SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY, CALIFORNIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-43 Supplement contains:
Local Legislation current through Ord. 4499, passed September 23, 2025
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11011.jpg]
** This electronic, unofficial version of the San Bernardino County Code is
provided for the convenience of the public. While every effort is made to
update this site to provide the most accurate and current version of the Code,
this site cannot be relied on to include the most recent changes or amendments
to any given section. To insure that you obtain the most accurate, current and
official version of any Code section, you must contact the San Bernardino
County Clerk of the Board at:
Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors,
County Government Center,
385 North Arrowhead Avenue, 2nd Floor,
San Bernardino, CA
92415-0130.
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
of
San Bernardino County, California
(REVISED)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword
Preamble
Article I: Name and Rights of the County
   
Section 101. County Powers.
   
Section 102. County Authority.
   
Section 103. County Name.
Article II: Board of Supervisors
   
Section 201. Governing Body.
   
Section 202. Election.
   
Section 203. Term of Office.
   
Section 204. Term Limits.
   
Section 205. Chair and Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors.
   
Section 206. Powers and Duties of the Board of Supervisors.
   
Section 207. Limitations on Taxing Authority.
   
Section 208. Filling of Vacancies.
   
Section 209. Compensation of the Board of Supervisors.
   
Section 210. Staff Members of the Board of Supervisors.
   
Section 211. Removal of a Supervisor.
   
Section 212. Rules of Order.
Article III: Other Elective County Officers
   
Section 301. Elective County Officers.
   
Section 302. Powers and Duties.
   
Section 303. Elections and Term of Office.
   
Section 304. Consolidation and Segregation of Elective County Offices.
   
Section 305. Removal of Elective Officers.
   
Section 306. Filling of Vacancies.
   
Section 307. Staff Members of the Elective County Officers.
   
Section 308. Compensation of Elective County Officers.
   Section 309. Compensation of County Sheriff and District Attorney.
Article IV: Appointive County Officers
   
Section 401. Appointive County Officers.
   
Section 402. Powers and Duties.
   
Section 403. County Officer Appointing Assistants and Others.
   
Section 404. Boards and Commissions.
Article V: Personnel
   
Section 501. Number, Duties, and Compensation.
   
Section 502. Civil Service System.
Article VI: Ethics and Election Integrity
   
Section 601. Responsibilities of Public Office.
   
Section 602. Training to County Officers and Employees.
   
Section 603. Ethics Training for the Staff of Elective Officers.
   
Section 604. Campaign Finance Regulations.
   
Section 605. Campaign Transparency.
   
Section 606. Redistricting Commission.
   
Section 607. Lobbyists.
Article VII: Miscellaneous
   
Section 701. Limitation on Exercise of Eminent Domain.
   
Section 702. Charter Review.
   
Section 703. Referendum of Ordinances.
   
Section 704. County Code Review.
   
Section 705. Review of Orders of the County Health Officer.
   
Section 706. Emergency Preparedness.
   
Section 707. Severance Clause.
Article VIII: Law Enforcement Funding.
   Section 801. Definitions.
   Section 802. Minimum Unincorporated County Patrol Personnel Funding.
   Section 803. Accountability and Transparency.
 
FOREWORD
The original Charter was framed and adopted in accordance with Section 7 1/2 of
Article XI of the Constitution of California in 1913. A board of fifteen
freeholders was selected at a special election held on May 14, 1912. Drawn up
by this board, the original Charter was presented to the County electors on
November 5, 1912. A majority favored adoption. Both houses of the State
Legislature voted approval and the original Charter was filed with the
Secretary of State on April 7, 1913.
Since that time, 36 amendments to the original Charter have been proposed and
27 have been adopted by the voters. The amendments that have been adopted are:
Amendment 1. Approved by the Legislature January 30, 1915; published on Page
1726, Statutes and Amendments to the Codes, 1915; election of officers other
than Supervisors.
Amendment 2. Approved March 24, 1919; published on Page 1454, Statutes and
Amendments to the Codes, 1919; addition of Article 2 1/2.
Amendment 3. Approved January 29, 1923; published on Page 1294, Statutes and
Amendments to the Codes, 1923; salary of Sheriff fixed.
Amendment 5. Approved January 27, 1925; published on Page 1185, Statutes and
Amendments to the Codes, 1925; traffic officers.
Amendment 6. Approved January 18, 1927; copied in this book from a copy
certified by the Secretary of State and filed in the office of the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors of this County; salaries fixed by Supervisors.
Amendment 7. Approved January 6, 1943; amends Article I, Sections 1 and 2;
election of Supervisors by district, rather than County-wide balloting.
Amendment 8. Approved January 15, 1945; amends Article I, Section 10; provides
salaries of Supervisors to be fixed by legislature.
Amendment 9. Approved January 15, 1945; amends Article Ill, Section 1; provides
number of officers in Class A Justice Court fixed by general law.
Amendment 10. Approved January 15, 1945; amends Article VIE, Section 1;
Supervisors may suspend provision prohibiting wartime raise in compensation for
elective officers.
Amendment 12. Approved January 25, 1957; amends Article II, Section 9;
establishes office of County Counsel.
Amendment 13. Approved January 25, 1957; amends Article II, Section 10;
establishes office of Registrar of Voters.
Amendment 17. Approved January 25, 1957; amends Article V, Section 2; provides
filing of reports by County officers.
Amendment 18. Approved January 25, 1957; amends Article V, Section 6; provides
inspection of books of County and Judicial District Officers by Auditor.
Amendment 19. Approved January 25, 1957; amends Article VII, Section 1; fixes
compensation of elective officers.
Amendment 20. Approved January 25, 1957; amends Article VII, Section 3;
provides biweekly salary payment.
Amendment 21. Approved January 25, 1957; adds Section 6 to Article 2 1/2;
establishes County Board of Education.
Amendment 22. Approved February 19, 1959; amends Section I to Article IV;
establishes office of County Purchasing Agent.
Amendment 23. Approved February 19, 1959; adds Section 4 1/2 to Article VII;
provides for establishment of fixed benefit retirement system for employees
ineligible for federal insurance.
Amendment 24. Approved February 8, 1967; amends Article V; relating to reports
and accounts.
Amendment 25. Approved March 15, 1971; amends Articles I, II, III, IV, and VII,
and repeals Articles 2 1/2 and VI; eliminates obsolete and unnecessary language
and renumbers Charter provisions.
Amendment 26. Approved March 15, 1971; adds Section 1.1 to Article II and
repeals Sections 9 and 10 of Article II and Article IV; places all County
department heads in the Unclassified Service.
Amendment 28. Filed and operative December 26, 1974; repeals Section 6 of
Article I and Sections 1 and 5 of Article VI; eliminates obsolete and
unnecessary language and brings Charter into conformity with the California
Constitution.
Amendment 29. Filed and operative December 26, 1974; repeals Section 1.1 of
Article II and amends Sections 2, 5, and 10 of Article II; brings Charter into
conformity with California Constitution and reflects and provides greater
flexibility in the governmental structure and administration of the County.
Amendment 30. Filed and operative May 2, 1979; adds Section 9 to Article I;
provides procedures for and limitations on setting of salaries for supervisors.
(Repealed by Amendment 36, filed and operative November 18, 1985).
Amendment 31. Filed and operative May 2, 1979; adds an unnumbered section to
Article VI (Miscellaneous); requires any increase in compensation of county-
elected officers to be approved by the voters. Initiative amendment. (Repealed
by Amendment 36, filed and operative November 18, 1985).
Amendment 33. Filed and operative November 16, 1981; adds Section 3A to Article
II; makes office of County Clerk appointive rather than elective.
Amendment 36. Filed and operative November 18, 1985; adds Section I to Article
VI; provides procedures for and limitations on setting of salaries for elected
officials. Section 9 of Article I is repealed; unnumbered initiative amendment
in Article VI is repealed.
Amendment 37. Filed and operative November 7, 2006; adds Section 5 of Article
VI; limits eminent domain and protects property rights.
Amendment 38. Filed and operative November 7, 2006; amends Section 2 of Article
I; limits terms of office; amends Section 1 of Article VI; sets salaries for
Board of Supervisors.
Amendment 39. Filed and operative November 4, 2008; adds Section 11 to Article
II; establishes a higher standard of ethics for staff members of County elected
officers.
Amendment 40. Filed and operative November 6, 2012; amends Section 1 of Article
VI; enacts a permanent cap on compensation and mandatory transparency for
members of the County Board of Supervisors.
Amendment 41. On July 24, 2020, the Board of Supervisors adopted an entirely
new, revised Charter for San Bernardino County, subject to ratification by the
voters at the election on November 3, 2020.
Amendment 42. Filed and operative November 8, 2022; amends Article II and adds
Section 207; prohibits the Board of Supervisors from increasing taxes without a
vote of the people, prevents elected County Supervisors from voting to increase
their salary, and facilitates effective representation in county government.
Amendment 43. Filed and operative November 4, 2024; Amends Section 308 and adds
Section 309 and Article VIII; ensures funding for San Bernardino County
Sheriff’s Department patrol and resources, protects against potential defunding
of law enforcement services, and provides competitive compensation for County
Elected Officials.
PREAMBLE
We the People of San Bernardino County, do establish this Charter to provide
for more local control to serve the diverse communities of the largest
geographic county in the United States by advancing freedom, equality, justice,
health, safety, and prosperity with effective, transparent, accountable,
innovative, and inclusive governance.
ARTICLE I: NAME AND RIGHTS OF THE COUNTY
Section 101. County Powers.
San Bernardino County, as it now exists, is a body corporate and politic, and
as such has and shall have all the powers that are now or may be hereafter
specified by the Constitution and laws of the State of California, and by this
Charter, and such other powers as are necessarily implied.
Section 102. County Authority.
The powers mentioned in the preceding section can be exercised only by the
Board of Supervisors or by agents and officers acting under its authority or by
the authority of law or of this Charter.
Section 103. County Name.
The corporate name shall be "San Bernardino County," which must be thus
designated in all actions and proceedings touching its corporate rights,
properties, and duties. San Bernardino County's boundaries and county seat
shall remain as they are now, until otherwise changed by law.
ARTICLE II: BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Section 201. Governing Body.
The Board of Supervisors is the governing body of San Bernardino County. The
Board of Supervisors shall consist of five persons, hereafter identified as
Members or Supervisors.
Section 202. Election.
Supervisors shall be elected by Supervisorial District. Each candidate for the
office of County Supervisor shall be an elector in the District which the
candidate seeks to represent and shall be elected by the electors of such
District. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, candidates shall be
nominated and elected pursuant to the general law. The five Supervisorial
Districts shall be apportioned by ordinance pursuant to the general law and
this Charter. A County Supervisor must reside in his or her District during the
Supervisor's incumbency.
Section 203. Term of Office.
At each general election, there shall be elected two or three Supervisors, as
the case may be, for a term of four years beginning at noon on the first Monday
after the first day of January next following their election and ending at noon
on the first Monday after the first day of January four years thereafter.
Supervisors shall be elected from the First, Third, and Fifth Supervisorial
Districts in those years in which a presidential election is held, and
Supervisors shall be elected from the Second and Fourth Supervisorial Districts
in those years in which a gubernatorial election is held.
However, the term for the County Supervisors elected from the First, Third, and
Fifth Supervisorial Districts on either March 3, 2020, or November 3, 2020,
shall end at noon on Monday, January 6, 2025. The term for the County
Supervisors elected from the Second and Fourth Supervisorial Districts on
either June 5, 2018, or November 6, 2018, shall end at noon on Monday, January
2, 2023.
Section 204. Term Limits.
No person may serve for more than three terms as County Supervisor, regardless
of the District represented. For the First, Third, and Fifth Supervisorial
Districts, any term or portion of a term served prior to noon on Monday,
January 6, 2025, shall not count toward the term limit. For the Second and
Fourth Supervisorial Districts, any term or portion of a term served prior to
noon on Monday, January 2, 2023, shall not count toward the term limit. For the
First, Third and Fifth Supervisorial Districts, after noon on Monday, January
6, 2025, and for the Second and Fourth Supervisorial Districts, after noon on
Monday, January 2, 2023, any County Supervisor who serves more than one-half of
a term, either through election or appointment, shall be deemed for purposes of
this section to have served a full term. For the First, Third and Fifth
Supervisorial Districts, after noon on Monday, January 6, 2025, and for the
Second and Fourth Supervisorial Districts, after noon on Monday, January 2,
2023, any County Supervisor who resigns or is removed from office with less
than one-half of a term remaining shall be deemed for purposes of this section
to have served a full term.
Section 205. Chair and Vice Chair of the Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors shall elect from among its Members a Chair and a Vice
Chair of the Board of Supervisors. The election, term of office, duties, and
removal of the Chair and Vice Chair shall be provided for by ordinance,
resolution, or policy of the Board of Supervisors.
Section 206. Powers and Duties of the Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors has all the powers granted to it by the Constitution
of California, the general law, and this Charter. The Board of Supervisors
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are required by the
Constitution of California, this Charter, and ordinance, and by the general law
except as otherwise provided in the Constitution of California, this Charter,
and any ordinance adopted pursuant to this Charter.
Given the size and complexity of San Bernardino County, the elected office of
County Supervisor is recognized as a position that requires a considerable
investment of time and due diligence from Board Members in order to effectively
fulfill their duties in service to the public. These duties include but are not
limited to: ensuring fiscal responsibility; representing the interest of the
public during public meetings and hearings of the Board of Supervisors;
participating in the response to natural disasters and other emergencies;
conducting meetings with members of the public; ensuring that the County is
effectively represented with respect to federal, state, and other local
government agencies; and reviewing issues impacting the County and its
residents, businesses, built and natural environment, and health and safety.
The elected position of County Supervisor requires Supervisors to be responsive
to the needs of the public on a 24 hours a day, seven days a week basis.
Furthermore, Members of the Board of Supervisors also have duties with respect
to, and must attend the meetings of, many other public entities and other
entities. Each member of the Board of Supervisors shall serve on such public
entity or other entity governing boards, commissions and committees, as
designated by or appointed in accordance with, and perform such duties as are
required by, the Constitution of California, this Charter, general law,
ordinance, or contract, as may be amended from time to time. Such public
entities and other entity governing boards, commissions, and committees
include, without limitation, as of August 1, 2022, the following:
   •   Agua Mansa Industrial Growth Association
   •   Arrowhead Regional Medical Center Joint Conference Committee
   •   Behavioral Health Commission
   •   Big Bear Area Regional Wastewater Agency
   •   Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District
   •   Bloomington Recreation and Park District
   •   Board of Supervisors Governed County Service Areas
   •   CAL-ID Remote Access Network Board
   •   California State Association of Counties
   •   Children and Families Commission (First 5)
   •   Children's Policy Council
   •   Crafton Hills Open Space Conservancy
   •   Head Start Shared Governance Board
   •   Indian Gaming Local Benefit Committee
   •   Indian Wells Valley Groundwater Authority
   •   In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority
   •   Inland Counties Emergency Medical Agency
   •   Inland Empire Economic Partnership
   •   Inland Empire Health Plan
   •   Inland Empire Public Facilities Corporation
   •   Inland Valley Development Agency
   •   Interagency Council on Homelessness
   •   Mojave Desert Air Quality Management District
   •   Mojave Desert and Mountain Recycling Authority
   •   Morongo Basin Transit Authority
   •   Mountain Area Regional Transit Authority
   •   National Association of Counties
   •   Ontario International Airport Authority
   •   Omnitrans Board of Directors
   •   Quad State Local Governments Authority
   •   San Bernardino County Employees' Retirement Association Board of
Retirement
   •   San Bernardino County Financing Authority
   •   San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
   •   San Bernardino County Flood Control District
   •   San Bernardino County Industrial Development Authority
   •   San Bernardino County Law Library Board of Trustees
   •   San Bernardino County Local Agency Formation Commission
   •   San Bernardino County Transportation Authority
   •   San Bernardino International Airport Authority
   •   San Bernardino Municipal Water District Advisory Committee on Water
Policy
   •   Santa Ana River Parkway Policy Advisory Group
   •   Santa Ana Watershed Project Authority OWOW Steering Committee
   •   Solid Waste Advisory Taskforce
   •   South Coast Air Quality Management District
   •   Southern California Associated Governments
   •   Southern California Water Coalition
   •   Successor Agency to the San Bernardino County Redevelopment Agency
   •   Upper Santa Ana River Washland Management and Habitat Conservation Plan
Taskforce
   •   Urban Counties Caucus
   •   Victor Valley Economic Development Authority
   •   Victor Valley Transit Authority
   •   Victor Valley Wastewater Reclamation Authority
Section 207. Limitations on Taxing Authority.
Any tax increase passed by the Board of Supervisors must be approved by a 4/5's
vote of the Board of Supervisors and be placed on the ballot at the next
available statewide general election, following the timelines in the Elections
Code, for approval by qualified voters. Additionally, the Board of Supervisors,
when acting as the governing body of a Board-governed Special District, the San
Bernardino County Fire Protection District, or the San Bernardino County Flood
Control District must approve any tax increase by a 4/5's vote and place the
tax increase on the ballot at the next available statewide general election,
under the timelines in the Elections Code, for approval by qualified voters. If
a tax is proposed by property owners this section does not apply.
Section 208. Filling of Vacancies.
If there is a vacancy in the office of County Supervisor, the remaining Members
of the Board of Supervisors shall within 60 days of the effective date of the
vacancy either appoint a replacement Supervisor or call a special election. The
appointee shall be from among the qualified electors of the Supervisorial
District in which such vacancy exists. Nomination and election of a Supervisor
shall be by district as provided in Section
202.
If the effective date of the appointment is no less than 130 days from the
statewide general election in November of an even-numbered mid-term year of the
vacant office, the appointment is provisional to the first Monday after the
first day of January next following the election. When making the appointment,
the remaining Members of the Board of Supervisors shall call for a special
election for this office for the remaining term and shall order the special
election to be consolidated with such statewide general election. The special
election shall be a single-winner election. The candidate receiving the highest
number of votes is elected.
If the effective date of the appointment is less than 130 days from the
statewide general election in November of an even-numbered mid-term year of the
vacant office, then the appointee shall serve the remainder of the term of the
office.
If the remaining Members of the Board of Supervisors do not make an appointment
and instead call a special election, the special election shall be held on the
next established election date, as defined in Division 1 (commencing with
Section 1000) of the Elections Code, that is no less than 130 days from the
date that the special election is called. When calling a special election to be
held on the next established election date that is no less than 130 days from
the date that the election is called, the remaining members of the Board of
Supervisors may authorize the election to be conducted wholly by mail, provided
that the special election is not held on the same date as a statewide primary
or general election or is not consolidated, as defined in Elections Code
section 10400, with any other election. The special election shall be a single-
winner election. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes is
elected.
If the remaining Members of the Board of Supervisors do not make an appointment
or call a special election within 60 days of the effective date of the vacancy,
then a special election shall be held to fill the vacancy. The special election
shall be held on the next established election date, as defined in Division 1
(commencing with Section 1000) of the Elections Code, that is no less than 130
days from the 60th day after the effective date of the vacancy. In the
discretion of the Register of Voters, the special election to be held on the
next established election date that is no less than 130 days from the 60th day
after the effective date of the vacancy may be conducted wholly by mail,
provided that the special election is not held on the same date as a statewide
primary or general election or is not consolidated, as defined in Elections
Code section 10400, with any other election. The special election shall be a
single-winner election. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes is
elected.
If an election is required pursuant to this section and the date of such
election as required by one of the preceding paragraphs of this section would
be less than 180 days from the statewide primary election applicable to the
Supervisorial District as set forth in
Section 203, then notwithstanding such preceding paragraph, the regular
nomination and election process shall be followed pursuant to Sections
202,
203, and
204.
Section 209. Compensation of the Board of Supervisors.
Members of the Board of Supervisors shall be paid an annual base salary that is
equal to 80 percent of the annual base salary prescribed by law for Judges of
the Superior Court of San Bernardino County, and shall be provided, to the
extent legally permissible, the regular benefits that are offered to Exempt
Group employees in the benefits category for department heads as provided by
ordinance.
Thereafter, the annual base salary of the Members of the Board of Supervisors
shall be changed at such times and in such percentages as changes made by law
to the Judges of the Superior Court of San Bernardino County, except as
otherwise provided in this paragraph. Any increase in the salary of the Members
of the Board of Supervisors pursuant to this paragraph shall only become
effective after there has been an election for any member of the Board of
Supervisors.
Thereafter, the benefits provided to the Members of the Board of Supervisors
shall be changed at such times and in such amounts as changes made to Exempt
Group employees in the benefits category for department heads as provided by
ordinance, except as otherwise provided in this paragraph. Any increase in the
benefits of the Members of the Board of Supervisors pursuant to this paragraph
shall only become effective after there has been an election for any member of
the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors may approve a benefit
increase that is less than the benefit increase permitted under this paragraph.
The salary and benefits that members of the Board of Supervisors are eligible
to receive shall be posted on the County website and accessible from a link
located on the home page of the County website.
Section 210. Staff Members of the Board of Supervisors.
The staff members of the Board of Supervisors shall serve in the unclassified
service at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors. The terms and conditions
of employment of such staff members shall be established by contract approved
by the Board of Supervisors. A contract for any such staff members may be
terminated without cause, by the individual employing Supervisor or by action
of the Board of Supervisors by four votes.
Section 211. Removal of a Supervisor.
Any Supervisor may be removed from office in the manner provided by law.
Section 212. Rules of Order.
The Board of Supervisors shall adopt by ordinance, from time to time, rules of
order for the conduct of meetings of the Board of Supervisors.
ARTICLE III: OTHER ELECTIVE COUNTY OFFICERS
Section 301. Elective County Officers.
Article III applies to all elective County officers other than the Members of
the Board of Supervisors. The elective County officers shall be:
Assessor
Auditor
Coroner
County Superintendent of Schools
District Attorney
Public Administrator
Recorder
Sheriff
Tax Collector
Treasurer
Section 302. Powers and Duties.
Each elective County officer shall have the power and perform the duties now or
hereafter prescribed by the general law, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter or by an ordinance adopted pursuant to this Charter, and shall have and
perform such other powers and duties as are prescribed in this Charter or by
ordinance adopted pursuant to this Charter.
Section 303. Elections and Term of Office.
The term of office of each elective County officer is four years. All elective
County officers shall be elected at the general election at which the Governor
is elected, and shall take office at noon on the first Monday after the first
day of January next succeeding their election and shall hold office until their
successors are elected or appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed as
provided by this Charter. All such elective County officers shall be nominated
and elected in the manner provided by general laws for the nomination and
election of such officers.
Section 304. Consolidation and Segregation of Elective County Offices.
The Board of Supervisors may, by ordinance, consolidate any two or more County
offices or may separate any offices now or hereafter consolidated. In the event
of consolidation of an elective office with an appointive office, such
consolidated office shall be filled in the same manner in which the elective
office is filled.
Section 305. Removal of Elective Officers.
Any elective County officer may be removed from office in the manner provided
by law. Any elective County officer other than a Supervisor may be removed by a
four-fifths vote of the Board of Supervisors, for cause, after such officer has
been served with a written statement of alleged grounds for such removal, and
such officer has been given a reasonable opportunity to be heard in the way of
explanation or defense.
For the purposes of this section, cause is defined as: a flagrant or repeated
neglect of duties; a misappropriation of public property; a violation of any
law related to the performance of the officer's duties; or a willful
falsification of a relevant official statement or document.
Section 306. Filling of Vacancies.
If there is a vacancy in an elective office, the Board of Supervisors shall
within 60 days of the effective date of the vacancy either appoint a
replacement or call a special election. Nomination and election of the elective
County officer shall be as provided in
Section 303.
If the effective date of the appointment is no less than 130 days from the
statewide general election at which the United States President is elected, the
appointment is provisional to the first Monday after the first day of January
next following the election. When making the appointment, the Board of
Supervisors shall call for a special election for this office for the remaining
term and shall order the special election to be consolidated with such
statewide general election. The special election shall be a single-winner
election. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes is elected.
If the effective date of the appointment is less than 130 days from the
statewide general election at which the United States President is elected,
then the appointee shall serve the remainder of the term of the office.
If the Board of Supervisors does not make an appointment and instead calls a
special election, the special election shall be held on the next established
election date, as defined in Division 1 (commencing with Section 1000) of the
Elections Code, that is no less than 130 days from the date that the special
election is called. When calling a special election to be held on the next
established election date that is no less than 130 days from the date that the
election is called, the Board of Supervisors may authorize the election to be
conducted wholly by mail, provided that the special election is not held on the
same date as a statewide primary or general election or is not consolidated, as
defined in Elections Code section 10400, with any other election. The special
election shall be a single-winner election. The candidate receiving the highest
number of votes is elected.
If the Board of Supervisors does not make an appointment or call a special
election within 60 days of the effective date of the vacancy, then a special
election shall be held to fill the vacancy. The special election shall be held
on the next established election date, as defined in Division 1 (commencing
with Section 1000) of the Elections Code, that is no less than 130 days from
the 60th day after the effective date of the vacancy. In the discretion of the
Register of Voters, the special election to be held on the next established
election date that is no less than 130 days from the 60th day after the
effective date of the vacancy may be conducted wholly by mail, provided that
the special election is not held on the same date as a statewide primary or
general election or is not consolidated, as defined in Elections Code section
10400, with any other election. The special election shall be a single-winner
election. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes is elected.
If an election is required pursuant to this section and the date of such
election as required by one of the preceding paragraphs of this section would
be less than 180 days from the statewide primary election vacant office, then
notwithstanding such preceding paragraph, the regular nomination and election
process shall be followed pursuant to
Section 303.
Section 307. Staff Members of the Elective County Officers.
Staff members of the elective County officers, at the level of assistant
department head or its equivalent level, shall serve in the unclassified
service at the pleasure of the appointing elective County officer and in that
elective officer's sole discretion. Except for the offices of Sheriff and
District Attorney, qualifications for all staff members in the unclassified
service of elective County officers shall be established by the elective County
officer and approved by the Board of Supervisors. The persons to be appointed
as Undersheriff shall be certified by the California Commission on Peace
Officers Standards and Training (POST) and the persons to be appointed as
Assistant District Attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar
of California. This section shall not apply to the staff of the County
Superintendent of Schools.
Section 308. Compensation of Elective County Officers.
Beginning January 1, 2025, the base salary for the elective County officers,
except (1) those covered under Section
309, (2) the County Superintendent of Schools, and (3) Members of the Board of
Supervisors, shall be set by the average of the base salaries paid to officers
holding the most similar position in the following California counties: Orange,
Riverside, Los Angeles, San Diego and Ventura. In calculating the base salary
of the elective County officers, the salary paid to the individual holding the
most similar office in the five identified counties to the elective County
officer shall be used, regardless of whether the position has been consolidated
with other elected offices or appointed positions. The base salary of the
County officers shall be set based upon this section, regardless of whether the
elective County office has been consolidated with other elective County offices
in Section
301 or appointed positions. The base salary shall be adjusted annually on
January 1 as provided in this paragraph.
The individuals holding the positions of Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax
Collector and Assessor-Recorder on November 5, 2024, shall not have their base
salary reduced pursuant to this Section, and shall receive base salary
increases of 4% annually on January 1 while they occupy that specific elective
County office, including any future consecutive elected terms.
Beginning January 1, 2025, in addition to base salary, the elective County
officers shall receive compensation and benefits pursuant to the Salaries and
Working Conditions of the County-Wide Elected Officials Ordinance, as amended
or replaced by ordinance approved by the Board of Supervisors.
The salary and benefits that elective County officers are eligible to receive
shall be posted on the County website and accessible from a link located on the
home page of the County website.
Section 309. Compensation of County Sheriff and District Attorney.
Beginning January 1, 2025, the base salary for the County Sheriff and District
Attorney shall be the average of the salaries paid to the Sheriff and District
Attorney in the following California counties: Orange, Riverside, Los Angeles,
San Diego and Ventura. In calculating the base salary of the County Sheriff and
District Attorney based on the salaries in the five identified counties, the
salary paid to the individuals holding the offices of Sheriff and District
Attorney in those counties shall be used, regardless of whether the position
has been consolidated with other elected offices or appointed positions. The
base salary of the County Sheriff and District Attorney shall be set based upon
this section, regardless of whether the elected office has been consolidated
with other elective County offices or appointed positions. The base salary
shall be adjusted annually on January 1 of each year as provided in this
paragraph.
Beginning January 1, 2025, in addition to base salary the County Sheriff and
District Attorney shall receive compensation and benefits pursuant to the
Salaries and Working Conditions of the County-Wide Elected Officials Ordinance,
as amended or replaced by an ordinance approved by the Board of Supervisors.
The salary and benefits that the County Sheriff and District Attorney are
eligible to receive shall be posted on the County website and accessible from a
link located on the home page of the County website.
ARTICLE IV: APPOINTIVE COUNTY OFFICERS
Section 401. Appointive County Officers.
The appointive County officers shall be:
Chief Executive Officer
Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
County Clerk
County Counsel
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint the above-identified County officers.
The appointive officers of the County shall also be any such officers as are
otherwise required by this Charter, the general law, or ordinance. The Chief
Executive Officer shall appoint all other appointive County officers, unless
such appointment authority is designated by the Constitution of California, the
general law, or by ordinance.
Section 402. Powers and Duties.
Each appointive County officer shall have the power and perform the duties now
or hereafter prescribed by the general law, except as otherwise provided in
this Charter or by ordinance, and shall have and perform such other powers and
duties as are prescribed in this Charter or by ordinance.
Section 403. County Officer Appointing Assistants and Others.
Each appointive County officer shall be the appointing authority for all
assistants, deputies, clerks, and other persons employed or serving in his or
her office, except as otherwise provided by the general law, this Charter, or
by ordinance.
Section 404. Boards and Commissions.
The Board of Supervisors may by ordinance create such boards and commissions as
in its judgment are required and may grant to them such powers and duties as
are consistent with this Charter and the general law. The ordinance may provide
for the number of members of the board or commission, the manner of
appointment, term of office, qualifications of members, the remuneration of
members, and any other necessary provisions.
ARTICLE V: PERSONNEL
Section 501. Number, Duties, and Compensation.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish, where not otherwise expressly
provided by the general law or this Charter, the number, qualifications,
appointment, powers, and duties of all County officers and employees.
Compensation of officers and employees shall be established by ordinance,
resolution, memorandum of understanding, or contract. All such officers and
employees, except those designated by the Board of Supervisors by ordinance,
shall be in the classified service of the County and subject to civil service
rules and regulations. Nothing herein shall be deemed to impinge upon any
authority otherwise conferred by law upon an officer to appoint deputies.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to limit the authority of the Board of
Supervisors to employ persons for positions in the unclassified service.
Section 502. Civil Service System.
The Board of Supervisors shall by ordinance establish a civil service system.
The purpose of the civil service system is to provide the County government
with a productive, efficient, and stable workforce. The Board of Supervisors
shall by ordinance prescribe civil service rules and regulations.
ARTICLE VI: ETHICS AND ELECTION INTEGRITY
Section 601. Responsibilities of Public Office.
County officers and employees shall uphold the Constitution of the United
States, the Constitution of California, and this Charter, and shall carry out
impartially the laws and regulations of the United States, California, and the
County. County officers and employees shall discharge faithfully their duties,
recognizing that the public interest is paramount.
Section 602. Training to County Officers and Employees.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish by ordinance training requirements
pertaining to ethics, the prohibition of discrimination and harassment, the
prohibition of nepotism, and other areas of ethics pertinent to public service.
Section 603. Ethics Training for the Staff of Elective Officers.
Staff members of the Board of Supervisors, and staff members of other elective
County officers at the level of assistant department head or its equivalent
level, shall receive the same ethics training as is provided to the members of
the Board of Supervisors and other elective County officers pursuant to the
general law.
Section 604. Campaign Finance Regulations.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish by ordinance campaign contribution
limits and other campaign finance regulations, and effective enforcement
procedures thereof.
Section 605. Campaign Transparency.
The Board of Supervisors shall by ordinance provide that campaign statements
required by the Political Reform Act may be filed electronically with the
Registrar of Voters, and that copies of such statements shall be posted
electronically in a location convenient to the public.
Section 606. Redistricting Commission.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish by ordinance a redistricting
commission. The commission shall be either advisory or independent. The
commission shall ensure that, when Supervisor district boundaries are redrawn,
public input is effectively solicited and considered, the Voting Rights Act and
other laws are complied with, neighborhood and community interests are
considered, the interests of stakeholders are considered, and the process is
transparent.
Section 607. Lobbyists.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish by ordinance requirements regarding
lobbyist transparency.
ARTICLE VII: MISCELLANEOUS
Section 701. Limitation on Exercise of Eminent Domain.
The County may not exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire property
from any private owner thereof, without such owner's consent, when the purpose
of the acquisition is to convey the property so acquired to any private party.
As used in this section, "owner" means the owner or owners of the fee title
interest in the property to be acquired.
Section 702. Charter Review.
The Board of Supervisors shall convene a Charter Review Committee within 10
years of the effective date of this Charter and within 10 years of the last
Charter review thereafter. The Charter Review Committee shall review the
Charter and, after at least two public hearings, make recommendations for
amendments to or revisions of this Charter to the Board of Supervisors.
Section 703. Referendum of Ordinances.
Ordinances adopted by the Board of Supervisors, not otherwise exempt under
State law, shall be subject to referendum prior to their effective dates in
accordance with the general law.
Section 704. County Code Review.
The Board of Supervisors shall establish by ordinance a procedure through which
the County Code of Ordinances may be reviewed on an annual or other periodic
basis for purposes of efficiency, completeness, and effectiveness. Such reviews
will be presented in public at a meeting of the Board of Supervisors.
Section 705. Review of Orders of the County Health Officer.
All orders issued by the County Health Officer addressed to the public at large
shall be reviewed by the Board of Supervisors at a public meeting within 30
days of issuance.
Section 706. Emergency Preparedness.
The County shall establish and maintain a discretionary strategic stockpile of
vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties needed for the protection
of life and property in the event of a natural, biological, infectious disease,
or any other disaster or emergency.
Section 707. Severance Clause.
If a provision of this Charter or its application to any person or circumstance
is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the validity or constitutionality of
the remaining portions of this Charter or the application of the provision to
other persons or circumstances shall not be affected.
ARTICLE VIII: LAW ENFORCEMENT FUNDING
Section 801. Definitions.
For purposes of Article VIII the following definition applies:
"Patrol Personnel" means all Deputy Sheriffs, Detectives/Corporals, Sergeants,
Lieutenants, and Captains whose job duties directly support the operations of
County unincorporated patrol stations.
Section 802. Minimum Unincorporated County Patrol Personnel Funding.
The Board of Supervisors shall allocate a minimum amount of funding in its
annual budget to fund County Patrol Personnel's direct salary and benefit costs
for operations in the unincorporated area of the County.
This minimum amount shall be the average of actual Patrol Personnel salary and
benefit costs in the unincorporated area of the County in the three (3)
preceding fiscal years. Minimum amounts shall exclude all Patrol Personnel
salary and benefit costs associated with cities that contract with the County
for law enforcement services and shall also exclude any funding received for
Patrol Personnel salary and benefit costs that is designated as "one-time"
funding (as opposed to "ongoing" funding).
The Board of Supervisors may annually suspend the minimum funding budget
requirement of this section for up to twelve (12) months by resolution approved
by a four-fifths (4/5) majority of the entire Board which includes a
declaration of a fiscal emergency.
Should the Board of Supervisors approve a resolution that includes a
declaration of a fiscal emergency, the up to 12-month suspension period shall
not be included in the three-year average, unless in a separate vote all five
members of the Board of Supervisors vote unanimously to include the up to 12-
month suspension period in the three year average.
If the up to 12-month suspension period is not included, the three-year average
will be based on the most recent three years with no declared fiscal emergency.
Section 803. Accountability and Transparency.
The Sheriff of San Bernardino County shall publish an annual report detailing:
(i)   The total number of calls for service in the unincorporated area and
deputy reports issued for the two (2) prior fiscal years.
(ii)   The current and two (2) prior fiscal years' adopted unincorporated
Patrol Personnel salary and benefit budgets approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
(iii)   The calculated minimum allocation for the current fiscal year's
unincorporated Patrol Personnel budget. The calculation will include all
components detailed under Section
802, Minimum Unincorporated County Patrol Personnel Funding.
The annual report shall be made available to the public and published on the
County's official website in December of each year.
TITLE 1: GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
1.   The Code
   
2.   Violations and Enforcement
   
3.   Claims Against the County
   
4.   Administrative Regulations
   
5.   Time Limitations for Administrative Mandamus Proceedings
   
6.   Validity of Title 1
DIVISION 2: DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES AND COMMISSIONS
   
1.   Board of Supervisors
   
2.   Chief Executive Officer
   
3.   County Auditor/Controller-Recorder
   
4.   Fish and Game Commission
   
5.   Sheriff Department
   
6.   Probation Department
   
7.   San Bernardino County Medical Center
   
8.   (Deleted by Ord. 4291, passed - -2015)
   
9.   County Service Areas
   
10.   Department of Public Social Services
   
11.   Director of Transportation—Road Commissioner
   
12.   Public Guardian
   
13.   Delinquency Prevention Commission
   
14.   County Retirement Board
   
15.   Colton Redevelopment Agency
   
16.   Airports Commission
   
17.   Board of Law Library Trustees
   
18.   Surveyor
   
19.   County Counsel
   
20.   Registrar of Voters
   
21.   Coroner
   
22.   Department of Agricultural Weights and Measures
   
23.   Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
   
24.   County Officers with Department Head Status
   
25.   (Repealed by Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
   
26.   Office of Public Safety
   
27.   Administrative Hearings; County Hearing Officer
   
28.   County Treasurer-Tax Collector
   
29.   County Children and Families First Commission
   
30.   (Deleted by Ord. 2425, passed - -1980)
   
31.   (Deleted by Ord. 3584, passed - -1994)
   
32.   Assistant County Administrative Officer
   
33.   Senior Affairs Commission
   
34.   Risk Management Division
   
35.   Human Services Group
   
36.   (Repealed by Ord. 4153, passed - -2011)
   
37.   Boards, Commissions, Committees
   
38.   Affirmative Action Commission
   
39.   Office of County Safety and Security
   
39b.   (Deleted by Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
   
40.   Office of Central Collections
   
41.   Planning Commission
   
42.   In Home Supportive Services Public Authority
   
43.   Campaign Finance Reform
   
44.   Assessor/Recorder
   
45.   Municipal Advisory Councils and Advisory Committees
   
46.   Animal Care Community Outreach Commission
   
47.   (Repealed by Ord. 4366, passed - -2019)
   
48.   Advisory Redistricting Commission
DIVISION 3: PERSONNEL
   
1.   Civil Service
   
2.   Employee Relations
   
3.   Salary Review Procedure (Repealed by Ord. 3707, passed - -1998)
   
4.   Standards of Conduct for County Officials
   
5.   Workers’ Compensation
   
6.   Compensation adn Terms and Conditions fo County Officials, Employees, and
Others
   
7.   Disqualification of Former Officers and Employees
DIVISION 4: PURCHASING, REVENUE AND TAXATION
   
1.   Purchasing
   
2.   Revenue and Taxation
   
3.   Real Property Transfer Tax
   
4.   Refuse Disposal Land Use Fees
   
5.   Reassessment of Damaged Property
   
6.   Survey Monument Preservation Fund
   
7.   Franchise Program
   
8.   Taxation of Replacement Residences
DIVISION 5: COURTS
   
1.   Superior Courts
   
2.   Justice Courts (Repealed by Ord. 3600, passed - -)
   
3.   Municipal Courts
   
4.   Trial Juror Fees
   
5.   Parking Violations—Not Guilty Plea by Mail
DIVISION 6: COUNTY FEES
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Schedule of Fees
DIVISION 7: PROJECT REVIEW
   
1.   Project Review Commission
   
2.   Improvement Projects
   
3.   Redevelopment Projects
   
4.   Industrial Projects
DIVISION 8: MANAGEMENT OF COUNTY PROPERTY
   
1.   Leasing County Realty
DIVISION 9: SUNSHINE ORDINANCE
   
1.   General Provisions
DIVISION 10: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Authorized Activities
   
3.   Financing
   
4.   Limitations and Restrictions
   
5.   Land Acquisition and Disposition Process
   
6.   Economic Opportunity Subsidies
   
7.   Reporting Requirements
Editor's Note:
   Ordinance 4046, passed April 8, 2008, repealed and reenacted Title 1.
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1: THE CODE
Section
   
11.0101   Title—Reference to Code.
   
11.0102   Authority for Code.
   
11.0103   Scope of Code.
   
11.0104   Existing Law Continued.
   
11.0105   Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations Previously Accrued.
   
11.0106   Pending Action or Accrued Rights Not Affected.
   
11.0107   Rights Under Existing License or Certificate Not Affected.
   
11.0108   References to Specific Ordinances.
   
11.0109   Effect of Heading.
   
11.0110   Section Numbers.
   
11.0111   Validity of Code.
   
11.0112   Words and Phrases—How Construed.
   
11.0113   Definitions and Rules of Construction.
§ 11.0101   Title—Reference to Code.
   The Code shall be known as the “Codified Ordinances of the County of San
Bernardino.” It shall be sufficient to refer to said Code as the “Codified
Ordinances of the County of San Bernardino” or the “San Bernardino County Code”
in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof and it shall also
be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending or repealing said
Code as an addition or amendment to or repeal of said “Codified Ordinances of
the County of San Bernardino.”
   Title, division, chapter and section headings do not in any manner affect
the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0102   Authority for Code.
   This Code consisting of ordinances of the County of San Bernardino is
adopted pursuant to Government Code §§ 25126, 25127 and 25128.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0103   Scope of Code.
   It is intended that all existing ordinances of the County of San Bernardino
are included in this Code except the following ordinances and their amendments:
   Grants of franchise; interim reclassification of land use; call for an
election; authorization for the levying and collection of taxes pursuant to an
indebtedness; authorizing the execution of notes or bonds of indebtedness. All
of or that portion of ordinances and amendments thereto adopting Sectional
District Maps, Precise Plan Maps and Oil Field Maps, whether adopted as
amendments to sections of this Code or not, are not printed herein. The
adoption of this Code shall not affect any ordinance, the provisions of which
are not included in this Code.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0104   Existing Law Continued.
   The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
provisions of existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be
construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0105   Effect of Code on Past Actions and Obligations Previously Accrued.
   Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of
the County of San Bernardino shall in any manner affect the prosecution for
violation of any ordinance, which violation was committed prior to the
effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any permit, license fee,
charge or penalty at said effective date required or due and unpaid under such
ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such
ordinance relating to the collection of any such fee, charge or penalty or the
penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, required to be posted,
filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations
thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0106   Pending Action or Accrued Rights Not Affected.
   No action or proceeding commenced before this Code takes effect, and no
right accrued, is affected by the provisions of this Code, but all procedures
thereafter taken therein shall conform to the provisions of this Code so far as
possible.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0107   Rights Under Existing License or Certificate Not Affected.
   No rights given by any license or certificate under any ordinance repealed
by this Code are affected by the enactment of this Code or by such repeal; but
such rights shall hereafter be exercised according to this Code.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0108   References to Specific Ordinances.
   The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other
matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances
which are therein specially designated by number or otherwise and which are
included in this Code, but such references shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this Code.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0109   Effect of Heading.
   Title, division, article, section and subdivision headings contained in this
Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the
scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, division, article,
section or subdivision of this Code.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0110   Section Numbers.
   In reading section numbers from left to right, the first digit shall
designate the Title of this Code, the next digit or digits to the right of the
first digit and to the left of the decimal point shall designate the Division
of that Title. The first two digits to the right of the first decimal point
designate the chapter. The remaining digits to the right of the first two
digits indicate the section number. Example: 56.0122 designates Section 22,
Chapter 1 of Division 6 of Title 5.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0111   Validity of Code.
   If any section, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision
of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Board of Supervisors
hereby declares that it would have adopted this Code and each section,
subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases
or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0112   Words and Phrases—How Construed.
   Words and phrases are to be construed according to the context and the
approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases, and such
others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, or are
specifically defined in succeeding sections of this Code, are to be construed
according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning or definition.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
§ 11.0113   Definitions and Rules of Construction.
   The following terms as used in this Code shall, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise, have the following rules of construction applied and the
respective meanings herein set forth:
   GENDER. Masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   NUMBER. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the
singular.
   SHALL, MAY. “Shall” is mandatory, and “may” is permissive.
   TENSES. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future includes the present.
   WRITING. Writing includes printing or typewriting.
(Ord. 975, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1347, passed - -1967)
CHAPTER 2: VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
11.0201   Purposes and Remedies.
   
11.0202   Definitions.
   
11.0203   Enforcement Authority.
   
11.0204   Code Violations Generally.
   
11.0205   Written Orders.
   
11.0206   Criminal Actions.
   
11.0207   Civil Actions.
   
11.0208   Administrative Citation Actions.
   
11.0209   Abatement.
   
11.0210   Summary Abatements.
   
11.0211   Filing and Recording of Notices.
   
11.0212   Costs Incurred for Abatement.
   
11.0213   Collection of Unpaid Administrative Citations, Administrative
Citations for Continuing Violations, and Administrative and Abatement Costs.
   
11.0214   Treble Damages.
§ 11.0201 Purposes and Remedies.
   The Board of Supervisors has determined that the enforcement of the Codified
Ordinances of the County of San Bernardino (also known as the San Bernardino
County Code) is an important public service and vital to the protection of the
public's health, safety, and quality of life. The Board of Supervisors has
determined a need for alternative methods of enforcing the San Bernardino
County Code (hereinafter referred to as this "Code"). At the discretion of the
County, violations of this Code may be addressed through the institution of a
criminal action, a civil action, and/or an administrative action as set forth
in this Chapter.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0202 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter certain words are defined as follows:
   ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS. All costs incurred by or on behalf of the County from
the date of the initial discovery of the violation of the County Code through
the applicable appeal process and until compliance is achieved. Administrative
costs include, but are not limited to: contractor's costs, staff time in
investigating the violation, staff and attorney time in preparing inspection or
abatement warrants (where applicable), inspecting the property where the
violation occurred, preparing investigation reports, sending notices, preparing
for and attending any appeal hearing, telephone contacts, correspondence, the
cost of an administrative hearing officer (where applicable), and attorney's
fees (where applicable).
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS. Pursuant to Penal Code §§ 829.5 and 836.5, a Code
Enforcement Officer is any County employee or agent appointed by the Chief
Executive Officer working under the general direction of the Code Enforcement
Chief who has the authority and duty to investigate and initiate any action
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of the County Code, the
provisions of any code adopted by reference by the County Code, and when
designated by the County Code, parking laws and regulations.
   DAYS. Consecutive, calendar days.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any County employee, Special District employee, or
agent of the County with the authority to enforce or administer any provision
of the County Code, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Code Enforcement Officers;
      (2)   The Building Official, each Regional Building and Safety
Supervisor, each Building Inspector, and other designated employees of the
Building and Safety Division of the Land Use Services Department;
      (3)   The Fire Chief/Fire Warden, the Fire Marshal, and other designated
employees of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District;
      (4)   The Division Chief, each Inspector, and other designated employees
of the Environmental Health Services Division of the Department of Public
Health;
      (5)   The Division Chief, each Animal Control Supervisor, each Animal
Control Officer, and other designated employees of the Animal Care and Control
Division of the Department of Public Health;
      (6)   The Sheriff-Coroner, each Deputy Sheriff (all ranks), and other
designated employees of the Sheriff's Department;
      (7)   The Director and other designated employees of the Public Works
Department;
      (8)   The Chief Executive Officer and any other director and other
designated employees of a County department or special district as designated
by the Chief Executive Officer, or the Board of Supervisors.
   HEARING OFFICER. Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, a hearing
officer has the same meaning as defined by Chapter 27 of Division 2 of Title 1
of the County Code.
   INTERESTED PARTIES. Those individuals or entities with a recorded deed of
trust, assignment, lease, or other document showing a monetary interest in the
property at issue, and some ability or potential obligation to cure violations
on the property according to the recorded document. It does not include
judgment lienholders.
   PERSON. Means without limitation, any natural person, firm, association,
club, organization, corporation, partnership, business, trust, company or other
entity.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Except as otherwise provided in Titles 1 through 8,
inclusive, a responsible party includes one or more of the following:
      (1)   Each person who has a legal or equitable ownership interest in any
parcel of real property located within the unincorporated area of the County
(referred to also as "owner"), whether or not the owner of record, and who
commits, causes, or otherwise allows a violation of the County Code to occur,
exist, or continue on such parcel.
      (2)   Each person, other than a minor, who commits, causes, or otherwise
allows a violation of the County Code to occur, exist, or continue.
      (3)   Each person who is the parent or legal guardian of a minor person
who commits, causes, or otherwise allows a violation of the County Code to
occur, exist, or continue.
      (4)   Each person who, although not an owner, nevertheless has a legal
right or legal obligation to exercise possession and control over any parcel of
real property located within the unincorporated area of the County and who
commits, causes, or otherwise allows a violation of the County Code to occur,
exist, or continue on such parcel.
      (5)   Any business entity to whom a violation of the County Code is
reasonably attributable to that entity, in addition to any other responsible
party. In such case notices shall be issued in the name of the business entity
as a responsible party.
      (6)   Each person who is an owner of a business entity as described in
subdivision (e).
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0203 Enforcement Authority.
   (a)   Jurisdiction. Regardless of provisions of the County Code that would
limit authority to enforce provisions of the Code to specific departments,
Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce all provisions of the County
Code, the provisions of any code adopted by reference by the County Code, and
when designated by the County Code, parking laws and regulations, except as
otherwise provided by state law, in the following areas:
      (1)   In the unincorporated area of the County, with the exception of
those areas owned by or under the jurisdiction of other governmental agencies,
unless allowed for by agreement, statute, or other applicable law;
      (2)   On property owned, leased, or operated by the County, anywhere
within the County; and
      (3)   Where the County has legal standing to enforce provisions of the
County Code or any other code, regulation or ordinance anywhere in the County.
   (b)   Inspections. Enforcement Officers are hereby authorized to enter upon
any property or premises within the Enforcement Officer's jurisdiction to
investigate violations of the County Code, and to make any inspection as may be
necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties. Such authorization is
subject to constitutional constraints and laws respecting the rights of
privacy, in accordance with the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure §§
1822.50 through 1822.59, as may be amended from time to time, or the successor
provisions thereto, and related case law.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0204 Code Violations Generally.
   (a)   Declaration of Public Nuisance. Each and every violation of the County
Code is hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance.
   (b)   Acts Including Causing, Aiding and Abetting. Whenever in the County
Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing,
permitting, aiding or abetting such act or omission.
   (c)   Cumulative and Discretionary. All remedies and penalties provided for
in the County Code shall be cumulative and discretionary and not exclusive of
other applicable provisions of the County Code or other applicable State or
Federal law.
   (d)   Continuing Violations. Each and every day, and any portion of which,
any violation of the County Code is committed, continued, or permitted, shall
be deemed a new and separate offense and shall be punishable or actionable as
set forth in this Chapter.
   (e)   Correction of Nuisance.
      (1)   The conviction and punishment (whether by fine, imprisonment, or
both) of any person hereunder pursuant to a criminal action, or the imposition
of a monetary administrative penalty pursuant to an administrative citation (as
defined in §
11.0208), shall not relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting,
removing, or abating the violation; nor prevent the enforced correction,
removal, or abatement thereof by the County, its employees, agents, or
representatives.
      (2)   The correction, removal, or abatement of a violation begun after
the issuance of a criminal citation or the filing of a criminal complaint shall
not be a defense to the infraction or misdemeanor so charged and, following a
conviction or plea of nolo contendere shall not be grounds for dismissal of the
action or for the waiver, stay, or reduction, of any fine established in this
Chapter.
      (3)   The procedures established in this Chapter for the use of
administrative citations, administrative abatement and summary abatement, and
the procedures established in other titles and chapters of the County Code for
administrative abatement and summary abatement as a means for addressing
violations of the County Code, shall be in addition to criminal and civil or
other legal or equitable remedies established by law which may be pursued to
address violations of the County Code. The use of this Chapter shall be at the
sole discretion of the County. In the exercise of such discretion in selecting
an appropriate code enforcement remedy, the County shall not be required to
institute available code enforcement remedies in any particular order, or to
prefer the application of one remedy to another.
   (f)   Joint and Several Liability. Where the violations arise from the joint
actions of multiple responsible parties rather than the action of several
responsible parties acting independently of one another, then the liability for
administrative citations and/or abatement costs shall be joint and several.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0205 Written Orders.
   (a)   Inspection and issuance of written order. If an Enforcement Officer,
after investigation, determines that one or more violations of the County Code
exist on real property within the jurisdiction of the County, as defined in §
11.0203(a), the County may cause to be served a written order upon each
responsible party.
   (b)   Contents of written order. The written order shall be issued on a form
containing at least the following information:
      (1)   The name and mailing address of the responsible party.
      (2)   The date of the property inspection.
      (3)   The manner in which the conditions on the property or behavior
violate the County Code, or any state or federal code the County is authorized
to administratively enforce, and the specific provision that has been violated.
      (4)   The corrective actions required to abate the violation(s).
      (5)   A declaration that the violations are a public nuisance
(hereinafter "nuisance conditions").
      (6)   An order stating that the responsible party shall abate the
nuisance conditions listed in the written order within a reasonable time
determined by the issuing officer in light of the circumstances. If the
nuisance condition is a violation that poses an immediate threat to health or
safety or relates to a violation(s) of building, plumbing, electrical, or other
similar structural, health and safety, or zoning requirements that are the
result of, or to facilitate cannabis cultivation, the written order may provide
for an immediate correction deadline for that violation.
      (7)   A statement that failure to bring the property into compliance with
the County Code could subject the responsible party to any or all of the
following actions: administrative fines and penalties; County initiated
abatement or summary abatement; civil prosecution and penalties; criminal
prosecution, including fines and/or imprisonment; and/or the imposition of a
lien and/or special tax assessment against the property for abatement costs
related to enforcement of the written order, including administrative citations
issued for failure to comply with a written order to the extent provided by
law.
      (8)   Identification of all appeal rights and instructions on how to
appeal the written order, including instructions regarding the advance deposit
hardship waiver.
      (9)   A statement that failure on the part of the recipient to appeal the
written order shall constitute a waiver of the recipient's right to contest the
written order and will constitute a failure of the recipient to exhaust his
administrative remedies.
      (10)   Reference to §
11.0208(f)(5)(D)(IV) describing the evidence permitted at the administrative
hearing and considered by the hearing officer in reaching a decision on appeal.
      (11)   A statement that "lessors cannot retaliate against a lessee
pursuant to § 1942.5 of the Civil Code.
      (12)   The name, address, and telephone number of the County staff member
the responsible party may contact with questions regarding the written order.
The failure of the written order to set forth all required contents shall not
affect the validity of the proceedings.
   (c)   Service of the written order. Service of the written order shall be
served as follows:
      (1)   By U.S. mail, addressed to the owner or the owner's agent, at the
address shown on the current assessment roll and addressed to any other person
known to be in possession of the property at the street address of the property
where the nuisance exists; and
      (2)   By posting the written order conspicuously in front of the property
on which, or in front of which, the nuisance exists, or if the property has no
frontage, at a conspicuous location on a roadway closest to the property most
likely to give actual notice to the owner and persons in possession of the
property.
   (d)   Right to abate nuisance conditions by responsible party. Any
responsible party shall have the right to have the property rehabilitated or to
have the listed nuisance conditions abated in accordance with the written
order, at his or her own expense, provided the same is done prior to the
expiration of the abatement period set forth in the written order. Upon such
abatement in full, abatement proceedings under this Chapter shall terminate.
Nothing in this section is intended to excuse an owner/landlord from compliance
with California landlord-tenant laws. Additionally, nothing in this section is
intended to require an owner/landlord to breach any written agreement with a
tenant in possession of the property.
   (e)   Appeal of the written order. The right to and the procedure of any
appeal of a written order shall be the same as the right and procedures of an
appeal of an administrative citation located at §§
11.0208 (f) et seq., with the exception of those provisions specifically set
forth below.
      (1)   Notwithstanding §
11.0208(g), when conducting a hearing requested by a responsible party,
including the property owner, to contest a written order, the hearing officer
shall determine whether the enforcement officer has demonstrated there is
substantial evidence of a public nuisance and whether additional action is
necessary to abate the public nuisance. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law. The
hearing officer's decision shall uphold or overrule, in whole or in part, the
Enforcement Officer's determination that a public nuisance exists and whether
additional action is necessary to prevent recurrence of the public nuisance. If
the hearing officer determines the written order shall be enforced, the hearing
officer shall determine a reasonable time for compliance and the decision shall
specify a date by which the responsible party shall comply. The hearing officer
shall file the decision with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors within seven
days of the conclusion of the hearing. The hearing officer's decision shall be
final when it is filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. The Clerk of
the Board of Supervisors shall send the decision to the appellant by U.S. mail
and provide a copy to the relevant department. The judicial review provisions
in §
11.0208(h) shall not apply to the appeal of a written order.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0206 Criminal Actions.
   (a)   Criminal Penalties for Violations. It is unlawful for any person to
violate any provision of this Code, or to violate any provision of any permit
issued pursuant to this Code, or the conditions of approval for such permit
granted pursuant to this Code. Unless otherwise specified in another part of
this Code, any person committing such violation shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      (1)   Misdemeanor Violations. Except as provided below, upon conviction
of a misdemeanor, or upon a plea of nolo contendere (commonly called "no
contest"), the penalty shall be a base fine of not less than $500.00 and not
more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not
more than six months, or by both such base fine and imprisonment. Any court
costs that the court may otherwise be required to impose pursuant to applicable
State law or local ordinance shall be imposed in addition to the base fine. The
court, or judge thereof, in the order granting probation, may suspend the
imposing or the execution of the sentence and may direct that the suspension
may continue for a period of time not exceeding three years, and upon those
terms and conditions as it shall determine. The court, or judge thereof, in the
order granting probation and as a condition thereof, may imprison the defendant
in a county jail for a period not exceeding the maximum time fixed by law in
the case.
         (A)   Violations of Chapter 84.28. Any person violating any provision
of
Chapter 84.28 is guilty of a misdemeanor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
misdemeanor violation may be cited, charged, and prosecuted as an infraction.
Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, or upon a plea of nolo contendere (commonly
called "no contest") involving misdemeanor violations of
Chapter 84.28, the penalty shall be as follows:
            (I)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for operating a short-
term residential rental unit without a valid permit in violation of
Chapter 84.28 shall be punished by a base fine of up to $1,000.00 upon a first
conviction, by a base fine of up to $2,000.00 for a second conviction, by a
base fine of up to $5,000.00 upon a third or subsequent conviction, or by
imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six months, or by
both such base fine and imprisonment;
            (II)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for operating a
permitted short-term residential rental unit in violation of
Chapter 84.28 shall be punished by a base fine of up $1,000.00 upon a first
conviction, by a base fine of up to $2,000.00 upon a second conviction for
violations occurring within a 12-month period, by a base fine of up to
$5,000.00 upon a third or subsequent conviction for violations occurring within
a 12-month period, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not
more than six months, or by both such base fine and imprisonment.
         (B)   Violations of
Chapter 84.34. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, or upon a plea of nolo
contendere (commonly called "no contest") involving misdemeanor violations of
Chapter 84.28, the penalty shall be as follows:
            (I)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for cannabis
cultivation in violation of
Chapter 84.28 where the number of cannabis plants located on the premises is
less than 200 shall be punished by a base fine of up to $1,000.00 upon a first
conviction; by a base fine of up to $1,500.00 for a second conviction; by a
base fine of up to $3,000.00 upon a third or subsequent conviction; by
imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six months; or by
both such base fine and imprisonment;
            (II)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for commercial
cannabis activity related to operation of a dispensary, or delivery,
manufacturing, transportation, distribution, or cultivation where the number of
cannabis plants located on the premises is greater than 200 in violation of
Chapter 84.28, shall be punished by a base fine of up $3,000.00 upon a first
conviction; by a base fine of up to $6,000.00 upon a second conviction; by a
base fine of up to $10,000.00 upon a third or subsequent conviction; or by
imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six months; or by
both such base fine and imprisonment.
         (C)   Violations of
Chapter 88.01. Notwithstanding the penalty provisions in §
88.01.050(j)(1), upon conviction of a misdemeanor, or upon a plea of nolo
contendere (commonly called "no contest") involving misdemeanor violations of
Chapter 88.01 related to the unlawful removal of a Joshua tree, the penalty
shall be as follows:
            (I)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for the unlawful
removal of a Joshua tree in violation of
Chapter 88.01 shall be punished by a base fine of up to $5,000.00 upon a first
conviction, by a base fine of up to $10,000.00 for a second conviction, by a
base fine of up to $20,000.00 upon a third or subsequent conviction, or by
imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six months, or by
both such base fine and imprisonment;
            (II)   The unlawful removal of each Joshua tree in violation of
Chapter 88.01 shall be a new and separate offense.
      (2)   Infraction Violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a misdemeanor
violation may be cited, charged, and prosecuted as an infraction. Where so
prosecuted, or where specified in a section or chapter of this Code that the
violation of a certain section or sections shall be an infraction, then that
shall be the type of offense and each such violation shall be punishable,
except as otherwise provided herein, upon conviction or upon a plea of nolo
contendere (commonly called "no contest"), by a base fine not exceeding $100.00
for a first violation; a base fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation
of the same Code section within one year; and a base fine not exceeding $500.00
for each additional violation of the same Code section within one year of the
first violation. However, violations of building and safety provisions of this
Code cited, charged, and prosecuted as infractions shall be punishable by a
base fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; a base fine not
exceeding $500.00 for a second violation of the same Code section within one
year; and a base fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each additional violation of
the same Code section within one year of the first violation. The maximum fines
imposed in this Section are based upon the provisions of Government Code §
25132 and will be increased automatically and without amendment to this Section
upon any amendment to Government Code § 25132 increasing the amount of fines
permitted. Any court costs that the court may otherwise be required to impose
pursuant to applicable State law or local ordinance shall be imposed in
addition to the base fine.
   (b)   Criminal Citations.
      (1)   If any person is arrested by a peace officer, fire marshal, fire
prevention officer, code enforcement officer, animal control officer, public
health officer, or any other officer authorized to enforce this Code for a
violation of any provision of this Code (hereinafter "arresting officer"),
whether punishable as a misdemeanor or as an infraction, the arresting officer
shall issue a notice to appear (the citation) to such person, pursuant to Penal
Code §§ 853.5 and 853.6, and request that the person sign the notice to appear,
which shall constitute the person's written promise to appear in court. After
obtaining the written promise to appear, the arresting officer must immediately
release the person.
      (2)   If the person cited refuses to sign the notice to appear, the
arresting officer, unless the arresting officer is a sworn peace officer, must
immediately release the person and refer the matter to the Office of County
Counsel or other appropriate agency for appropriate action.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021; Am. Ord. 4432, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4435,
passed - -2022)
§ 11.0207 Civil Actions.
   (a)   Injunctive Relief and Abatement. At the request of any person
authorized to enforce this Code, the County Counsel or District Attorney may
commence proceedings for the abatement, removal, correction and enjoinment of
any act or omission that constitutes or will constitute a violation of this
Code, or any permit issued pursuant to this Code, or any condition(s) of
approval for such permit granted pursuant thereto, and an order requiring the
violator(s) to pay civil penalties and/or abatement costs. Where multiple
violators are involved, they shall be jointly and severally liable for the
civil penalties and/or abatement costs.
   (b)   Civil Remedies and Penalties. Any person, whether acting as principal,
agent, employee, owner, lessor, lessee, landlord, tenant, occupant, operator,
contractor, or otherwise, who violates any provision of this Code, or any
permit issued pursuant to this Code, or any condition(s) of approval for such
permit granted pursuant thereto, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to
exceed $1,000.00 per violation for each day or any portion thereof, that the
violation continues to exist. In determining the amount of civil penalty to be
imposed, both as to the daily rate and the subsequent total amount for any
given violation, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances,
including, but not limited to, the extent of the harm caused by the conduct
constituting the violation; the nature and persistence of such conduct; the
length of time over which the conduct occurred or was repeated; the assets,
liabilities, and net worth of the violator; whether the violator is a corporate
entity or an individual; and any corrective action taken by the violator.
   (c)   Attorney's Fees and Costs of Enforcement. In any civil action brought
by the County, including but not limited to a proceeding to abate a public
nuisance, whether by seeking injunctive relief and/or an abatement order, or
other order, attorney's fees and costs of enforcement may be recovered by the
prevailing party. Such recovered attorney's fees shall not exceed the amount of
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the County in that action or proceeding
(Government Code § 25845). Costs of enforcement shall include, but not be
limited to, administrative costs and any and all costs incurred in the physical
abatement of any nuisance and any and all costs incurred by the County in the
correction or remedying of a violation of this Code. Notwithstanding the above
language, no attorney's fees shall be recovered in any administrative
proceeding held pursuant to § 11.0208 or any related appeal to the Superior
Court or the Courts of Appeal.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0208 Administrative Citation Actions.
   (a)   Application. All violations of any provision of the "Codified
Ordinances of the County of San Bernardino," more commonly known as the San
Bernardino County Code, Titles 1 through 8, inclusive, and hereinafter to
include any and all additional titles as may be enacted and adopted by the
County of San Bernardino Board of Supervisors, are subject to enforcement
through the use of administrative citations in accordance with Government Code
§ 53069.4 and this Section. Administrative citations may be issued for any
violation of this Code including but not limited to those violations not
occurring in the presence of the Enforcement Officer (as defined below) issuing
the citation where the issuing officer determines through investigation that
the responsible party (as defined below) committed, caused, allowed, or is
otherwise responsible for the violation. The following procedures shall govern
the imposition, enforcement, collection, administrative review, and judicial
review of administrative citations and penalties.
   (b)   Issuance. Upon discovering that a violation of the County Code exists
on a property, an enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation
which shall state the violation(s) and the penalty to be paid by the
responsible party.
   (c)   Content of Citation. The administrative citation shall be issued on a
form approved by the County Executive Officer in consultation with County
Counsel. The administrative citation form may be tailored to the specific needs
of the issuing department as approved by the County Executive Officer; however,
all administrative citations regardless of the issuing County Department shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and mailing address of the responsible party.
      (2)   A reference to the date(s) and location of the violation and the
approximate time(s), if applicable, that the violation was observed.
      (3)   The identification of each violation by the applicable Section
number of the County Code and by either the Section's title or a brief
descriptive caption; or by reference to the applicable permit describing the
condition violated.
      (4)   A description of the action(s) required to correct the violations.
      (5)   A requirement that the responsible party to immediately correct the
violation where appropriate or otherwise indicate a reasonable compliance
deadline date and shall explain the consequences of failure to correct the
violation.
      (6)   The amount, if any, of the penalty imposed for the violation.
Multiple violations may be listed on the same citation form. In the event of
multiple violations, the administrative citation shall list the penalty amount,
if any, for each violation and the total of all of the penalties. For
continuing violations pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, or other
similar structural or zoning issues, and where such continuing violations do
not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the administrative citation
shall provide for a reasonable period of time to correct or otherwise remedy
the violation prior to the imposition of the penalty. For such violations that
pose an immediate danger to health or safety, the penalty may be imposed
immediately.
         (A)   Notwithstanding the above, where the continuing violation
concerns violations of building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar
structural, health and safety, or zoning requirements that exist as a result
of, or to facilitate, the illegal cultivation of cannabis, the penalty may be
imposed immediately unless a property owner or their agent has presented
sufficient evidence to the Enforcement Officer or hearing officer to satisfy
the requirements of Government Code § 53069.4(a)(2)(C).
      (7)   A notation box for the enforcement officer to indicate whether or
not the citation is issued as a "warning only" and without penalty. The
administrative citation shall also include a notation box that may be used by
the enforcement officer to indicate that the penalty will be waived if the
violation is corrected by the compliance deadline date indicated on the
citation form.
      (8)   An explanation of how the penalty shall be paid and the time period
by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the penalty
within this time period.
      (9)   Identify all appeal rights and include instructions on how to
appeal the citation, including instructions regarding the advance deposit
hardship waiver.
      (10)   The printed name and the signature of the enforcement officer
issuing the citation and, where reasonably possible to obtain it, the signature
of the responsible party (or managing employee if the responsible party is a
business entity), if he or she can be located, as set forth in subsection (d)
below.
   (d)   Service of Citation.
      (1)   If the responsible party is present at the scene of the violation,
the Enforcement Officer shall attempt to obtain their signature on the
administrative citation and shall deliver a copy of the administrative citation
to them.
      (2)   If the responsible party is a business, and the business owner is
on the premises, the Enforcement Officer shall attempt to deliver the
administrative citation to the business owner. If the Enforcement Officer is
unable to serve the business owner on the premises and the Enforcement Officer
can only locate the manager or on-site supervisor, the administrative citation
may be issued in the name of the business and a copy given to the manager or
on-site supervisor. A copy of the administrative citation shall also be mailed
to the business owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by first
class mail. If a copy of the administrative citation that is sent by certified
mail is returned by the United States Postal Service unsigned or marked
"unclaimed" and/or "refused," then service by first class mail shall be deemed
effective provided it is also not returned by the United States Postal Service.
      (3)   If a responsible party cannot be located at the property, then a
copy of the administrative citation shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
or near that property, if practicable, and a copy mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and by first class mail, to each responsible party at
their last known addresses as they appear on the last County equalized
assessment role, or any other available public records related to title or
ownership of the property that is the subject of the administrative citation.
If the copy of the administrative citation sent by certified mail to a
responsible party is returned by the United States Postal Service with the mail
receipt unsigned, or marked "unclaimed" and/or "refused," then service by first
class mail shall be deemed effective provided it is also not returned by the
United States Postal Service.
      (4)   The failure of any responsible party to receive a copy of the
administrative citation shall not affect the validity of the proceedings.
   (e)   Administrative Penalties and Costs.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided in the County Code or as indicated below,
the amount of penalty to be imposed for a violation of the County Code and
assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be in the maximum amounts
set forth in Government Code § 25132 and will be increased automatically and
without amendment to this Section upon any amendment to Government Code § 25132
increasing the maximum amount of fines permitted.
         (A)   If the violation concerns a short-term residential rental
subject to
Chapter 84.28, the following fines shall apply:
            (I)   Any person operating a short-term residential rental without
a valid permit in violation of
Chapter 84.28, the citation fine amount shall be $1,000.00 per violation per
day accruing until the violator indicates, and Code Enforcement confirms, the
violation has been abated;
            (II)   Any person operating a permitted short-term residential
rental in violation of
Chapter 84.28, the citation fine amount shall be $1,000.00 for a first
citation, $2,000.00 for a second citation for violations occurring within a 12-
month period, and $5,000.00 upon a third or subsequent citation for violations
occurring within a 12-month period.
         (B)   If the violation concerns commercial cannabis activity subject
to
Chapter 84.34, the following fines shall apply:
            (I)   If the commercial cannabis activity occurring on a property
involves the cultivation of cannabis not authorized by §§
84.34.040 and
84.34.050, and the number of cannabis plants located on the premises does not
exceed 200, the citation fine amount shall be $1,000.00 for a first citation;
$1,500.00 for a second citation; and $3,000.00 upon a third or subsequent
citation;
            (II)   If the commercial cannabis activity occurring on a property
involves the cultivation of cannabis and the number of cannabis plants located
on the premises exceeds 200, the citation fine amount shall be $3,000.00 for a
first citation; $6,000.00 for a second citation; and $10,000.00 upon a third or
subsequent citation;
            (III)   If the commercial cannabis activity occurring on a property
involves the operation of a dispensary, or delivery, manufacturing,
transportation or distribution, as defined in §
84.34.020, the citation fine amount shall be $3,000.00 for a first citation;
$6,000.00 for a second citation; and $10,000.00 upon a third or subsequent
citation.
      (2)   If the violation is not corrected within the time limits
established in the County Code, then additional administrative citations may be
issued for the same violation. The amount of the penalty shall increase at the
rate specified above.
         (A)   Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct
the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the County.
         (B)   The penalties assessed shall be due to the County (or to the
County's designated collection/processing agent for the issuing County
Department or Special District Department) within 30 calendar days from the
date the administrative citation is issued.
         (C)   Except as provided below, any person who fails to pay to the
County (or the County's designated collection/processing agent for the issuing
County Department) any penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter shall be liable for payment of the applicable late payment charges as
follows:
            (I)   For payments received within 30 days after the due date, a
late fee in the amount of 50 percent of the administrative fine is due.
            (II)   For payments received more than 30 days after the due date,
a late fee in the amount of 50 percent of the original administrative fine is
due, plus an additional 50 percent of the original administrative fine is due.
         (D)   The County may collect any past due administrative citation
penalty or late payment charge by use of any available means, including without
limitation, the recording of a notice of lien, describing the real property
affected and the amount of the costs and administrative citation penalties
claimed by the County with the Office of the County Recorder. The County may
transmit notice of the award of administrative costs and administrative
citation penalties, or notice of the judgment thereon arising from a collection
or other legal action, to the Treasurer/Tax Collector who shall place the
amount thereof on the assessment role as a special assessment to be paid with
County taxes, unless sooner paid. The County may also recover its collection
costs. A judgment or award of such costs, penalties or damages may be enforced
as set forth above and may also be enforced in any other manner provided by
law.
         (E)   In any appeal hearing, the issuing County Department may also
recover its administrative costs incurred in investigating, inspecting, and
abating or remedying the violation of the County Code, in attempting to collect
any and all penalties and late fees, and in defending the citation at the
appeal hearing.
         (F)   All administrative citation penalties collected pursuant to
these provisions shall be deposited into specific funds maintained by or on
behalf of the respective issuing County Departments for the purpose of funding
their enforcement of the County Code.
   (f)   Appeal of Administrative Citation.
      (1)   Notice of Appeal. Any responsible party in whose name an
administrative citation has been issued may appeal the administrative citation
by filing a written notice of appeal with the County Department that issued the
administrative citation. If the issuing County Department has designated a
processing agent, then the responsible party shall file their written notice of
appeal with the issuing County Department's designated processing agent. The
written notice of appeal must be filed within 20 calendar days of the date the
administrative citation was served in a manner set forth in subsection (d) of
this Section. The written notice of appeal shall be filed together with an
advance deposit, consisting of a cashier's check, for the full amount of the
penalty stated on the administrative citation. Failure to file a written notice
of appeal and the full amount of the advance deposit within this time period
shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the administrative citation.
      (2)   Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver. Any person intending to appeal an
administrative citation and who is financially unable to make the advance
deposit as required by this Section may file a written request for an advance
deposit hardship waiver. The written request must be filed prior to filing the
notice of appeal. The written request shall be filed with the issuing County
Department. A County-approved form shall be made for this purpose. The person
requesting the advance deposit hardship waiver shall indicate on the
corresponding notice of appeal that an advance deposit hardship waiver request
has been submitted.
      (3)   Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver Evaluation Procedures. Pending a
decision by the County Department's Director, or the Director's designee to
grant or deny the request, the advance deposit requirement shall be stayed and
no administrative hearing shall be scheduled. The Director, or the Director's
designee, may waive the advance deposit requirement and issue a waiver only if
the person requesting the waiver submits to the Director's attention a sworn
affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, reasonably
demonstrating to the Director the person's actual financial inability to submit
the advance deposit in advance of the appeal hearing. Within ten days of
receipt of the advance deposit hardship waiver request, the Director or the
Director's designee shall issue a written decision to grant or deny the
request. If the request is denied the written decision shall explain the reason
(s) for denial of the waiver and shall state the due date for payment of the
advance deposit. The written decision of the Director, or the Director's
designee, shall be sent via first class mail to the requesting party and shall
be final. An administrative hearing shall not be scheduled until the advance
deposit is received. If the request is denied and the advance deposit is not
remitted within the time frame indicated in the written decision, the right to
an appeal shall be deemed waived and payment of the administrative penalty
shall become due immediately. The amount due shall be subject to all applicable
late fees, which shall accrue from the original due date as indicated on the
administrative citation.
      (4)   Contents of Notice of Appeal.  The notice of appeal shall be
submitted on County-approved forms and shall contain the following information:
         (A)   A brief statement setting forth the appealing person's
(hereinafter "appellant") interest in the proceedings;
         (B)   A brief statement of the material facts which the appellant
claims supports their contention that they did not commit, cause, or otherwise
allow a violation of one or more provisions of Titles 1 through 7, inclusive,
of this Code to occur, exist, or continue as alleged in the administrative
citation at issue; or that they are not a responsible party as defined at §
11.0208(b)(7) of this Chapter.
         (C)   A mailing address at which the appellant agrees that notice of
any additional proceeding, or an order relating to the imposition of an
administrative citation penalty, shall be received and accepted by the
appellant by first class mail.
         (D)   The notice of appeal must be signed and dated by the appellant.
      (5)   Administrative Hearing. The resolution of an appeal of an
administrative citation issued under the authority of this Section shall be by
an administrative hearing conducted according to the procedures set forth in
this Section. The provisions of this Code at Title 1: Government and
Administration, Division 2: Departments, Offices, Commissions, Chapter 27:
Administrative Hearings; County Hearing Officer, shall not apply. Upon the
issuing County Department's designated processing agent's receipt of a timely,
written notice of appeal from the appellant, an administrative hearing shall be
held as follows:
         (A)   Hearing Date. The date of the hearing shall be set for a date
that is no later than 60 days from the date the notice of appeal is received by
the issuing County Department's processing agent, unless otherwise stayed by
the timely submission of an advance deposit hardship waiver, as indicated
above.
         (B)   Notice of Hearing.  Notice of the administrative hearing shall
be given to the appellant at least ten calendar days before the hearing. The
notice may be delivered to the appellant or mailed by first class mail to the
address listed in the notice of appeal. Neither personal service nor service by
certified mail shall be required.
         (C)   Hearing Officer. The administrative hearing shall be held before
the Director of the issuing County Department or his or her designee. The
hearing officer shall not be the Enforcement Officer who issued the
administrative citation or their immediate supervisor. The Director of the
issuing County Department, through the County's contracting process, may
contract with a qualified provider for administrative processing and collection
services to provide hearing officers to conduct administrative hearings and
process administrative citations, including the collection of payments of
administrative citation penalties, administrative costs, and late charges.
         The Board of Supervisors finds that contracting with a qualified
provider for administrative hearing officers as set forth in this Section is
equivalent to the establishment of an office of County hearing officer as
provided for and for the purpose intended by Government Code § 25845(i). The
Board of Supervisors further finds that the decision of the hearing officer so
appointed shall be deemed a recommendation adopted by the Board of Supervisors
without further notice, and shall be deemed equivalent to and for the purpose
intended by Government Code § 25845(h).
         (D)   Conduct of the Hearing.
            (I)   The Enforcement Officer who issued the administrative
citation shall not be required to participate in the administrative hearing.
The contents of the Enforcement Officer's case file shall be admitted as prima
facie evidence of the facts stated therein. The hearing officer shall not be
limited by the technical or formal rules of evidence. The issuing County
Department shall bear the burden of proof at the administrative hearing to
establish the existence of a violation of this Code by a preponderance of the
evidence. The hearing officer shall have the discretion to exclude evidence if
its probative value is substantially outweighed by the probability that its
admission will cause an undue consumption of time. The Enforcement Officer
establishing or confirming the occurrence or existence of a violation of this
Code shall be deemed the complaining or reporting party. Personal or other
identifying information regarding any other reporting party shall be deemed
both irrelevant and subject to the federal and state constitutional rights of
privacy; and, therefore, shall not be subject to review or disclosure.
            (II)   Provided that proper notice of the administrative hearing
has been served as required by this or other applicable chapters of this Code,
an appellant who fails to appear at the administrative hearing shall be deemed
to have waived each of the following: the right to such hearing, the
adjudication of issues presented at the hearing, and any and all rights
afforded to the appellant under this Code. The appellant shall also be deemed
to have failed to exhaust their administrative remedies.
            (III)   Notwithstanding Subsection (f)(5)(D)(II) above, if the
appellant fails to appear at the administrative hearing, the hearing officer
shall make their determination based on the information contained in the
Enforcement Officer's case file and the appellant's notice of appeal.
            (IV)   The only evidence that shall be permitted at the
administrative hearing and considered by the administrative hearing officer in
reaching a decision, is that evidence which is relevant to the proof or
disproof of:
               (i)   Ownership of the subject property, when applicable;
               (ii)   Whether a person noticed by the issuing County Department
as a responsible party is, in fact, a responsible party;
               (iii)   Whether a violation of this Code occurred and/or
continues to occur on the date or dates specified in the administrative
citation;
               (iv)   Whether the responsible party has committed, caused,
maintained, or permitted a violation of this Code on the date or dates
specified on the administrative citation.
               (v)   The County's administrative costs.
   (g)   Hearing Officer's Ruling.
      (1)   After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the hearing officer shall take the matter under submission. The
hearing officer shall within a reasonable time issue a written ruling
("Administrative Citation Appeal Ruling" or "Ruling") to uphold or cancel the
administrative citation, as to each violation, and shall list in the ruling the
reasons for that decision.
      (2)   If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation
should be upheld, then the amount of the penalties set forth in the citation
shall not be reduced or waived for any reason. As to an administrative citation
listing multiple violations, the amount of penalties for the violations so
upheld shall not be reduced or waived for any reason. This subsection (g) shall
not apply to "warning only" administrative citations or to any administrative
citation that indicates on its face that the penalty will be waived if the
violation is corrected by the deadline compliance date and the violation is so
corrected.
      (3)   If the hearing officer cancels the administrative citation, then no
penalty shall be assessed and any penalty otherwise deposited with the issuing
County Department, or its designated processing/collection agent, shall be
promptly refunded to the appellant. As to an administrative citation listing
multiple violations, then no penalties shall be assessed for the specific
violations so cancelled and the amounts of such penalties otherwise deposited
with the issuing County Department, or its designated processing/collection
agent, shall be promptly refunded to the appellant.
      (4)   The appellant shall be served with a copy of the ruling by first
class mail within a reasonable time. The ruling shall become final on the date
of mailing.
      (5)   The ruling shall contain instructions for obtaining judicial review
of the decision pursuant to California Government Code § 53069.4, as that
section may be from time to time amended, or the successor provision thereto.
      (6)   If the administrative citation is upheld, the Hearing Officer shall
also award the County its administrative costs. An itemized summary of these
costs shall be presented at the hearing.
   (h)   Judicial Review of Administrative Hearing Officer's Ruling.
      (1)   Notice of Appeal. Within 20 calendar days of the date of the
delivery or mailing of the ruling to the appellant, the appellant (hereinafter
"contestant") may contest that decision by filing an appeal to be heard by the
Superior Court, and paying to the court clerk the filing fee set forth at
Government Code § 53069.4, or the successor provision thereto. The failure to
file the written appeal and to pay the filing fee within this period shall
constitute a waiver of the right to an appeal and the ruling shall be deemed
confirmed. The contestant shall serve a copy of the notice of appeal in person
or by first class mail upon the County Department that had issued the original
administrative citation.
      (2)   Conduct of the Superior Court Appeal Hearing. The conduct of the
appeal before the Superior Court is a subordinate judicial duty and may be
performed by traffic trial commissioners and other subordinate judicial
officers at the direction of the presiding judge at the Superior Court. The
appeal shall be heard de novo, except that the contents of the issuing County
Department's file in the case shall be received in evidence. A copy of the
document or instrument of the issuing County Department providing notice of the
violation and imposition of the administrative penalty (i.e., the
administrative citation) shall be admitted into evidence as prima facie
evidence of the facts stated therein. The Court shall request that the issuing
Department's file in the case be forwarded to the Court, to be received within
15 calendar days of the request.
      (3)   Judgment. The Court shall retain the filing fee regardless of the
outcome of the appeal. If the Court finds in favor of the contestant, the
amount of the fee shall be reimbursed to the contestant by the issuing County
Department. Any deposit of the administrative penalty shall be refunded by the
issuing County Department in accordance with the judgment of the Court. If the
administrative penalty has not been deposited and the decision of the Court is
against the contestant and in favor of the issuing County Department, the
issuing County Department may proceed to collect the penalty and administrative
costs pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Code, or in any other manner
provided by law.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0209 Abatement.
   To the extent the nuisance conditions stated in a written order are not
completely corrected by the responsible party having charge of the property,
and/or the responsible party is otherwise determined to be non-responsive to
the written order issued pursuant to §
11.0205, and to the extent that no timely appeal of the written order is
requested, or the administrative appeal process has been completely exhausted,
the enforcement officer or his or her designee may cause the nuisance
conditions to be abated by County staff or pursuant to a public or private
contract in any reasonable manner and enter the property for such purpose. Upon
request of the enforcement officer or his or her designee, other County
departments shall cooperate fully and shall render all reasonable assistance in
abating any such nuisance conditions.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0210 Summary Abatements.
   Notwithstanding the administrative procedures for abating a nuisance
pursuant to this Chapter, the County may summarily abate a public nuisance if
the enforcement officer determines the nuisance constitutes an immediate threat
to public health and safety. If immediate action becomes necessary, the
enforcement officer may summarily abate a public nuisance even though the
enforcement officer initiated an administrative proceeding under this Chapter.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0211 Filing and Recording of Notices.
   (a)   Recording a Notice of Action. Whenever an enforcement action is
initiated, including when a written order is issued pursuant to §
11.0205, and prior to recording a notice of pendency, the Code Enforcement
Division or other County Department initiating the action may record with the
County Recorder a notice of action identifying the enforcement action taken for
violation of the County Code or other applicable law. The notice of action
shall be served by certified mail return receipt requested and first class mail
to the address shown on the current assessment roll and addressed to any other
person known to be in possession of the property at the street address of the
property where the nuisance exists. The notice of action shall state:
      (1)   That the County is the agency on whose behalf the notice of action
is filed.
      (2)   The date of the written order.
      (3)   The street address of the property, if available.
      (4)   The legal description of the property.
      (5)   The assessor's parcel number of the property.
      (6)   That nuisance conditions exist on the property.
      (7)   The name and address of the owner of the property, if known.
      (8)   The amount of any costs incurred to date by the County in abating
or restraining the nuisance conditions.
      (9)   The amount of any administrative citations issued to date as a
result of the nuisance conditions on the subject parcel.
      (10)   That the costs of abatement and/or the amounts of administrative
citations or penalties only reflect the costs of abatement and the amount
accrued as of the date of the notice of action, and that the amount shown may
increase over time and/or until such time as abatement is complete and all
costs and the amounts of administrative citations or penalties have been paid
in full to San Bernardino County.
      (11)   That unpaid abatement costs or administrative citations may be
specially assessed and that such special assessment is not subject to
extinguishment by the sale or foreclosure of the property or by sale of the
property for unpaid property taxes.
      (12)   That the notice of action shall not be removed until the
violations are abated and all costs incurred by the County are recovered, and
any criminal fines or administrative citations have been paid.
   (b)   Recording of a Notice of Pendency. Whenever the County institutes a
judicial action or proceeding to enforce the San Bernardino County Code, a
notice of pendency of the action or proceeding may be recorded in the County
Recorder's Office. The notice may be recorded at the time of the commencement
of the action or proceeding, and upon recordation of the notice as provided in
this Section, shall have the same effect as a notice recorded in compliance
with § 405.20 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
      (1)   The County Recorder shall record and index the notice of pendency
of action or proceeding in the Grantor/Grantee Index.
      (2)   Any notice of pendency of action or proceeding filed in compliance
with this Section may, upon motion of a party to the action or proceeding, be
vacated upon an appropriate showing of need therefor by an order of a judge of
the Court in which the action or proceeding is pending.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0212 Costs Incurred for Abatement.
   Any person, whether acting as a principal, agent, employee, owner, lessor,
lessee, landlord, tenant, occupant, operator or contractor, or otherwise,
violating any provision of the County Code or the rules, regulations, orders,
permits or conditions of approval issued thereunder, shall be liable to the
County for all costs of abatement incurred by the County, including, but not
limited to, administrative costs, and any and all costs incurred in the
physical abatement of the nuisance, and any damages suffered by the County, its
agents or agencies, as a result of such violations. In accordance with
Government Code § 25845(b), administrative and abatement costs incurred by the
County for abating a nuisance or public nuisance under this chapter shall be
collected in the following manner:
   (a)   Account of expense, filing of report. An itemized account shall be
kept of the expenses incurred by the County in the abatement, restraint, or
prevention of any nuisances or public nuisances. Upon the completion of the
abatement or the work associated with the prevention or restraint of the
violations of the County Code, the appropriate County staff member shall
prepare a report specifying the work done, with itemized and total costs of the
work, and description of the real property upon which the nuisances or public
nuisances is or was located.
   (b)   Invoicing and notice. Except in cases of extreme financial hardship
and upon advice of County Counsel, the responsible County department shall seek
to recover all costs incurred by the County referenced in subsection (a) from
the responsible party. To do this an invoice shall be mailed as set forth in §
11.0205(c). In addition to stating the amount owed to the County by the
responsible party, the invoice shall state that if the invoice is not paid by
the responsible party that the County may order the amount of the invoice to be
placed as a special assessment against the parcel and/or cause a notice of lien
to be filed against the parcel. The invoice shall also advise the responsible
party of their right to appeal the invoice or the amount of the invoice. If the
responsible party does not request an appeal, or fails the appeal, and the
invoice is not paid within the time set forth by the notice, the responsible
County department may seek approval of the special assessment from the Board of
Supervisors as a consent calendar item which shall also be recorded on title as
a notice of abatement lien.
   (c)   Appeal of the invoice/notice of cost assessment. Any appeal of the
County's invoice or notice of cost assessment shall comply with the procedures
listed in §§
11.0205(e)(1) and
11.0208(f). If the appeal of the invoice/notice of cost assessment concerns
abatement costs for summary abatements initiated pursuant to § 11.0210, and the
appealing party so requests in the notice of appeal, then the hearing officer
shall also determine whether the public nuisance actually existed at the time
of abatement.
   (d)   Resolution and assessment. If in an appeal the hearing officer
determines that the property should be assessed, and the amount to be assessed
has not been paid within 20 days of the date the decision is mailed to the
appellant, the County shall cause the same to be recorded on the assessment
roll. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner
as ordinary taxes within the San Bernardino County are collected, and shall be
subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary County taxes. All laws applicable to the
levy, collection and enforcement of County taxes shall be applicable to the
special assessment. Notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceeding
or special assessment may be recorded with the County Recorder.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0213 Collection of Unpaid Administrative Citations, Administrative
Citations for Continuing Violations, and Administrative and Abatement Costs.
   (a)   Administrative citations for continuing violations may be issued for
the existence of violations of a continuing nature accruing each and every day
after issuance of a prior notice to the responsible party in the form of a
written order, notice of violation, a notice and order, or an administrative
citation (hereafter "notice") to correct the violation, so long as the
violation remains in existence.
   (b)   The County may collect any past due administrative citation penalties,
administrative and abatement costs, and late payment charges as imposed or, as
set forth in a final decision of a hearing officer or judgment of the Superior
Court (arising from judicial review of a hearing officer's decision), and all
costs of collection associated therewith, in any manner provided by law
including, but not limited to, the methods described in California Government
Code § 25845. At its discretion, the County may place a special assessment on
the County tax roll against the parcel of real property where the violation(s)
occurred. Thereafter the amount of the assessment shall be collected at the
same time and in the same manner as County taxes are collected, and be subject
to the same penalties. On property for which no property tax is currently due,
the lien shall be collected at the same time taxes on the property are
collected, and in a similar manner.
   (c)   In its sole discretion, in the event the County collects past due
amounts through placement of a special assessment on the County tax roll, the
County may record a notice of lien with the County Recorder, describing the
parcel of real property affected and the amount of the administrative citation
penalties, administrative and abatement costs, late payment charges, and/or
costs associated with the recording of the notice of lien and perfecting the
special assessment.
   (d)   All administrative citation penalties collected pursuant to these
provisions shall be deposited into specific funds maintained by or on behalf of
the respective issuing department for the purpose of funding its enforcement of
the County Code.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
§ 11.0214 Treble Damages.
   Upon a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment for a violation of
this Code within a two-year period the violator shall be liable to the County
for treble the abatement costs, in accordance with Government Code § 25845.5.
(Ord. 4424, passed - -2021)
CHAPTER 3: CLAIMS AGAINST THE COUNTY
Section
   
11.0301   Presentment of Claims—Prerequisite for Bringing Suit.
   
11.0302   Claims Presented.
   
11.0303   Suits Prohibited Until Written Claim Acted Upon.
   
11.0304   Six Months Statute of Limitations—Exception.
   
11.0305   Suit Prohibited Where Full Payment or Compromise Effected.
   
11.0306   Authorization to Delegate the Power to Compromise Any Pending Action.
§ 11.0301   Presentment of Claims—Prerequisite for Bringing Suit.
   There shall be presented in accordance with this Chapter and as a
prerequisite to suit against the County of San Bernardino, all claims for money
or damages not governed and controlled by Part 3 (commencing with Government
Code § 900), and which are more specifically listed as exceptions in Government
Code § 905, provided that the claims covered by this Section are not governed
by any other statutes or regulations expressly relating thereto.
(Ord. 1115, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2734, passed - -1983)
§ 11.0302   Claims Presented.
   Those claims required by §
11.0301 of this Chapter shall be presented to the Board of Supervisors or the
Risk Manager in accordance with and in the manner provided in the California
Government Code §§ 900 et seq. as contained in Article I of Chapter 2 entitled
“Presentation and Consideration of Claims,” Article 2 of Chapter 2 entitled
“Manner of Presentation and Giving Notice,” and §
12.3405 of the Code.
(Ord. 1115, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2734, passed - -1983)
§ 11.0303   Suits Prohibited Until Written Claim Acted Upon.
   No suit for money or damages may be brought against the County of San
Bernardino on a cause of action for which a claim is required to be presented
under §
11.0301 of this Chapter until a written claim therefor has been presented to
the Board of Supervisors or the Risk Manager and has been acted upon or has
been deemed rejected, in accordance with procedures prescribed by §
11.0302 of this Chapter. Only the person who filed the claim may bring such a
suit.
(Ord. 1115, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2734, passed - -1983)
§ 11.0304   Six Months Statute of Limitations—Exception.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subdivision (b), any suit brought against the
County of San Bernardino for which a claim is required to be presented in
accordance with §
11.0301 of this Chapter must be commenced within six months after the date the
claim is acted upon or deemed rejected by the Board of Supervisors or the Risk
Manager.
   (b)   Exception. When a person is unable to commence a suit on a cause of
action described in Subdivision (a) within the time prescribed in that
Subdivision because he or she has been sentenced to imprisonment in a state
prison, such suit must be commenced within six months after the date that the
civil right to commence such action is restored to such person. A person
sentenced to imprisonment in a state prison may not commence such suit unless
he or she presented a claim in accordance with §
11.0302 of this Chapter within the time prescribed therein.
(Ord. 1115, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2734, passed - -1983)
§ 11.0305   Suit Prohibited Where Full Payment or Compromise Effected.
   Where a claim that is required to be presented to the County of San
Bernardino in accordance with §§
11.0301 and
11.0302 of this Chapter is so presented and action thereon is taken by the
Board of Supervisors or the Risk Manager:
   (a)   If the claim is allowable in full and the claimant accepts the amount
allowed, no suit may be maintained on any part of the cause of action to which
the claim relates.
   (b)   If the claim is allowed in part and the claimant accepts the amount
allowed, no suit may be maintained on any portion of the cause of action where,
pursuant to a requirement of the Board of Supervisors or the Risk Manager to
such effect, the claimant has accepted the amount allowed in settlement of the
entire claim.
(Ord. 1115, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2734, passed - -1983)
§ 11.0306   Authorization to Delegate the Power to Compromise Any Pending
Action.
   The Board of Supervisors may compromise, or may delegate the authority to
its attorney or an employee to compromise, any pending action.
(Ord. 1115, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2734, passed - -1983)
CHAPTER 4: ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS
Section
   
11.0401   Business Hours.
   
11.0402   Declaration of Saturday as a Holiday.
   
11.0403   Inventory Reports Required.
§ 11.0401   Business Hours.
   All County offices shall be kept open for the transaction of business
continuously from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. every day except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays and except as otherwise expressly authorized by the Board of
Supervisors by resolution.
(Ord. 641, passed - -1949; Am. Ord. 2544, passed - -1981)
§ 11.0402   Declaration of Saturday as a Holiday.
   In accordance with the provisions of Government Code § 24260, every Saturday
shall be considered as a holiday with the same legal results as in the case of
any other holiday, insofar as the business of County offices is concerned.
(Ord. 641, passed - -1949)
§ 11.0403   Inventory Reports Required.
   (a)   Filing. On or before April 10 of each year, each County office or
person in charge of any office, department, service, or institution of the
County, each officer of the judicial district, each judge, or the clerk,
secretary or other administrative officer of each court of record, and the
executive head of each special district whose affairs and funds are under the
supervision and control of the Board of Supervisors or for which the Board is
ex officio, the governing body shall file with the County Auditor/Controller,
according to the procedure prescribed by the Board, an inventory under oath,
showing in detail all County property in his possession or in his charge at the
close of business on the preceding March 31.
   (b)   Consequence of not filing. In the event that any inventory listing is
not filed by the person responsible as provided for in Subdivision (a) of this
Section, the County Auditor/Controller shall send a list of all such
inventories which have not been filed by May 15, to the Board of Supervisors
for appropriate action.
(Ord. 1200, passed - -1964)
CHAPTER 5: TIME LIMITATIONS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE MANDAMUS PROCEEDINGS
Section
   
11.0501   Adoption of Civil Procedure Code § 1094.6.
   
11.0502   Definition of “Decision.”
§ 11.0501   Adoption of Civil Procedure Code § 1094.6.
   The provisions of Civil Procedure Code § 1094.6 shall be applicable to
decisions of the Board of Supervisors and of any commission, board, officer, or
agent of the County of San Bernardino.
§ 11.0502   Definition of “Decision.”
   As used in this Chapter, DECISION means a decision subject to review
pursuant to Civil Procedure Code § 1094.5, suspending, demoting, or dismissing
an officer or employee, revoking or denying an application for a permit,
license, or other entitlement, or denying an application for any retirement
benefit or allowance.
CHAPTER 6: VALIDITY OF TITLE 1
Section
   
11.0601   Validity of Title 1.
§ 11.0601 Validity of Title 1.
   This Title and the various Divisions,Chapters, Sections, clauses, or parts
thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any Division, Chapter, Section,
clause, or part is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this
Title shall not be affected thereby. The County Board of Supervisors hereby
declares that it would have passed this Title and each part thereof, regardless
of the fact that one or more parts thereof be declared unconstitutional or
invalid.
(Am. Ord. 1920, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 4124, passed - -2010)
DIVISION 2: DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1: BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Section
   
12.0101   Rules Applicable to Meetings.
   
12.0102   Supervisorial Districts.
   
12.0103   Non-interference.
   
12.0104   Procedures for Appointment to Vacant Elective Office.
§ 12.0101   Rules Applicable to Meetings.
   Rule 1. Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Board of Supervisors of
the County of San Bernardino shall generally be held on Tuesdays at 9:00 a.m.
Meetings will not be held on Tuesdays when the preceding Monday is a legal
holiday. All meeting dates shall be determined by an annual meeting calendar,
as adopted and amended by the Board of Supervisors each year.
(Ord. 974, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 2211, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2557, passed
- -1981; Am. Ord. 2613, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2714, passed - -1982; Am. Ord.
3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 2. Meeting Place. Regular meetings of the Board of Supervisors of the
County of San Bernardino shall be held in the Covington chamber of the Board of
Supervisors in the County Government Center, 385 North Arrowhead Avenue, First
Floor, City of San Bernardino, County of San Bernardino, State of California,
unless the annual meeting calendar as adopted or amended identifies another
location within the County for a particular regular meeting. Closed sessions
shall be held in the Magda Lawson Room of the County Government Center, unless
another location is designated by the Chairperson of the Board. When a closed
session is scheduled, the regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors shall be
convened in the Magda Lawson Room, and adjourned to the Covington chamber
following the closed session.
(Ord. 2211, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2557, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 3944,
passed - -2005)
   Rule 3. Order of Business. The regular order of business of the Board shall
be:
   (a)   Closed session;
   (b)    Invocation;
   (c)    Pledge of allegiance to the flag;
   (d)    Agenda of the Board;
   (e)    Adjournment.
(Am. Ord. 3536, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3576, passed - -1994; Am. Ord. 3580,
passed - -1994; Am. Ord. 3606, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 4. Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. A Chairperson and a Vice-
Chairperson shall be elected at the first regular meeting of the Board of
Supervisors in each odd-numbered calendar year, and shall hold office for two-
year terms and until their successors are elected. The Chairperson of the Board
shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide questions of order subject to
appeal to the Board. In the Chairperson’s absence, the Vice-Chairperson shall
act as Chairperson. If both the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson are absent,
the Board shall elect an acting Chairperson for that meeting. All documents
approved by the Board which require signature shall be signed by the
Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Vice-Chairperson, or by such other
person designated by the Board or allowed by law.
(Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 5. Questions of Law. All questions of law shall be referred by the
Board to the County Counsel for opinion. All contracts and proposed ordinances
shall be referred to the County Counsel for approval as to form.
(Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 6. Preparation of Agenda and Fair Statement. An agenda shall be
prepared by the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors for each meeting of the Board
and shall contain a brief general description of each item of business to be
transacted or discussed at the meeting. The agenda shall specify the time and
location of the regular meeting and shall be posted at least 72 hours before
the meeting in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public.
All proposed agenda items shall be approved for placement on the agenda by the
County Administrative Officer, the Chairperson of the Board of Supervisors, or
their designees, before being placed on the agenda by the Clerk of the Board.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any member of the Board of Supervisors or his or
her designee may place an item on the agenda after presenting that item to the
Chairperson and the County Administrative Officer or their designees. The Clerk
of the Board shall prepare a fair statement of proceedings of meetings of the
Board of Supervisors.
(Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 7. Agenda Procedure. Except as otherwise provided herein, any matter to
be presented to or acted upon by the Board of Supervisors at a regular meeting
must be filed in the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors not later
than 5:00 p.m. Tuesday preceding the Tuesday meeting. Unless so filed the
matter will not be considered by the Board of Supervisors until the next
succeeding meeting of the Board; provided, however, with the consent of the
Chairperson, the County Administrative Officer, or their designees, a matter
may be placed on the agenda at any time prior to 72 hours before the regular
meeting. No action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the posted
agenda; provided, however, the Board may take action on items of business not
appearing on the posted agenda under any of the following conditions:
   (a)    Upon determination by a majority vote of the Board that an emergency
situation exists, as defined in Government Code § 54956.5;
   (b)    Upon a determination by a two-thirds vote of the Board, or, if less
than two-thirds of the Board members are present, a unanimous vote of those
members present, that there is a need to take immediate action and that the
need for action came to the attention of the responsible County staff
subsequent to the posting of the agenda;
   (c)    The item was posted on the agenda for a prior meeting of the Board
occurring not more than five calendar days prior to the date action is taken on
the item, and at the prior meeting the item was continued to the meeting at
which action is being taken.
(Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 8. Referrals. Any matter coming before the Board may, if deemed
necessary, be referred to the officer or department concerned therewith.
(Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 9. Reconsideration. At the same meeting or at the meeting succeeding
that at which a final vote on any question has been taken, said vote may be
reconsidered on the motion of any member of the Board, if notice of intention
to move such reconsideration has been given at the meeting at which such final
vote was taken by a member voting with the majority.
(Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 10. Addressing the Board. Any member of the public may address the
Board: (1) on an agenda item before or during the Board’s consideration of the
item, and (2) on any matter not on the agenda that is within the subject matter
jurisdiction of the Board at the time provided on the agenda for public
comment, provided the person submits a completed request to speak form to the
Clerk of the Board or his or her designee prior to the time the Chairperson
calls the item for the Board’s consideration. The person wishing to address the
Board shall, when recognized by the Chairperson of the Board, step up to the
rostrum and announce his or her name and address. The Chairperson shall, in the
interest of facilitating the business of the Board, limit the amount of time
which a member of the public may use in addressing the Board to three minutes
total on the consent calendar and to three minutes on each discussion item,
unless the Chairperson, or a majority of the Board determines that a different
limit is appropriate. In addition, the Chairperson shall, in the interest of
facilitating the business of the Board, limit the total amount of time which a
member of the public may use in addressing the Board on all agenda items to 12
minutes, unless the Chairperson, or majority of the Board, determines that a
different limit is appropriate.
(Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 11. Disruptive Conduct—Removal from Chambers. In the event that any
meeting of the Board is willfully disrupted by a person or by a group or groups
of persons so as to render the orderly conduct of the meeting impossible, the
Chairperson may recess the meeting or order the person, group or groups of
persons willfully disrupting the meeting to leave the meeting or be removed
from the meeting. Disruptive conduct includes addressing the Board without
first being recognized, not addressing the subject before the Board,
repetitiously addressing the same subject, failing to relinquish the podium
when requested to do so, or otherwise preventing the Board from conducting its
meeting in an orderly manner.
(Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 12. Sergeant-at-Arms. The Board of Supervisors shall designate a
sergeant-at-arms of the Board who shall attend meetings at the request of the
Chairperson of the Board. The sergeant-at-arms shall be available to respond to
all meetings immediately upon call. The sergeant-at-arms shall carry out all
instructions given by the Chairperson or Acting Chairperson for the purpose of
maintaining order and providing security at the Board meetings.
(Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
   Rule 13. Committees. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint such standing
and special committees as it may deem necessary.
   Rule 14. Waiver of Rules. Any of the within rules not required by law may be
waived by the Chairperson of the Board or by a majority of the members of the
Board.
   Rule 15. Open Meetings. All meetings of the Board of Supervisors shall be
open and public, and all persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting of
the Board, except as otherwise provided herein.
   Rule 16. Closed Sessions. The Board may hold closed sessions as provided by
law.
   Rule 17. Adjourned Meetings. The Board of Supervisors may adjourn any
regular, adjourned regular, special or adjourned special meeting to a time and
place specified in the order of adjournment. Less than a quorum may so adjourn
from time to time. If all members are absent from any regular or adjourned
regular meeting, the Clerk of the Board may declare the meeting adjourned to a
stated time and place, and the Clerk of the Board shall cause a written notice
of the adjournment to be given in the same manner as provided herein for
special meetings, unless such notice is waived as provided for special
meetings. A copy of the order or notice of adjournment shall be conspicuously
posted on or near the door of the Chambers or placed where the regular,
adjourned regular, special or adjourned special meeting was held within 24
hours after the time of the adjournment. When a regular or adjourned regular
meeting is adjourned as provided herein, the resulting adjourned regular
meeting is a regular meeting for all purposes. When an order of adjournment of
any meeting fails to state the hour at which the adjourned meeting is to be
held, it shall be held at the hour specified for regular meetings.
   Rule 18. Special Meetings. A special meeting may be called at any time by
the Chairperson of the Board, or by a majority of the members of the Board, by
delivering personally or by mail written notice to each member of the Board and
to each newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station
requesting notice in writing. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by
mail and shall be received at least 24 hours before the time of the meeting as
specified in the notice.
   The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting
and the business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at
such meeting by the Board. The written notice may be dispensed with as to any
member of the Board who at, or prior to, the time the meeting convenes files
with the Clerk of the Board a written waiver of notice. The waiver may be given
by telegram. The written notice may also be dispensed with as to any member of
the Board who was actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. The
call and notice of the special meeting shall be posted at least 24 hours prior
to the meeting in a location that is freely accessible to members of the
public.
   Rule 19. Emergency Meetings. In the case of an emergency situation involving
matters upon which prompt action is necessary due to the disruption or
threatened disruption of public facilities, the Board may hold an emergency
meeting without complying with either the 24-hour notice requirements or the
24-hour posting requirement of Rule 18. For purposes of this rule, EMERGENCY
SITUATION means any of the following:
   (a)    Work stoppage or other activity which severely impairs public health,
safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the Board;
   (b)    Crippling disaster which severely impairs public health, safety, or
both, as determined by a majority of the Board.
   However, each local newspaper of general circulation or radio or television
station which has requested notice of special meetings pursuant to Rule 18
shall be notified by the Chairperson of the Board, or the Chairperson’s
designee, one hour prior to the emergency meeting by telephone and all
telephone numbers provided in the most recent request of such newspaper or
station for notification of special meetings shall be exhausted. In the event
that telephone services are not functioning, the notice requirements of this
rule shall be deemed waived, and the Board, or its designee, shall notify those
newspapers, radio stations, or television stations of the fact of the holding
of the emergency meeting, the purpose of the meeting, and any action taken at
the meeting as soon after the meeting as possible.
   The Board shall not meet in closed session during a meeting called pursuant
to this rule.
   All special meeting requirements, as prescribed in Rule 18, shall be
applicable to a meeting called pursuant to this rule, with the exception of the
24-hour notice requirement.
   The minutes of a meeting called pursuant to this rule, a list of persons who
the Chairperson of the Board, or the Chairperson’s designee, notified or
attempted to notify, a copy of the roll call vote, and any actions taken at the
meeting shall be posted for a minimum of ten days in a public place as soon
after the meeting as possible.
(Am. Ord. 3885, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 3944, passed - -2005)
§ 12.0102   Supervisorial Districts.
   (a)   Pursuant to the provisions of the Fair And Inclusive Redistricting for
Municipalities and Political Subdivisions Act (California Elections Code §§
21500 et seq.) the boundaries of the supervisorial districts of San Bernardino
County are adjusted, changed and established as set forth in Commission Map 2
Version 2, considered by the Board of Supervisors at multiple public hearings
as required by law, and as reflected in Exhibits A and B, attached to Ordinance
4421 and incorporated herein by reference as if set out in full, and they shall
constitute and are hereby established as the boundaries of the supervisorial
districts of San Bernardino County for subsequent elections until further
readjustment is required by law.
   (b)   For purposes of this article, references to "tract" shall mean "census
tract," as that demographic unit is defined by the United States Bureau of the
Census for the 2020 Census and as described by maps and publications of the
United States Bureau of the Census. References to "block," "blocks" or "block
groups" refer to those demographic units, as defined by the United States
Census Bureau for the 2020 Census and as described by maps and publications of
the United States Census Bureau.
(Am. Ord. 1224, passed - -1965; Am. Ord. 1676, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 1813,
passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2581, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 3463, passed - -1992;
Am. Ord. 3521, passed - -1992;Am. Ord. 3826, passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 4152,
passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4421, passed - -2021)
§ 12.0103 Non-interference.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the Board of Supervisors, as
the governing board of the County, retains full authority to take any and all
official action authorized for the governance of the County. Except, no member
of the Board of Supervisors nor any member of his or her staff shall give
orders to or instruct the subordinates of the Chief Executive Officer, either
publicly or privately.
   This Section does not limit a member of the Board of Supervisors or any
member of his or her staff from seeking or providing information. The remedies
available under this Code at
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 shall not apply.
(Ord. 4128, passed - -2010)
§ 12.0104 Procedures for Appointment to a Vacant Elective Office.
   (a)   When an office holder vacates his or her elective County office before
expiration of the term, the procedures provided for in this section shall apply
in addition to the procedures required by the County's charter. The procedures
of this section shall be applied in a manner that does not conflict with the
charter. In no event shall this section prevent, or be applied in a manner that
prevents, the Board of Supervisors from making an appointment to fill a
vacancy.
   (b)   When the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors (the Clerk of the Board)
becomes aware of a vacancy or an impending vacancy in any County elective
office, the Clerk of the Board shall place an item on the public portion of the
agenda for the next regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors or on the
agenda for a special meeting of the Board of Supervisors. The agenda item shall
describe the elective office that is or will be vacant and clearly state that
the Board of Supervisors will discuss and act upon the filling of the vacancy
and the procedures thereof.
   (c)   If the Board of Supervisors determines to fill the vacancy by
appointment, then at the meeting described in subdivision (b) or at another
regularly scheduled meeting or a special meeting, the Board of Supervisors
shall:
      (1)   Set a date for making the appointment. The appointment shall be in
open session at a regular or special meeting of the Board of Supervisors. The
date must comply with any charter deadlines.
      (2)   Direct the Clerk of the Board to prepare an application form. The
form shall set forth any statutory or other requirements of holding office. The
Board of Supervisors may also specify additional application requirements,
including but not limited to the requirement that applicants complete a
questionnaire.
      (3)   Set a date and time for when applications for appointment must be
submitted to the Clerk of the Board.
      (4)   Direct the Clerk of the Board to prepare and post a notice of
vacancy. The notice shall set forth any statutory or other requirements of
holding office and include information on where to obtain an application, the
deadline for submission of an application, and the date upon which the Board
shall consider the applications. The notice shall provide the period of time
for which the appointee shall hold office.
   (d)   Applications shall be submitted to the Clerk of the Board no later
than the deadline set by the Board. Applications submitted after the deadline
shall not be considered. Submitted applications shall be available for
inspection or copying by the public upon request. The home address, personal
telephone number, and personal e-mail address of an applicant shall be
considered confidential, shall not be considered public information, and shall
not be disclosed unless required by law.
   (e)   At a regular or special meeting in open session, the Board of
Supervisors shall determine whether or not to interview applicants and, if it
chooses to conduct such interviews, the Board shall establish the interview
process including but not limited to supplemental submittals from applicants
and appropriate deadlines. If any candidate fails to comply with the process
established by the Board, that candidate shall be automatically disqualified
and removed from the candidate pool. The Board of Supervisors may at its
discretion interview all applicants, certain applicants, or no applicants. If
only certain applicants will be interviewed, then the Board of Supervisors
shall, in open session, decide the manner in which the applicants will be
chosen and, at the same meeting or a future meeting, choose the applicants to
be interviewed. The Board of Supervisors may, if it chooses, conduct a second
round of interviews.
   (f)   If all or some applicants are to be interviewed, then they will be
interviewed in open session at a regular or special meeting of the Board of
Supervisors. Each applicant may make an opening statement of approximately
three minutes or as otherwise determined by the Chair of the Board of
Supervisors. The order in which applicants shall be interviewed shall be
determined by a random method. The order may be altered by the Chair due to the
availability of an applicant or for some other good cause. Following each
opening statement, each member of the Board of Supervisors may ask questions of
the applicant.
   (g)   After completion of the interviews, the public shall have opportunity
to address the Board of Supervisors concerning the appointment. The time
allotted for each speaker shall be three minutes or as otherwise determined by
the Chair.
   (h)   After completion of the interviews and public comment, the Board of
Supervisors shall deliberate in open session about the appointment. Thereafter,
the Board of Supervisors may take action to make the appointment. If the
vacancy is in a Countywide elected office, then the appointment shall require a
majority vote of the total membership of the Board of Supervisors. If the
vacancy is in the office of Supervisor, then the appointment shall require a
majority vote of the remaining members of the Board of Supervisors.
   (i)   The Board of Supervisors may continue the matter, at any stage of the
proceeding, to a subsequent regular or special meeting, subject to applicable
charter deadlines.
   (j)   At its discretion, the Board of Supervisors may alter, supplement, or
waive any requirement of this section. Such altering, supplementing, or waiving
must be done in open session.
(Ord. 4395, passed - -2020)
CHAPTER 2: CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
Section
   
12.0201   Position Established.
   
12.0202   Qualifications.
   
12.0203   Appointment of Chief Executive Officer.
   
12.0204   Salary of Chief Executive Officer.
   
12.0205   Employment of Assistants.
   
12.0206   Responsibilities of Chief Executive Officer.
   
12.0207   Authority to Carry Out Policies of Board of Supervisors.
   
12.0208   Limitation of Delegated Duties of Chief Executive Officer.
   
12.0209   Delegation of Approval Authority.
   
12.0210   Authority of Chief Executive Officer.
   
12.0211   Delegation of Authority to Approve Budget Transfers and Revisions.
   
12.0212   Substitution of References.
   
12.0213   Economic Development.
§ 12.0201   Position Established.
   That there be, and there is, hereby created the position which shall be
known and designated as Chief Executive Officer of the County which position
may be designated as “Chief Executive Officer.”
(Am. Ord. 4128, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0202   Qualifications.
   The Chief Executive Officer shall be chosen on the basis of administrative
and executive ability. He or she shall have at least five years experience in
responsible executive or administrative positions and shall possess the ability
to plan and execute policies and programs of the Board of Supervisors,
including budgeting, budgetary control and the coordination of various County
activities. At the time of his or her appointment, he or she shall be a citizen
of the United States of America. He or she need not be a resident of San
Bernardino County, but he or she shall become and remain a resident of San
Bernardino County during his or her tenure of office. He or she shall devote
his or her entire time to the duties of his or her office and shall not engage
in any other business or occupation.
(Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0203   Appointment of Chief Executive Officer.
   The Chief Executive Officer shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure
of the Board of Supervisors. He or she may be discharged by three-fifths vote
of the Board of Supervisors and his or her appointment terminated upon written
notice to him or her of such discharge and termination. The Chief Executive
Officer shall give the Board of Supervisors not less than 30 days written
notice of his or her intent to resign.
(Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0204   Salary of Chief Executive Officer.
   The salary of the Chief Executive Officer shall be fixed annually by the
Board of Supervisors and it shall be paid by the County Auditor in the same
manner as the salaries of other County employees. He or she is granted and is
entitled to all of the benefits conferred upon County employees relating to
sick leave, vacation leave, holidays, medical and hospital insurance, workers’
compensation, travel expense, and by the County Employees’ Retirement Act.
(Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0205   Employment of Assistants.
   The Chief Executive Officer may appoint and employ assistants and other
employees and assign to them various duties prescribed in this County Code. The
positions of such assistants and other employees shall be authorized by the
Board of Supervisors, and they shall be employed under the provisions of the
County Civil Service System except that the Assistant Executive Officers and
the Deputy Executive Officers shall be County Officers in the Unclassified
Service.
   The Chief Executive Officer shall also be the appointing authority for all
department heads whose appointment is not otherwise provided by law, and such
appointing authority power may be delegated in writing to an Assistant
Executive Officer or a Deputy Executive Officer. These officers shall serve in
the Unclassified Service as provided in §
12.2400. The Chief Executive Officer shall provide general supervision for
these positions; however, such supervision may be assigned to an Assistant
Executive Officer or a Deputy Executive Officer.
(Am. Ord. 3771, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3947, passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 3953,
passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0206   Responsibilities of Chief Executive Officer.
   Under the supervision of the Board of Supervisors, and subject to the
approval and direction and control thereof, the Chief Executive Officer shall
be responsible for the performance of such duties and ministerial functions as
may be placed in his or her charge by the Board of Supervisors, and in
connection therewith, shall report to the Board from time to time the status
and enforcement of the Board’s policies, rules and regulations. The Chief
Executive Officer shall:
   (a)   Act as the chief executive officer of the County and, as such, act as
the primary administrative advisor to the Board of Supervisors on all matters
relating to the efficient and economical administration of County government.
   (b)   Attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors, except when excused
therefrom, and advise and make recommendations to the Board upon matters which
are brought before it and which are within his or her administrative authority.
   (c)   Act on behalf of the Board of Supervisors in overseeing the
implementation of authorized projects and programs. Coordinate the work of
departments, agencies and districts which are under the direct jurisdiction or
fiscal control of the Board of Supervisors. In this connection the Chief
Executive Officer may require periodic submission of organizational charts and
departmental activity reports and inform departments on actions, decisions and
policies of the Board of Supervisors affecting departmental operations.
   (d)   Directly manage or develop an appropriate delegation structure of all
County functions and operations except those committed by law to elected
officials or Board of Supervisors appointed department heads of the County and
be cognizant of the administration of all departments and Board-governed
special districts.
   (e)   Provide budgetary, fiscal and administrative support, oversight, and
direction as it pertains to Board of Supervisors policy and procedures for all
elected and all Board of Supervisors appointed department heads and their
agencies and departments.
   (f)   Subject to rules, regulations, and ordinances of the Board of
Supervisors, cause to be prepared and submitted requests for the creation of
new positions, and capital outlay items. He or she may request such
information, charts and statistics as may be necessary for his or her
recommendations.
   (g)   Supervise, in cooperation with the County Auditor, the preparation of
the annual County Budget. In the performance of this duty, the Chief Executive
Officer shall review all departmental and agency requests and all items in the
proposed budget, including revenues, expenditures and reserves. He or she shall
submit his or her recommendation on the proposed budget to the Board of
Supervisors.
   (h)   Review all departmental and agency requests for adjustments and
transfers of appropriations from contingencies and among budget units and make
recommendations on them to the Board of Supervisors.
   (i)   Pursuant to §
12.0211, approve any transfers and revisions of appropriations, objects, and
subobjects within a budget unit.
   (j)   Maintain continuous research into administrative practices and make
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning such changes or
modifications as will improve the efficiency and economy of County governmental
operations.
   (k)   In cooperation with County departments and agencies, the Chief
Executive Officer shall develop work measurement, process organization and
procedures programs and operating manuals.
   (l)   Prepare and maintain administrative policies in cooperation with
County departments.
   (m)   Promote proper preparation and dissemination of periodic reports and
informative pamphlets or brochures.
   (n)   Recommend to the Board of Supervisors new and revised State and
Federal statutes which he or she considers to be desirable and to merit the
endorsement of the Board of Supervisors. The Chief Executive Officer shall also
recommend to the Board of Supervisors the adoption of new and revised
ordinances, resolutions and policies when in his or her judgment such action
will promote improved County services and operations and is in the public
interest.
   (o)   Make such other investigations, studies and surveys, and perform such
other duties as may be ordered by the Board of Supervisors or as deemed
necessary.
   (p)   Provide general supervision of the Director of the Arrowhead Regional
Medical Center. This officer shall report to the Chief Executive Officer.
   (q)   In accordance with a resolution or other written direction from the
Board of Directors of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District,
exercise general supervision of the Fire Chief or Interim Fire Chief, including
the authority to appoint the Fire Chief or an Interim Fire Chief.
   (r)   Provide general administrative oversight of the Chief Probation
Officer, investigate performance concerns and/or allegations of misconduct
committed by the Chief Probation Officer and present the results of the
investigation(s) to the Presiding Judge of the Superior Court.
(Am. Ord. 3771, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 4128, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4368,
passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4492, passed - -2025)
§ 12.0207   Authority to Carry Out Policies of Board of Supervisors.
   The Chief Executive Officer may call upon any officer, or head of any
department, agency or district under the control or jurisdiction of the Board
of Supervisors to provide information and to assist in carrying out the
policies and orders of the Board of Supervisors and the duties herein vested in
the Chief Executive Officer.
(Am. Ord. 4128, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0208   Limitation of Delegated Duties of Chief Executive Officer.
   No provision of this Chapter is intended to vest in the Chief Executive
Officer any duties or grant to him or her any authority which is vested by
general law or by the County Charter of the Board of Supervisors.
(Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0209   Delegation of Approval Authority.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, or other County
regulation, procedure, or policy, the Chief Executive Officer may delegate by
written authorization any approval authority given to him or her by County
ordinance, regulation, procedure, or policy, unless State statute or County
Charter precludes such delegation.
(Am. Ord. 4128, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0210   Authority of Chief Executive Officer.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
(a)   The Chief Executive Officer, when he or she deems it appropriate, may
exercise any power or jurisdiction, or assume or discharge any
responsibilities, or carry out or effect any purpose vested by law, ordinance,
rule, regulation or policy in his or her subordinates within the Administrative
Office including the Assistant Executive Officers and Deputy Executive Officers
serving various functions. When the Chief Executive Officer exercises power
pursuant to this provision, such authority shall supersede that of his or her
subordinates.
   (b)   The Chief Executive Officer shall be the appointing authority over
those employees within the departments of Workforce Development and Community
Development and Housing and those County employees assigned to support the
Successor Agency to the County Redevelopment Agency and the Workforce
Development Board, whose appointments are not otherwise provided for by the
County Charter or general law, including Deputy Executive Officers. The Chief
Executive Officer shall have the power to delegate in writing this appointing
authority to the Deputy Executive Officer or Deputy Executive Officers assigned
to the economic development departments.
   (c)   The Chief Executive Officer shall have the power of general
administrative supervision and coordination over the operations of the
Workforce Development Department and the Community Development and Housing
Department and the County employees assigned to support the Successor Agency to
the County Redevelopment Agency and the Workforce Development Board. The Chief
Executive Officer may direct such action as he or she deems appropriate to
exercise any power or jurisdiction, or to assume or discharge any
responsibility, or to carry out or effect any of the purposes vested by law in
any officer, employee or division in the Workforce Development Department and
the Community Development and Housing Department or the employees assigned to
support the Successor Agency of the County Redevelopment Agency and the
Workforce Development Board.
   (d)   The Chief Executive Officer shall have the power to reorganize the
Workforce Development and Community Development and Housing departments and in
connection with such reorganization, the Chief Executive Officer has the power
to transfer personnel from one department to the other as well as the County
employees assigned to support the Successor Agency to the County Redevelopment
Agency and the Workforce Investment Board.
(Am. Ord. 3947, passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0211   Delegation of Authority to Approve Budget Transfers and Revisions.
   Pursuant to Government Code § 29125, the Board of Supervisors hereby
designates the Chief Executive Officer as the County officer with the authority
to approve, with respect to an adopted budget, any transfers and revisions of
appropriations, objects and subobjects within a budget unit.
(Am. Ord. 4128, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0212   Substitution of References.
   (a)   Any reference in this Code to the Assistant Administrative Officer for
Human Resources or Assistant Administrative Officer for Personnel shall mean
the Director of Human Resources.
   (b)   Whenever the term “County Administrative Officer” or “Administrative
Officer” is used in the ordinances, County Code, or the County Charter, or in
resolutions and policies adopted by the Board of Supervisors, that term shall
mean the Chief Executive Officer.
   (c)   Any reference in this Code to Assistant County Administrator,
Associate Administrative Officer, and Deputy Administrative Officer shall mean
Assistant Executive Officer, Associate Executive Officer, and Deputy Executive
Officer, respectively.
(Am. Ord. 4128, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.0213   Economic Development.
   The Chief Executive Officer shall be the appointing authority for and shall
supervise the Deputy Executive Officer assigned to the economic development
departments, which shall include Workforce Development and Community
Development and Housing. The Chief Executive Officer shall also be responsible
for providing administrative oversight and support services and direction to
the Successor Agency to the County Redevelopment Agency and its administrator
and the Workforce Investment Board.
(Ord. 3947, passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
CHAPTER 3: COUNTY AUDITOR/CONTROLLER-RECORDER
Section
   
12.0301   Consolidation of Offices.
   
12.0302   Qualifications of County Auditor.
   
12.0303   Preparation of Monthly Account.
   
12.0304   Warrant Deemed Lost.
   
12.0305   Time for Presentation of County Warrants.
   
12.0306   Time Period for the Issuance of Warrants.
   
12.0307   Auditor-Controller as Chief Accounting Officer.
   
12.0308   Maintenance of Accounts.
   
12.0309   Annual Audit.
   
12.0310   Independent Auditing Services.
§ 12.0301   Consolidation of Offices.
   Effective February 25, 2010, the Offices of Auditor, Controller, Recorder,
Treasurer, and Tax Collector, are hereby consolidated. The person filling the
consolidated office shall be the current Auditor/Controller-Recorder and shall
be known as the Auditor-Controller/Recorder/Treasurer/Tax Collector. The
Auditor-Controller/Recorder/Treasurer/Tax Collector shall take the oath and
give the bond required for each such office, and shall discharge all duties
pertaining to each office. The current salary of the Auditor/Controller/
Recorder shall be increased in the amount of $40,000 in recognition of the
additional duties resulting from the consolidation of offices. Any reference in
this Code to the Auditor or Controller or Recorder or Treasurer or Tax
Collector shall mean the Auditor- Controller/Recorder/Treasurer/Tax Collector.
   Effective January 3, 2011, the offices of Auditor, Controller, Treasurer,
and Tax Collector are hereby consolidated. The person elected to fill the
consolidated office shall be known as the Auditor- Controller/Treasurer/Tax
Collector and shall take the oath and give the bond required for each such
office, and shall discharge all duties pertaining to each office. Any reference
in this Code to the Auditor or Controller or Treasurer or Tax Collector shall
mean the Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector.
(Ord. 2533, passed --1981; Am. Ord. 4097, passed - -2010)
§ 12.0302   Qualifications of County Auditor.
   The provisions of Government Code § 26945, relating to the qualifications of
the County Auditor, are hereby adopted.
(Ord. 836, passed - -1956; Am. Ord. 2533, passed - -1981)
§ 12.0303   Preparation of Monthly Account.
   The monthly count of money in the County Treasury, and the preparation,
making, verifying, filing, posting and maintaining of statements relating
thereto, as required by Government Code § 26920, shall be performed by the
Auditor and not by the Chairperson of the Board of Supervisors, the County
Counsel, or the District Attorney.
(Ord. 737, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 2533, passed - -1981)
§ 12.0304   Warrant Deemed Lost.
   A County warrant shall be considered lost if it shall have been mailed and
shall not have been received by the addressee within 14 days after the date of
mailing. In such event, the Auditor/Controller has authority to replace such
lost warrant, as provided by Government Code § 29851.
(Ord. 2210, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2533, passed - -1981)
§ 12.0305   Time for Presentation of County Warrants.
   The following categories of County warrants shall be void if not presented
to the County Treasurer within 90 days after the warrant’s date of issuance:
 
Category No. Description
6            Welfare
7            Welfare
 
(Am. Ord. 3076, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3367, passed - -1989)
§ 12.0306 Time Period for the Issuance of Warrants.
   Pursuant to Government Code § 29742, and as recommended by the San
Bernardino County Auditor/Controller-Recorder, the three-day waiting period
provided in Government Code § 29742 shall not apply to the Auditor/Controller-
Recorder's issuance of County warrants. The Auditor/Controller- Recorder may
issue a County warrant without a waiting period, as long as that issuance is in
accordance with County policies and practices.
(Ord. 4068, passed - -2009)
§ 12.0307 Auditor/Controller as Chief Accounting Officer.
   The Auditor-Controller shall be the Chief Accounting Officer of the County
and shall prescribe and exercise general supervision, including the ability to
review departmental and countywide internal controls over the accounting forms
and method of keeping the accounts of all offices, agencies, departments and
districts under the control of the Board of Supervisors, and of all districts
whose funds are kept in the County treasury.
(Ord. 4453, passed - -2023)
§ 12.0308 Maintenance of Accounts.
   The Auditor-Controller shall maintain such accounts and statistics and
prepare such reports therefrom as the Board of Supervisors deems necessary for
its information and use in the management and control of the operations of the
County and of all districts whose funds are kept in the County treasury.
(Ord. 4453, passed - -2023)
§ 12.0309 Annual Audit.
   The Auditor-Controller shall cause to be audited annually the books,
accounts, money, securities and records of the offices, agencies, departments,
separate entities, and districts under the control of the Board of Supervisors,
and of all districts whose funds are kept in the County treasury. An annual
report on all audits shall be filed with the Board of Supervisors, and if the
report discloses fraud or gross negligence, a copy thereof shall be filed with
the District Attorney.
(Ord. 4453, passed - -2023)
§ 12.0310 Independent Auditing Services.
   Any time an individual or firm providing independent audit services is
retained, including for purposes of meeting the requirements of this County
Code or Government Code §§ 12410.5 et seq., the individual or firm may provide
auditing services for a period of no more than five consecutive years for the
same scope of work. Once an individual or firm has provided independent audit
services for a period of five consecutive years, the individual or firm is
prohibited from proposing on the same scope of work, for the same office,
agency, department, separate entity, and district, for the next competitively
procured contract period. The Board of Supervisors may waive the requirements
of this section by a majority vote.
(Ord. 4453, passed - -2023)
CHAPTER 4: FISH AND GAME COMMISSION
Section
   
12.0401   Establishment.
   
12.0402   Appointment of Commission Members.
   
12.0403   Term of Office.
   
12.0404   Duties of Commission.
   
12.0405   Compensation of Commissioners.
   
12.0406   Officers.
   
12.0407   Time of Meetings.
   
12.0408   Authority to Regulate Commission Internal Business.
§ 12.0401   Establishment.
   There is hereby created and established a Fish and Game Commission of the
County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 701, passed - -1953)
§ 12.0402   Appointment of Commission Members.
   Said Fish and Game Commission shall consist of seven members, two from
Supervisorial District No. 3, two from Supervisorial District No. 1, and one
each from Supervisorial Districts No. 2, 4, and 5; all of said members shall be
residents of the respective Supervisorial Districts and citizens of the United
States, who shall be appointed as members to said Commission by the Board of
Supervisors, evidenced by the majority vote thereof.
(Ord. 701, passed - -1953; Am. Ord. 2043, passed - -1975; Am. Ord. 3955, passed
- -2005)
§ 12.0403   Term of Office.
   The members of the Fish and Game Commission shall classify themselves by lot
so that two of them shall hold office for a period of one year, two for a
period of two years, and two for a period of three years; thereafter, each
Commissioner appointed shall serve for a period of four years not to exceed two
full terms or eight years.
(Ord. 701, passed - -1953; Am. Ord. 2043, passed - -1975)
§ 12.0404   Duties of Commission.
   Said Fish and Game Commission shall be an advisory body and may make such
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors as it may deem to be reasonable and
necessary or advisable in matters concerned with the propagation and protection
of fish and game.
(Ord. 701, passed - -1953)
§ 12.0405   Compensation of Commissioners.
   Each member of the Commission shall receive compensation at the rate
authorized in the current County Salary Ordinance for each meeting thereof
attended, but not to exceed six meetings in any calendar year. Commission
members shall receive actual and necessary travel expenses in the course of
their duties as Commission members, such expenses to be paid on the same basis
as expenses of County employees.
(Ord. 701, passed - -1953; Am. Ord. 720, passed - -1953; Am. Ord. 1021, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 2043, passed - -1975)
§ 12.0406   Officers.
   Said Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from the
members thereof, each of whom shall serve for a period of one year, and
thereafter until their successors are elected. The Secretary to the Commission
shall be provided by the Regional Parks Department.
(Ord. 701, passed - -1953; Am. Ord. 2043, passed - -1975; Am. Ord. 4265, passed
- -2014)
§ 12.0407   Time of Meetings.
   Meetings shall be held by said Commission at such times and places as may be
determined by a majority vote of said Commission.
(Ord. 701, passed - -1953)
§ 12.0408   Authority to Regulate Commission Internal Business.
   Said Commission may also prepare and adopt rules and regulations for the
internal government of its business, subject to the approval or the Board of
Supervisors.
(Ord. 701, passed - -1953)
CHAPTER 5: SHERIFF DEPARTMENT
Section
   
12.0501   Training of Law Enforcement Officers.
   
12.0502   Sale and Disposition of Unclaimed Property.
   
12.0503   Establishment of Glen Helen Prisoner Rehabilitation Facilities.
   
12.0504   Permit for Public Meetings.
   
12.0505   Peace Officers (See §
12.1101).
   
12.0506   Establishment of West End Sheriff’s Substation.
   
12.0507   Establishment of Central Jail Facilities.
   
12.0508   Establishment of Branch County Jail Facilities.
   
12.0509   Prisoner and Probationer Labor on Public Works.
   
12.0510   Collection of Costs Authorized by Penal Code § 1209.
   
12.0511   Search and Rescue.
   
12.0512   Consolidation of Offices.
   
12.0513   Reserve Deputies.
§ 12.0501   Training of Law Enforcement Officers.
   Pursuant to Penal Code § 13522, the County of San Bernardino, while
receiving aid from the State of California, pursuant to said Chapter 1, will
adhere to the standards of recruitment and training established by the
California Commission of Peace Officers Standards and Training.
(Ord. 1073, passed - -1963)
§ 12.0502   Sale and Disposition of Unclaimed Property.
   (a)   Inventory. Any and all unclaimed property now or hereafter coming into
the possession of the Sheriff’s Office shall be inventoried at least every
three months by the persons having custody of the same, and a full and complete
list thereof shall be transmitted to the Sheriff.
   (b)   Disposition of Unclaimed Property. The Sheriff, upon receipt of said
list of unclaimed property, shall determine therefrom the unclaimed property
that has been held by the Sheriff’s Office for a period of at least six months,
or as may otherwise be required by Penal Code §§ 1407—1413, whereupon said
Sheriff’s Office shall notify the Chief Probation Officer and the Director of
Public Social Services of the availability of any bicycles or toys as the
Sheriff may designate for being turned over to the Probation or Public Social
Services Departments for use in any program or activities designed to prevent
juvenile delinquency. The Sheriff may also retain and use any unclaimed
property covered by this Section that he or she deems to be needed for use in
undercover police operations or other functions of the Sheriff’s Office. The
Sheriff shall keep an inventory of any property retained and used by the
Sheriff’s Office and any such property which is suitable for sale will be sold
as hereinafter provided when it is no longer needed for use by the Sheriff’s
Office. Except as heretofore provided, the Sheriff shall cause the remainder of
unclaimed property held for a period of at least six months, or as otherwise
required by Penal Code §§ 1407—1413, to be sold at public auction as follows:
      (1)   Notice of such sale, describing the property in sufficient detail
for its identification, shall be prepared by the Sheriff’s Office, and said
notice signed by the Sheriff, which said notice of said sale shall be given at
least five days before the time fixed therefor by publication once in a
newspaper of general circulation published in the County of San Bernardino.
      (2)   Said property so offered for sale shall be sold to the highest
bidder for cash, provided that the Sheriff may, in his or her discretion, fix a
minimum sale price and may refuse to sell unless said minimum price is offered.
   (c)   Disposition of Proceeds with County Treasurer. The proceeds of said
auction sale or sales shall immediately be deposited with the Treasurer of the
County of San Bernardino and placed in the General Fund thereof.
   (d)   Safekeeping of Unclaimed Property. It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the Sheriff’s Office to safely keep any and all unclaimed
properties subject to the provisions of this Section and to the right of the
Sheriff to sell said properties at public auction as herein provided, whereupon
property which is sold shall be delivered to the purchaser upon payment of the
purchase price.
   (d)   Definition of Unclaimed Property. Whenever in this Chapter the
following words and phrases set forth in this Section are used, they shall, for
the purpose of this Chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this Section: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY shall include any and all lost, abandoned or
unclaimed personal property of whatsoever kind or character, but shall not
include property which is specifically ordered to be destroyed by provisions of
law, nor to the disposal of dogs, cats, or livestock.
(Ord. 735, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 1704, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2644, passed
- -1982)
§ 12.0503   Establishment of Glen Helen Prisoner Rehabilitation Facilities.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code § 25351, the Glen Helen
Prisoner Rehabilitation Facility, the improvements for which have been
constructed at or near Verdemont, California, is hereby established.
   Said Glen Helen Prisoner Rehabilitation Facility shall be conducted as part
of the jail system of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, by the
Sheriff of said County in accordance with Government Code § 26005 and other
applicable provisions of law.
(Ord. 911, passed - -1959)
§ 12.0504   Permit for Public Meetings.
(Ord. 319, passed - -1929; Am. Ord. 1120, passed - -1963; Repealed by Ord.
3168, passed - -1987)
§ 12.0505   Peace Officers (See §
12.1101).
§ 12.0506   Establishment of West End Sheriff’s Substation.
   (a)   Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code § 25351, the Sheriff’s
West End Substation, the improvements for which have been constructed near the
junction of Mountain Avenue and Highway 99, in the City of Ontario, California,
shall hereby be established.
   (b)   Part of County Jail System. The jail facilities at the Sheriff’s West
End Substation shall be conducted as part of the jail system of the County of
San Bernardino, State of California, by the Sheriff of said County in
accordance with Government Code § 26605 and other applicable provisions of law.
(Ord. 1255, passed - -1965)
§ 12.0507   Establishment of Central Jail Facilities.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code § 25351, the Central Jail
Facility, the improvements for which have been constructed at 630 Cardiff, San
Bernardino, California, is hereby established.
   Said Central Jail Facility shall be conducted as part of the jail system of
the County of San Bernardino, State of California, by the Sheriff of said
County in accordance with Government Code § 26605 and other applicable
provisions of law.
(Ord. 1694, passed - -1972)
§ 12.0508   Establishment of Branch County Jail Facilities.
   (a)   Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code § 25351, the following
branch jails shall be established.
      (1)   Victorville Substation Jail — 15579 Eighth Street, Victorville,
California 92391.
      (2)   Barstow Substation Jail — 225 East Mountain View, Barstow,
California 92311.
      (3)   Twentynine Palms Substation Jail — 6136 Adobe Road, Twentynine
Palms, California 92277.
      (4)   Big Bear Substation Jail — 40910 Big Bear Boulevard, Big Bear,
California 92315.
      (5)   Trona Substation Jail — P.O. Box 1053, Trona, California 93562.
      (6)   Needles Substation Jail — 1111 Bailey Street, Needles, California
92363.
   (b)   Part of County Jail System. The jail facilities, located as listed
above, shall be conducted as part of the jail system of the County of San
Bernardino, State of California, by the Sheriff of said County in accordance
with Government Code § 26605 and other applicable provisions of law.
(Ord. 1882, passed - -1974)
§ 12.0509   Prisoner and Probationer Labor on Public Works.
   (a)   Prisoner. For the purposes of this Section, PRISONER means any person
confined in the County Jail, industrial farm, road camp or similar restrictive
County facility under a final judgment of imprisonment rendered in a criminal
action or proceeding or as a condition of probation after suspension of
imposition of a sentence or suspension of execution of a sentence.
   (b)   Probationer. For the purposes of this Section, PROBATIONER means any
person under the charge of the court granting probation or the Probation
Officer, who is required to work at public work pursuant to Penal Code §
1203.1.
   (c)   Labor. For the purposes of this Section, LABOR means any physical or
mental activity or work directed toward the production of services or goods.
   (d)   Public Works or Ways. For the purposes of this Section, PUBLIC WORKS
OR WAYS means any project or improvement constructed or maintained by the
County of San Bernardino and districts governed by the Board of Supervisors and
including, but not limited to, parks, buildings, paths, roads, streets,
expressways, public road and flood-control rights of way or easements,
reservoirs, canals, and sewers.
   (e)   Prisoners and Probationers Compelled to Labor. Any or all prisoners
and probationers may be compelled to labor upon the public works or ways of the
County of San Bernardino or to perform such other work for the County or
districts governed by the Board of Supervisors as may be assigned. The assigned
work shall be compulsory as an incident of incarceration for prisoners or an
incident of probation for probationers. No prisoner or probationer engaged in
labor pursuant to this section shall be considered a County employee, nor shall
any such prisoner or probationer come within any of the provisions of the
California workers’ compensation system or the Workmen’s Compensation Insurance
and Safety Act of 1917.
   (f)   Direction of Labor. Work assignments of prisoners provided for in this
Section shall be made by the Sheriff, and the work shall be performed under the
direction of a responsible person designated by the Sheriff or by work crew
supervisors pursuant to §
12.1101 of this Code. Work assignments of probationers provided for in this
Section shall be made by the court granting probation or the Probation Officer,
and shall be performed under the direction of a responsible person designated
by the court granting probation or the Probation Officer.
(Ord. 1723, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2066, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 4206,
passed - -2013)
§ 12.0510   Collection of Costs Authorized by Penal Code § 1209.
   The Sheriff of San Bernardino County is authorized and directed to collect
and receive from defendants costs authorized by Penal Code § 1209. The Sheriff
shall deposit all funds received under this Section in the County Treasury.
(Ord. 2769, passed - -1983)
§ 12.0511   Search and Rescue.
   Pursuant to Government Code § 26614, the Sheriff shall have the authority to
search for and rescue persons who are lost or are in danger of their lives
within or in the immediate vicinity of the County.
(Ord. 3209, passed - -1988)
§ 12.0512   Consolidation of Offices.
   Effective February 25, 2010, the Offices of Sheriff/Coroner and Public
Administrator are hereby consolidated. The person filling the consolidated
office shall be the current Sheriff/Coroner and shall be known as the Sheriff/
Coroner/Public Administrator and shall take the oath and give the bond required
for each office, and shall discharge all duties pertaining to each office. The
salary of the Sheriff/Coroner in effect on February 25, 2010, shall be
increased in the amount of $10,000.00 in recognition of the additional duties
resulting from the consolidation of offices. Any reference in this Code to
Sheriff or Coroner or Public Administrator shall mean Sheriff/Coroner/Public
Administrator.
(Ord. 3936, passed --2004; Am. Ord. 4097, passed - -2010)
§ 12.0513 Reserve Deputies.
   (a)   Level One Deputies. Pursuant to Penal Code § 830.6(a)(2), qualified
reserve deputies of the Sheriff who are assigned by the Sheriff to the
prevention and detection of crime and the general enforcement of the laws of
this State, and who meet the enhanced criteria established by the Office of the
Sheriff and qualify as Level 1 Reserve Deputies pursuant to Penal Code § 832.6
(a)(1), may be appointed by the Sheriff as a “Designated level 1 Reserve Deputy
Sheriff” and deemed to be peace officers, possessing the powers described in
Penal Code § 830.1. The Sheriff may revoke the authority of any such deputy at
any time.
   (b)   Other Level Deputies. All other reserve deputies of the Sheriff shall
be permitted to perform the duties, functions, and tasks described in Penal
Code §§ 830.6(a)(1), 832.6(a)(2) and 832.6(a)(3), in keeping with their level
of certification issued by the California Commission on Peace Officers
Standards and Training. The Sheriff may revoke the authority of any such deputy
at any time.
(Ord. 4120, passed - -2010)
CHAPTER 6: PROBATION DEPARTMENT
Section
   
12.0601   Juvenile Boys’ Ranch.
   
12.0602   Juvenile Hall.
   
12.0603   James T. Kuiper Youth Center.
   
12.0604   Community Responsibility Training Unit.
   
12.0605   Administration and Personnel.
   
12.0606   Standards for Recruitment and Training.
   
12.0607   Costs of Confinement as a Condition of Probation.
   
12.0608   Administration and Personnel.
§ 12.0601   Juvenile Boys’ Ranch.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 880—891, the
Verdemont Ranch for Boys is hereby established.
   Said Verdemont Ranch for Boys shall be conducted, maintained and operated in
accordance with the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 880—891.
(Am. Ord. 2425, passed - -1980)
§ 12.0602   Juvenile Hall.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code § 889, there is
hereby established at San Bernardino County Juvenile Hall an elementary public
school and a secondary public school for the education of the children in said
Juvenile Hall. All necessary and suitable facilities for such schools shall be
provided as required by law.
   Said schools established at said Juvenile Hall shall be maintained by the
County Superintendent of Schools subject to the authority vested in the Board
of Supervisors by law.
(Am. Ord. 2425, passed - -1980)
§ 12.0603   James T. Kuiper Youth Center.
   Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 880—891, Kuiper Youth Center is
hereby established. Said facility shall be conducted, maintained and operated
in accordance with the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 880—891
and other appropriate sections of the Welfare and Institutions Code. Said
facility shall be known as the James T. Kuiper Youth Center of San Bernardino
County and may be designated in court orders and other official documents as
the James T. Kuiper Youth Center.
(Am. Ord. 2425, passed - -1980)
§ 12.0604   Community Responsibility Training Unit.
   There is hereby created and established, pursuant to the provisions of
Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 880—891, a juvenile home in and for the County
of San Bernardino, State of California. Said home shall be known as the
Community Responsibility Training Unit of San Bernardino County and may be
designated in court orders and other official documents as the Community
Responsibility Training Unit.
(Ord. 218, passed - -1923; Am. Ord. 2425, passed - -1980)
§ 12.0605   Administration and Personnel.
   Administration and direction of the Girls’ Treatment Unit, Lightning
Treatment Unit, and Community Responsibility Training Unit shall be under the
management and control of the Probation Department. The Chief Probation Officer
shall be the appointing authority for the superintendent or director of each
such unit, by whatever title such superintendent or director may be known, and
for other personnel of such units. All such personnel shall be selected and
appointed pursuant to applicable Civil Service rules and regulations.
(Ord. 1572, passed - -1970; Am. Ord. 2425, passed - -1980)
§ 12.0606   Standards for Recruitment and Training.
   While receiving any State Aid pursuant to Penal Code §§ 6040 et seq., the
County of San Bernardino will adhere to the standards for recruitment and
training established by the Board of Corrections.
(Ord. 1572, passed - -1970; Am. Ord. 2425, passed - -1980)
§ 12.0607   Costs of Confinement as a Condition of Probation.
   (a)   The provisions of Penal Code § 1203.1c shall be operative in the
County of San Bernardino. The Chief Probation Officer of San Bernardino County
is hereby designated as the County Officer responsible for collection of moneys
ordered to be paid pursuant to Penal Code § 1203.1c. All sums collected shall
be deposited in the general fund of the County.
(Ord. 1572, passed - -1970; Am. Ord. 2150, passed - -1977)
   (b)   The average per-day costs of incarceration in County Jail facilities
is hereby determined to be $29.52 per day.
(Am. Ord. 2727, passed - -1983)
§ 12.0608   Administration and Personnel.
   Administration and direction of the Girls’ Treatment Unit, Lightning
Treatment Unit, and Community Responsibility Training Unit shall be under the
management and control of the Probation Department. The Chief Probation Officer
shall be the appointing authority for the superintendent or director of each
such unit, by whatever title such superintendent or director may be known, and
for other personnel of such units. All such personnel shall be selected and
appointed pursuant to applicable Civil Service rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2150, passed - -1977)
CHAPTER 7: SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY MEDICAL CENTER
Section
   
12.0701   San Bernardino County Medical Center.
   
12.0702   Establishment of County Medical Center Operations Oversight
Committee. (Ord. 1460, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1805, passed - -1973; Deleted by
Ord. 2240, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3738, passed - -1998).
   12.0703   (Ord. 1460, passed - -1968; Deleted by Ord. 1805, passed - -1973).
   12.0704   (Ord. 1460, passed - -1968; Deleted by Ord. 1805, passed - -1973).
   12.0705   (Ord. 1460, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1949, passed - -1974; Deleted
by Ord. 2240, passed - -1978).
   12.0706   (Ord. 1460, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1949, passed - -1974;
Repealed by Ord. 3325, passed - -1989).
   12.0707   (Ord. 1460, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1949, passed - -1974;
Repealed by Ord. 3325, passed - -1989).
   12.0708   (Ord. 1460, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1949, passed - -1974;
Repealed by Ord. 3325, passed - -1989).
   12.0709   (Ord. 1460, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1949, passed - -1974;
Repealed by Ord. 3325, passed - -1989).
   12.0710   (Ord. 1460, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1949, passed - -1974;
Repealed by Ord. 3325, passed - -1989).
§ 12.0701   San Bernardino County Medical Center.
   There exists in the County of San Bernardino a department denominated San
Bernardino County Medical Center, which shall also be known as Arrowhead
Regional Medical Center.
(Ord. 1460, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1949, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 3738,
passed - -1998)
§ 12.0702   Establishment of County Medical Center Operations Oversight
Committee.
   There is an Operations Oversight Committee at San Bernardino County Medical
Center.
   (a)   Composition. The Operations Oversight Committee is comprised of the
Medical Center Director, who shall serve as Chairperson, the Medical Center
Medical Director, who shall serve as Vice-Chairperson, the Medical Center
Associate Administrator for Fiscal Services, the Medical Center Materiel
Manager, and the four Medical Center Associate Medical Directors.
   (b)   Responsibilities. The Operations Oversight Committee shall:
      (1)   Review all proposed leases, referrals and purchases of equipment,
supplies and services for use at County Medical Center which are initiated by
the members of the Medical Staff who do not otherwise file conflict of interest
disclosure statements;
      (2)   Take action recommending or not recommending the proposed leases,
referrals and purchases to the appropriate approving authority;
      (3)   Take recorded minutes and provide the minutes to the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors and any interested party.
   (c)   Meetings. The Operations Oversight Committee shall meet as often as is
necessary to determine whether or not to recommend proposed leases, referrals
and purchases. The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or their designees may
schedule meetings.
   (d)   Quorum and Vote Required to Take Action. A quorum of the Operations
Oversight Committee shall consist of five members of the Committee and the
Committee shall act only upon a majority vote of the membership present with a
quorum in attendance.
(Ord. 1460, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1805, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 3738,
passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 8: (DELETED BY ORD. 4291, PASSED - -2015)
 
CHAPTER 9: COUNTY SERVICE AREAS
Section
   
12.0901   Authority of Board of Supervisors to Appoint Advisory Commission for
County Service Areas.
   
12.0902   Compensation of Commissioners.
   
12.0903   (Ord. 986, passed - -1962; Repealed by Ord. 3473, passed - -1991).
§ 12.0901   Authority of Board of Supervisors to Appoint Advisory Commission
for County Service Areas.
   The Board of Supervisors may appoint an Advisory Commission, consisting of
such number of persons, not less than three, as the Board of Supervisors shall
from time to time in each instance designate, to advise the Board of
Supervisors regarding the administration of any County Service Area. Such
Commissioners shall be appointed to a four-year term, and may serve additional
terms if reappointed.
(Ord. 986, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 3473, passed - -1991)
§ 12.0902   Compensation of Commissioners.
   Commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors,
without salary, but may be compensated for their necessary travel expenses in
the same manner as County employees.
(Ord. 986, passed - -1962)
§ 12.0903   (Ord. 986, passed - -1962; Repealed by Ord. 3473, passed - -1991).
CHAPTER 10: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SOCIAL SERVICES
Section
   
12.1001   Department Established.
§ 12.1001   Department Established.
   A department of County work is hereby created to be known as the Department
of Public Social Services (DPSS) of San Bernardino County.
(Ord. 197, passed - -1921; Am. Ord. 283, passed - -1927; Am. Ord. 2425, passed
- -1980)
CHAPTER 11: DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION—ROAD COMMISSIONER
Section
   
12.1101   Appointment of Peace Officers.
§ 12.1101   Appointment of Peace Officers.
   The Director of Transportation who is ex officio Road Commissioner for the
County of San Bernardino may designate as peace officers, any work crew
supervisors of the Road Operations Division, Department of Transportation,
Public Works Agency whose duties include the guarding of prisoners. A list of
the work crew supervisors to be given the powers of peace officers shall be
submitted by the Director of Transportation to the Sheriff’s Office and the
Personnel Office. The status of said peace officers shall continue until
written notice is given to the Sheriff’s Office and the Personnel Office that
their status has been revoked or until their employment as work crew
supervisors terminates. The Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, promulgate
rules and regulations regarding the uniform, equipment and weapons used by said
peace officers.
(Am. Ord. 1950, passed - -1974)
CHAPTER 12: PUBLIC GUARDIAN
Section
   
12.1201   Office Created.
   
12.1202   Appointment of Public Guardian.
   
12.1203   Salary.
   
12.1204   Appointing Authority.
   
12.1205   Expenses.
§ 12.1201   Office Created.
   The Office of Public Guardian of the County of San Bernardino, State of
California, is hereby established.
(Ord. 1816, passed - -1973)
§ 12.1202   Appointment of Public Guardian.
   Pursuant to Government Code § 27432, the Public Administrator/Coroner of the
County of San Bernardino is hereby designated ex officio Public Guardian and
all authority heretofore vested in the Office of Public Guardian shall be
vested in the Public Administrator/Coroner.
   Effective January 8, 2005, pursuant to Government Code § 27431, the Director
of the Department of Aging and Adult Services of the County of San Bernardino
is hereby appointed Public Guardian and all authority heretofore vested in the
Office of Public Guardian shall be vested in the Director of the Department of
Aging and Adult Services.
(Ord. 1816, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 3936, passed - -2004)
§ 12.1203   Salary.
   The Public Administrator/Coroner shall serve as ex officio Public Guardian
without additional compensation.
   Effective January 8, 2005, the Director of the Department of Aging and Adult
Services shall serve as the Public Guardian without additional compensation.
(Ord. 1816, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 3936, passed - -2004)
§ 12.1204   Appointing Authority.
   The Public Administrator/Coroner, acting as ex officio Public Guardian,
shall be the appointing authority of personnel within the Public Guardian’s
Office.
   Effective January 8, 2004, the Director of the Department of Aging and Adult
Services, shall be the appointing authority of personnel within the Public
Guardian’s Office.
(Ord. 1816, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 3936, passed - -2004)
§ 12.1205   Expenses.
   Necessary expenses of the Public Guardian in the conduct of any guardianship
estate, may be advanced by the Public Guardian from County funds under his or
her control, and shall be a County charge, but the County shall be reimbursed
therefor out of any funds or property of the estate by the Public Guardian.
(Ord. 1816, passed - -1973)
CHAPTER 13: DELINQUENCY PREVENTION COMMISSION
Section
   
12.1301   Juvenile Justice Commission.
   
12.1302   Duties.
   
12.1303   Appointment of Members.
§ 12.1301   Juvenile Justice Commission.
   The Juvenile Justice Commission of the County of San Bernardino is hereby
designated as the Delinquency Prevention Commission for the County of San
Bernardino, pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 233.
(Ord. 1283, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2425, passed - -1980)
§ 12.1302   Duties.
   The Juvenile Justice Commission, serving as the Delinquency Prevention
Commission, shall coordinate on a County-wide basis the work of those
governmental and nongovernmental organizations engaged in activities designed
to prevent juvenile delinquency, and it shall perform any other functions or
responsibilities assigned or granted to the Delinquency Prevention Commission
by the Welfare and Institutions Code of the State of California.
(Ord. 1283, passed - -1966)
§ 12.1303   Appointment of Members.
   The procedure for appointing new members to the Juvenile Justice Commission,
in its capacity as the Delinquency Prevention Commission for the County of San
Bernardino, and the terms of office of the members thereof, shall be governed
by Welfare and Institutions Code § 225.
(Ord. 1283, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2425, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 4467,
passed - -2024)
CHAPTER 14: COUNTY RETIREMENT BOARD
Section
   
12.1401   Cost-of-Living Adjustment.
   
12.1402   Applicability of Government Code § 31558.1.
   
12.1403   Implementation of Government Code § 31725.5.
   
12.1404   Implementation of Government Code § 31641.04.
   
12.1405   Applicability of Government Code § 31870 Re: Cost-of-Living
Adjustment.
§ 12.1401   Cost-of-Living Adjustment.
   (a)   Adoption of Article 16.6 Alone. Pursuant to Article 16.6 of the County
Employee’s Retirement Act of 1937, as amended, the Board of Supervisors adopts
Article 16.6 alone as permitted by Government Code § 31879.
   (b)   Base Date. The base date for determining the percentage of cost-of-
living increase shall be January 1, 1965.
   (c)   Increase in Cost of Living. Since the base date there has been an
increase in the cost of living, justifying an increase in all retirement
allowances to the extent of two percent.
   (d)   Cost-of-living Increase for All Retirement Allowances.
      (1)   A cost-of-living increase of two percent for all retirement
allowances shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July
1, 1966, as provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (2)   An additional cost-of-living increase of two percent for all
retirement allowances shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and
after July 1, 1967, as provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (3)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for all
retirement allowances shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and
after July 1, 1968, as provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (4)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1969,
shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1969, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (5)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1970,
shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1970, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (6)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1971,
shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1971, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (7)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1972,
shall be effective on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1972, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (8)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1973,
shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1973, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (9)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1974,
shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1974, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (10)   An additional cost-of-living increase of six percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1974,
shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1975, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (11)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1975,
shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1976, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (12)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1976,
shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1977, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (13)   An additional cost-of-living increase of four percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1977, and
an additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for retirement
allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1978, shall be
effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1979, as provided
in Government Code § 31877.
      (14)   An additional cost-of-living increase of five percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1979,
shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1980, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
      (15)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1980, and
an additional cost-of-living increase of five percent for retirement allowances
of all members who are retired prior to November 27, 1970, shall be effective,
on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1981, as provided in
Government Code § 31877.
      (16)   An additional cost-of-living increase of three percent for
retirement allowances of all members who are retired prior to July 1, 1981,
shall be effective, on a prospective basis only, on and after July 1, 1982, as
provided in Government Code § 31877.
   (e)   The provisions of subdivisions
12.1401(d)(1),
12.1401(d)(2), and
12.1401(d)(3) shall not be applicable to any person who is not a member of the
San Bernardino County Employees Retirement Association on or before August 18,
1975.
(Am. Ord. 1296, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 1350, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 1425,
passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1482, passed - -1969; Ord. 1546, passed - -1970; Ord.
1632, passed - -1971; Ord. 1711, passed - -1972; Ord. 1817, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1912, passed - -1974; Ord. 2004, passed - -1975; Ord. 2019, passed - -
1975; Ord. 2081, passed - -1976; Ord. 2171, passed - -1977; Ord. 2353, passed -
-1979; Ord. 2434, passed - -1980; Ord. 3554, passed - -1981; Ord. 2659, passed
- -1982)
§ 12.1402   Applicability of Government Code § 31558.1.
   Government Code § 31558.1, as enacted by Chapter 491 of the 1974 Statutes,
is hereby made applicable in San Bernardino County.
(Ord. 1978, passed - -1975)
§ 12.1403   Implementation of Government Code § 31725.5.
   The provisions of Government Code § 31725.5 may be implemented by the Board
of Retirement of the County of San Bernardino. Such implementation may include
application to persons retired for disability before the effective date of this
Section.
(Ord. 2237, passed - -1978)
§ 12.1404   Implementation of Government Code § 31641.04.
   Government Code § 31641.04, as enacted by Chapter 971 of the 1982 Statutes,
is hereby made applicable in San Bernardino County.
(Ord. 2751, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 2751, passed - -1983)
§ 12.1405   Applicability of Government Code § 31870 Re: Cost-of-Living
Adjustment.
   Pursuant to Government Code § 31874, the Board of Supervisors hereby makes
Article 16.5 of the County Employees Retirement Law of 1937, as amended,
applicable in San Bernardino County, and implements an annual cost of living
adjustment for every retirement allowance, optional death allowance or annual
death allowance, not to exceed two percent per year, in accordance with the
provisions or Government Code § 31870. The cost of living adjustment hereby
provided shall be first implemented on April 1, 1984.
(Ord. 2764, passed - -1983)
CHAPTER 15: COLTON REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Section
   
12.1501   Designation of Redevelopment Agency of Colton as Agency for Survey
Area.
   
12.1502   Purpose and Intent of Board of Supervisors.
§ 12.1501   Designation of Redevelopment Agency of Colton as Agency for Survey
Area.
   (a)   Designation of Redevelopment Agency. The Redevelopment Agency for the
City of Colton is designated to be the Agency to formulate the Redevelopment
Plan for the Colton Municipal Air-lndo Estates Redevelopment Survey area.
   (b)   Submission of Redevelopment Plan. The said Agency shall submit the
said Redevelopment Plan when formulated, to the Board of Supervisors for
approval and adoption.
   (c)   Boundary of Redevelopment Survey Area. The boundary of the
Redevelopment Survey Area, located within unincorporated area, is that certain
area within the County of San Bernardino, more particularly described as
follows:
      The east half of Lots 168, 181,184, 197, 200, and 213 of the Town of
Rialto and Adjoining Subdivisions in the County of San Bernardino, State of
California, as per map recorded in Map Book 4, Page 11, Records of said County,
together with those portions of Colton Avenue, Valley Boulevard and Pepper
Avenue lying within the following described land:
      Beginning at the intersection of the original center line of Colton
Avenue and Pepper Avenue; thence north along the center line of Pepper Avenue
to its intersection with the Easterly prolongation of the north line of said
Lot 168, said line and prolongation being the corporate limits of the City of
Colton; thence west along said prolongation and said lot line and corporate
limit to the west line of the east half of said Lot 168; thence south along the
said west line of the east half of said Lots 168, 181, 184, 197, 200 and 213,
and the southerly prolongation of said west line of the east half of said Lot
213 to the center line of the original Colton Avenue, said course last
described also being the corporate limits of the City of Colton; thence east
along center line of the original Colton Avenue to a point 170 feet west of the
point of beginning, said last described course also being the corporate limits
of the City of Colton; thence south parallel with the 170 feet West of the
center line of Pepper Avenue to the intersection with Valley Boulevard now of
record, said last described course being the corporate limits of the City of
Colton; thence west along the center line of Valley Boulevard to its
intersection with the center line of Pepper Avenue; thence north along the
center line of Pepper Avenue 145.16 feet more or less to the original center
line of Colton Avenue and the point of beginning.
      Said described land lying within the unincorporated limits of the County
of San Bernardino.
§ 12.1502   Purpose and Intent of Board of Supervisors.
   It is hereby found and determined that said Redevelopment Plan for the
Colton Municipal Air Park Project No. 3 is a blighted area under said Community
Redevelopment Law of the State of California and the redevelopment of which is
necessary to effectuate the public purpose declared in said Community
Redevelopment Law.
   That the purpose and intent of the Board of Supervisors with respect to the
project are as follows, to wit:
   The City of Colton has designated the Redevelopment Agency for the City of
Colton to develop a municipal airport and industrial complex which will be of
benefit to the residents of both the City of Colton and adjacent unincorporated
areas of San Bernardino County.
   That the Redevelopment Plan on file in the Office of the Clerk to the Board
of Supervisors and incorporated herein, having been duly reviewed is hereby
approved and designated as the official Redevelopment Plan of said Project Area
and that the County Clerk transmit a copy of the ordinance codified in this
Chapter to the Auditor and Tax Assessor of San Bernardino County and to the
office or offices performing the functions of auditor or assessor for any
taxing agencies which, in levying or collecting its taxes does not use the
County Assessment Roll or does not collect its taxes through the County; and to
the governing body of each of the taxing agencies which levies taxes upon any
property in the proposed area.
   The Redevelopment Plan will redevelop the area in conformance with the
Community Redevelopment Law and in the interest of the public peace, health,
safety and welfare.
CHAPTER 16: AIRPORTS COMMISSION
Section
   
12.1601   Establishment.
   
12.1602   Appointment of Commission Members.
   
12.1603   Terms of Appointments.
   
12.1604   Duties and Responsibilities of the Airports Commission.
   
12.1605   Commissioner Qualifications.
   
12.1606   Compensation of Commissioners.
   
12.1607   Director of Airports’ Relationship to Airports Commission.
§ 12.1601   Establishment.
   There is established the San Bernardino County Airports Commission.
(Ord. 1351, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 1874, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2420,
passed - -1980)
§ 12.1602   Appointment of Commission Members.
   The Airports Commission shall consist of seven members. The Board of
Supervisors shall appoint one commissioner for each supervisorial district. The
commissioner for each district shall be recommended and, nominated by the
supervisor for that district. The Board of Supervisors shall also appoint two
at-large commissioners, one from the Mountain-Desert area, and one from the San
Bernardino Valley area. The at-large commissioner from the Mountain-Desert area
shall be recommended and nominated by the supervisor for the First
Supervisorial District, after consultation with the supervisor for the Third
Supervisorial District. The at-large commissioner from the San Bernardino
Valley area shall be recommended and nominated by the supervisor for the Fourth
Supervisorial District, after consultation with the supervisor for the Second
Supervisorial District. Each appointment shall be by majority vote of the Board
of Supervisors. Commissioners must be residents of the County of San
Bernardino. Notwithstanding San Bernardino County Code §
12.1603, Terms of Appointment, commissioners serve at the pleasure of the Board
of Supervisors and their term of appointment is subject to the provisions of
San Bernardino Code §
12.3701, Termination of Office.
(Ord. 1351, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 1874, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2420,
passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 3695, passed - -1997)
§ 12.1603   Terms of Appointments.
   Appointments shall not exceed four years in length and the terms of office
shall be staggered to insure that no more than two-thirds of the terms shall
expire in any one-year period. Terms shall expire on January 31 of the
appropriate year and subsequent new terms shall begin February 1 of that year.
Members who have served two consecutive full terms may not be reappointed to
the Commission for a period of two years unless authorized by specific Board of
Supervisors’ action.
   A Commissioner whose term of office has expired shall continue to serve in
that capacity until a new appointment is made or the Board of Supervisors
declares that position vacant. All final appointments shall be made for either
a full term or the completion of an unexpired term. Any appointment to fill an
unexpired term of office shall be considered a full term if the appointee
serves for three years or more of that unexpired term.
(Ord. 1351, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 1874, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2420,
passed - -1980)
§ 12.1604   Duties and Responsibilities of the Airports Commission.
   The Commission shall abide by all applicable laws and have the
responsibility to publicly review and discuss those matters it has been
requested to review and comment upon by the Board of Supervisors or the
Economic Development and Public Services Group. All resolutions, motions, or
other comments made by the Commission may be reviewed by the Department of
Airports of the Economic Development and Public Services Group and comments, if
any, will be appended to the Commission recommendations prior to forwarding to
the Board for action.
   The Commission is not authorized to sign contracts, disburse funds,
implement programs, employ or consider any personnel matters or act in any
other capacity that involves the direct management or operation of the San
Bernardino County airports system. The Commission may be asked for
recommendations with regard to the selection and hiring of the Director of
Airports for the County.
   The Commission will have the following specific duties and responsibilities:
   (a)   Make such recommendations and observations concerning County airports
and aviation-related issues to the Board of Supervisors and/or the Economic
Development and Public Services Group, as the Commission may, from time to
time, deem appropriate;
   (b)   Review proposals for airport leases as required or when otherwise
deemed appropriate by the Director or the Commission, and make recommendations
regarding approval by the Director or the Board;
   (c)   Promote airports and aviation in general in San Bernardino County;
   (d)   Review and participate in County airport special events and recommend
appropriate Board action;
   (e)   Review and make recommendations for initial preparation of the annual
airports budget and the five-year and ten-year capital improvement budgets, and
review and make recommendations for the initial preparation of the year-end
budget estimate;
   (f)   Review and make recommendations for appropriate action on rental
delinquencies or lease defaults requiring possible legal action and/or
termination by the Board.
   The Commission shall meet monthly, unless it is determined by the
Chairperson of the Commission and not less than three other members of the
Commission that less frequent meetings will satisfy the above-described duties
and responsibilities. For good cause, the Chairperson may call a special
meeting of the Commission.
   (g)   Augment the County Planning Commission when required in accordance
with the provisions of
Chapter 41 of this division and title.
(Ord. 1351, passed --1967; Am. Ord. 1874, passed --1973; Am. Ord. 2420, passed
--1980; Am. Ord. 2440, passed --1980; Am. Ord. 2626, passed --1982; Am. Ord.
3844, passed --2002; Am. Ord. 4071, passed - -2009)
§ 12.1605   Commissioner Qualifications.
   Each member of the Commission shall possess extensive experience and
expertise in one or more phases of aviation or airport activities, by virtue of
substantial participation therein for at least one year, but in lieu of such
qualification not more than two members may be similarly qualified by
substantial experience and responsibility in the fields of construction
engineering or commercial/industrial management.
(Ord. 1351, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 1874, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2420,
passed - -1980)
§ 12.1606   Compensation of Commissioners.
   Each member of the Commission shall serve with no other compensation than
that authorized by law in the County salary ordinance, and shall be allowed
their actual and necessary travel expenses incurred in the discharge of
official duties within the County, and, with prior approval of the Board of
Supervisors, outside the County, in accordance with the County Travel Code.
(Ord. 1351, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 1874, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2420,
passed - -1980)
§ 12.1607   Director of Airports’ Relationship to Airports Commission.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Airports, in his or her relationship
with the Airports Commission, subject to policy direction of the Board of
Supervisors and within the limits of the applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations to:
   (a)   Attend meetings of the Commission and serve as Secretary of the
Commission, without vote;
   (b)   Advise and inform the Airports Commission regarding airport and
aviation related issues, growth and development that may affect the County and/
or operation of the County airports;
   (c)   Forward the advice and recommendations of the Commission through the
Economic Development and Public Services Group, to the Board of Supervisors,
and keep the Commission advised of the Board’s actions and requests.
(Ord. 1351, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 1874, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2420,
passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2167, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3844, passed - -2002)
CHAPTER 17: BOARD OF LAW LIBRARY TRUSTEES
Section
   
12.1700   Board of Law Library Trustees.
§ 12.1700   Board of Law Library Trustees.
   There is in the County of San Bernardino a Board of Law Library Trustees
pursuant to the provisions of Business and Professions Code §§ 6300 et seq.,
which statutes are made applicable hereby to the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 1488, passed - -1969)
CHAPTER 18: SURVEYOR
Section
   
12.1800   Surveyor.
   
12.1801   (Ord. 1615, passed - -1970; Repealed by Ord. 1744, passed - -1972).
§ 12.1800   Surveyor.
   The Office of Surveyor in the County of San Bernardino is an appointive
office.
(Ord. 1538, passed - -1970; Am. Ord. 1615, passed - -1970)
§ 12.1801   (Ord. 1615, passed - -1970; Repealed by Ord. 1744, passed - -1972).
CHAPTER 19: COUNTY COUNSEL
Section
   
12.1901   Office Established.
   
12.1902   Qualifications.
   
12.1903   Appointment; Term; Removal.
   
12.1904   Salary of County Counsel.
   
12.1905   Employment of Assistants and Deputies.
   
12.1906   Duties and Responsibilities.
   
12.1907   Authority of County Counsel Regarding Certain Actions.
   
12.1908   Authority to Select and Retain Outside Legal Counsel.
§ 12.1901   Office Established.
   There is hereby established, pursuant to the authority of Section 1 of
Article II of the Charter of the County of San Bernardino, State of California,
the Office of County Counsel, said Office to be a County Office of department
head status in the Unclassified Service of the County.
(Ord. 1601, passed - -1970)
§ 12.1902   Qualifications.
   The County Counsel shall be an attorney admitted to practice in the courts
of this State.
(Ord. 1601, passed - -1970)
§ 12.1903   Appointment; Term; Removal.
   The County Counsel shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors by
majority vote and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Board subject to
removal for cause, pursuant to Section 6 of Article II of the County Charter.
(Ord. 1601, passed - -1970)
§ 12.1904   Salary of County Counsel.
   The salary of the County Counsel shall be fixed by the Board of Supervisors
by ordinance in the same manner in which salaries are fixed for other County
officers and employees.
(Ord. 1601, passed - -1970)
§ 12.1905   Employment of Assistants and Deputies.
   The County Counsel shall be the appointing authority for all assistants,
deputies, and other personnel in the Office of the County Counsel, all of whom
shall be in the Classified Service of the County and shall be appointed and
hold office pursuant to applicable civil service rules and regulations.
(Ord. 1601, passed - -1970)
§ 12.1906   Duties and Responsibilities.
   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the County Counsel to provide
legal advice, assistance, and representation to the Board of Supervisors, to
the department heads of the County, and to any other agency, board, commission,
or person authorized to call upon his or her services by statute or ordinance
to the extent of such authorization. Unless obligated to provide such services
without fee, he or she shall establish a schedule of fees and charge such fees
to the parties utilizing the services of his or her office. Any such fees
collected by the Office of County Counsel shall be deposited in the County
General Fund.
(Ord. 1601, passed - -1970)
§ 12.1907   Authority of County Counsel Regarding Certain Actions.
   (a)   The County Counsel or his or her designee, with consent from the
County department or other Board governed entity involved, is authorized to
consent to the filing of a lawsuit, cross-complaint, lien, or other legal
action on behalf of San Bernardino County or other Board governed entity to
seek compensation for damage to property or personal injury to a County or
other Board governed entity employee occasioned in the course and scope of the
individual's employment.
   (b)   The County Counsel or his or her designee is authorized to allow,
deny, compromise or settle any claim or lawsuit that is presented or filed
against San Bernardino County or other Board governed entity, its officers or
employees provided:
      (1)   The amount to be paid pursuant to such allowance, compromise or
settlement does not exceed $50,000; provided further, that if the matter is in
litigation, whether in a court of law or administrative proceeding, the
allowance, compromise or settlement is with the concurrence of any County
Department or other Board governed entity involved in the action and with the
concurrence of any outside counsel retained to represent San Bernardino County,
or other Board governed entity, its officers or employees;
      (2)   The claim or lawsuit is not subject to the terms of an insurance
policy wherein the insurer is granted the authority to allow, deny, compromise
or settle claims or actions within the scope of such policy;
      (3)   The action is not one which the Risk Management Department is
actively handling pursuant to County Code §
12.3405; and
      (4)   The action does not involve an employee's or former employee's
claim that alleges, solely, entitlement to back-pay.
   (c)   The County Counsel or his or her designee is authorized to settle any
claim or lawsuit that is presented or filed by San Bernardino County or other
Board governed entity against any person or entity provided the settlement is
no more than $50,000 less than what is owed to the County or other Board
governed entity; provided further, that if the matter is in litigation, whether
in a court of law or administrative proceeding, the compromise or settlement is
with the concurrence of any County department or other Board governed entity
involved in the action.
   (d)   In all actions or lawsuits that are allowed, compromised or settled,
the Auditor-Controller shall, upon written order of the County Counsel or his
or her designee, and in accordance with the terms of such allowance, compromise
or settlement, cause the necessary warrant to be issued upon the Treasury of
San Bernardino County or other Board governed entity in an amount for which
such claim, lawsuit or Workers' Compensation claim or action has been allowed,
compromised or settled pursuant to this Section.
(Ord. 3995, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4498, passed - -2025)
§ 12.1908   Authority to Select and Retain Outside Legal Counsel.
   In addition to the duties and responsibilities set forth in §
12.1906, from time to time it is necessary to retain specialized outside
counsel to assist the County Counsel in the provision of legal services. The
County Counsel shall also have the authority and be responsible for the
selection and retention of all legal counsel engaged in the representation of
the County, and to any other agency, board, commission, or person authorized to
receive legal services from County Counsel.
   The Chief Executive Officer, as directed by the Board of Supervisors in
specified circumstances, shall also have the authority and be responsible for
the selection and retention of legal counsel engaged in the representation of
the County, and to any other agency, board, commission, or person authorized to
receive legal services from County Counsel. The Chief Executive Officer shall
consult with the County Counsel on any potential conflict of interest prior to
formal engagement of outside legal counsel.
   Notwithstanding any County procurement policy, the County Counsel is
delegated the authority and discretion to select and retain specialized outside
counsel for a particular matter not to exceed $200,000 per fiscal year. The
Chief Executive Officer is delegated the authority and discretion to select and
retain specialized outside counsel for a particular matter not to exceed
$200,000 per fiscal year upon approval by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 3995, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4356, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4422,
passed - -2021)
CHAPTER 20: REGISTRAR OF VOTERS
Section
   
12.2001   Office Established.
   
12.2002   (Ord. 1601, passed - -1970; Repealed by Ord. 2809, passed - -1983).
   
12.2003   (Ord. 1601, passed - -1970; Repealed by Ord. 2809, passed - -1983).
   
12.2004   Salary of Registrar of Voters.
   
12.2005   Employment of Assistants and Deputies.
   
12.2006   Powers, Duties and Responsibilities.
§ 12.2001   Office Established.
   There is hereby established, pursuant to the authority of Section 1 of
Article II of the Charter of the County of San Bernardino, State of California,
the Office of Registrar of Voters, said office to be a County office of
department head status in the Unclassified Service of the County.
(Ord. 1601, passed - -1970)
§ 12.2002   (Ord. 1601, passed - -1970; Repealed by Ord. 2809, passed - -1983).
§ 12.2003   (Ord. 1601, passed - -1970; Repealed by Ord. 2809, passed - -1983).
§ 12.2004   Salary of Registrar of Voters.
   The salary of the Registrar of Voters shall be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors by ordinance in the same manner in which salaries are fixed for
other County officers and employees.
(Ord. 1601, passed - -1970)
§ 12.2005   Employment of Assistants and Deputies.
   The Registrar of Voters shall be the appointing authority for all
assistants, deputies, and other personnel in the Office of the Registrar of
Voters, all of whom shall be in the Classified Service of the County and shall
be appointed and hold office pursuant to applicable civil service rules and
regulations; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to be a
limitation on the statutory power and authority of the Registrar of Voters to
deputize qualified persons to register voters or serve as election officers.
(Ord. 1601, passed - -1970)
§ 12.2006   Powers, Duties and Responsibilities.
   The Registrar of Voters shall have, perform, and exercise the powers,
duties, and responsibilities relating to elections now or hereafter vested by
general law in the County Clerk or the Registrar of Voters.
(Ord. 1601, passed - -1970)
CHAPTER 21: CORONER
Section
   
12.2101   Training and Recruitment.
§ 12.2101   Training and Recruitment.
   Pursuant to Penal Code § 13522, the County of San Bernardino and the Coroner
and Deputy Coroners of San Bernardino County, while receiving aid from the
State of California, pursuant to the Penal Code Chapter 1, Title 4, Part 4,
will adhere to the standards of recruitment and training established by the
California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training.
(Ord. 3655, passed - -1996)
CHAPTER 22: DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE/WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Section
   
12.2201   Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures.
   
12.2202   Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer.
   
12.2203   Required Licenses.
   
12.2204   Term.
   
12.2205   Duties of the Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures.
   
12.2025   (Deleted by Ord. 3668, passed - -1996).
   
12.2026   (Deleted by Ord. 3668, passed - -1996).
§ 12.2201   Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures.
   There is in the government of San Bernardino County a Department of
Agriculture/Weights and Measures.
(Ord. 1617, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2291, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 2809,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3498, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3668, passed - -1996)
§ 12.2202   Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer.
   The executive officer of the Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures
shall be the Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer who shall have the powers and
duties conferred upon these offices by the laws of this State. Subject to the
provisions of this Chapter, the Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer shall have the
power to appoint, discipline and assign duties to all assistants, deputies, and
all other employees necessary to conduct the duties of the Department.
(Ord. 1617, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2291, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3498,
passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3668, passed - -1996)
§ 12.2203   Required Licenses.
   The Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer and all deputies and staff shall each
have a license of eligibility, appropriate to the position, from the Secretary
of the State Department of Food and Agriculture or the Director of the State
Department of Pesticide Regulation, which license shall be kept in full force
and effect as provided by law.
(Ord. 1617, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2291, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3668,
passed - -1996)
§ 12.2204   Term.
   The provisions of State law relative to the term for Agricultural
Commissioner and Sealer of Weights and Measures shall not be applicable;
appointments to this position shall be in accordance with the Charter and
applicable ordinances of the County and the position shall serve at the
pleasure of the appointing authority.
(Ord. 1617, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2291, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3668,
passed - -1996)
§ 12.2205   Duties of the Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures.
   The duties of the Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures shall be:
   (a)   Enforcement of the provisions of the laws of this State pertaining to
weights, measures, devices, containers, packages and advertising, including the
provisions of Division V of the California Business and Professions Code;
   (b)   Enforcement of the provisions of the laws of the State pertaining to
the use, storage and handling of pesticides, production of agricultural
commodities, shipments of plants and plant products; including the provisions
of Food and Agricultural Code Division 4, Division 6, Division 7, Division 12,
Division 13, Division 17, Division 18, and Division 23 and Business and
Professions Code Division 3, Chapter 14.
   (c)   Enforcement of various ordinances of the County of San Bernardino as
specified in the County Code.
(Ord. 1617, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2291, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3668,
passed - -1996)
§ 12.2025   (Deleted by Ord. 3668, passed - -1996).
§ 12.2026   (Deleted by Ord. 3668, passed - -1996).
CHAPTER 23: CLERK OF THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Section
   
12.2301   Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   
12.2302   Clerk of Board Responsible to Board of Supervisors.
   
12.2303   Duties of Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 12.2301   Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   Pursuant to Government Code § 25100.5, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
of the County of San Bernardino, shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors
in the same manner as other County officers are appointed. Henceforth, the
Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall be independent from the County Clerk.
(Ord. 1637, passed - -1971)
§ 12.2302   Clerk of Board Responsible to Board of Supervisors.
   The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall be responsible for the
operations of the department.
(Ord. 1637, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2413, passed - -1980)
§ 12.2303   Duties of Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall perform all duties related to
the following activities and functions:
   (a)   Applications for licenses/permits;
   (b)   Sale of school and other bonds;
   (c)   Public Safety Authority;
   (d)   Building Authority;
   (e)   Chino Building Authority;
   (f)   Redlands Museum Building Authority;
   (g)   Yucca Valley Community Center Authority;
   (h)   Authority for the Handicapped;
   (i)   Inland Counties Emergency Medical Authority;
   (j)   Assessment Appeals Boards and Hearing Officers;
   (k)   Flood Control District;
   (l)   Roster of Public Agencies;
   (m)   Conflict of Interest Codes;
   (n)   Administering of Oaths;
   (o)   Certification of County Ordinances and Resolutions and Certification
of Ordinances and Resolutions of Special Districts governed by Board of
Supervisors;
   (p)   Accept claims and service on behalf of County;
   (q)   Other duties and responsibilities of the Clerk required by law;
   (r)   Filing of all papers required or permitted to be filed with the County
Clerk by the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code §§
21000 and following.
(Ord. 1637, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 1812, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2194,
passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2413, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2519, passed - -1981)
CHAPTER 24: COUNTY OFFICERS WITH DEPARTMENT HEAD STATUS
Section
   
12.2400   Departments, County Officer Status.
   
12.2401   (Repealed by Ord. 2809, passed - -1983).
   
12.2402   (Repealed by Ord. 2809, passed - -1983).
§ 12.2400   Departments, County Officer Status.
   There are in the County of San Bernardino the following departments, the
heads of which shall be the County Officers in the Unclassified Service.
   Aging and Adult Services
   Agriculture/Weights and Measures1
   Airports
   Architecture and Engineering
   Arrowhead Regional Medical Center
   Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk2
   Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector3
   Behavioral Health
   Child Support
   Children and Family Services
   Clerk of the Board of Supervisors
   Community Development and Housing
   County Administrative Office
   County Counsel
   District Attorney
   Economic Development
   Fleet Management
   Human Resources
   Information Services
   Land Use Services
   Library
   Museum
   Preschool Services
   Probation
   Public Defender
   Public Health
   Public Works
   Purchasing
   Real Estate Services
   Regional Parks
   Registrar of Voters
   Risk Management
   Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator 4
   Special Districts
   Transitional Assistance
   Veterans’ Affairs
   Workforce Development
   1   Regarding the consolidation, see Ordinance No. 3668 (Item No. 57,
October 29, 1996).
   2, 3, 4   Regarding the consolidation, see Ordinance No. 4097 (Item No. 75,
January 26, 2010).
(Am. Ord. 2827, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 3641, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3662,
passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3710, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3786, passed - -2000;
Am. Ord. 3838, passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 3886, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 3936,
passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 3947, passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 3953, passed - -2005;
Am. Ord. 4073, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4097, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4368,
passed - -2019)
§ 12.2401   (Repealed by Ord. 2809, passed - -1983).
§ 12.2402   (Repealed by Ord. 2809, passed - -1983).
CHAPTER 25: (REPEALED BY ORD. 4368, PASSED - -2019)
CHAPTER 26: (DELETED BY ORD. 3581, PASSED - -1994)
CHAPTER 27: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS; COUNTY HEARING OFFICER
Section
   
12.2700   Agency Defined.
   
12.2701   County Hearing Officer.
   
12.2702   Hearing Officer Authority.
   
12.2703   Hearing Officer Qualifications.
   
12.2704   Use of Hearing Officer by Other Agencies.
   
12.2705   State Hearing Officer.
   
12.2706   License Defined.
   
12.2707   Application Defined.
   
12.2708   Hearing Subject Matter.
   
12.2709   License Application; Informal Hearing.
   
12.2710   License Application; Formal Hearing.
   
12.2711   Action Against License; Hearing.
   
12.2712   Form: Notice to Show Cause.
   
12.2713   Service of Notice; Answer.
   
12.2714   Contents of Answer.
   
12.2715   Amended Notice to Show Cause.
   
12.2716   Notice of Hearing.
   
12.2717   Continuances.
   
12.2718   Prehearing Conference.
   
12.2719   Subpoenas; Witnesses.
   
12.2720   Conduct of Hearing.
   
12.2721   Proceedings Recorded.
   
12.2722   Testimony; Evidence.
   
12.2723   Official Notice.
   
12.2724   Agency Hearing.
   
12.2725   Hearing Officer Recommended Decision.
   
12.2726   Agency Action.
   
12.2727   Decision; Conditions.
   
12.2728   Reconsideration.
   
12.2729   Petition; Waiver.
   
12.2730   Action on Petition for Reconsideration.
§ 12.2700   Agency Defined.
   As used in this Chapter, AGENCY means the County of San Bernardino, or any
board, commission, committee or department thereof, with the exception of the
Planning Commission, and includes any local public agency which contracts with
the County pursuant to §
12.2704.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2701   County Hearing Officer.
   There is in the government of the County of San Bernardino the Office of
County Hearing Officer. The duties of the Office are to conduct hearings for
the County or any agency thereof with the exception of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2702   Hearing Officer Authority.
   When any law, ordinance, rule or regulation provides that a hearing be held
or that findings of fact or conclusions of law be made by an agency, a County
Hearing Officer may be appointed by the Board of Supervisors to conduct such
hearing. The appointment of such a hearing officer is discretionary with the
Board of Supervisors even though other provisions of this Chapter are made
mandatory by another Section of this Code, which refers to the Chapter and
states that the procedures of this Chapter must be used. Unless made mandatory
by another Section of this Code, the procedures of this Chapter may be made
applicable to a proceeding at the sole discretion of the Board of Supervisors.
A hearing officer, so appointed, is authorized to issue subpoenas, to
administer oaths, to rule on questions of law and the admissibility of
evidence, to receive evidence to prepare a record of the proceedings. to
prepare recommended findings, conclusions and a decision, and to submit such
record, recommended findings, conclusions, and decision to the agency.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3058, passed - -1986)
§ 12.2703   Hearing Officer Qualifications.
   The County Hearing Officer or any deputy or assistant hearing officer shall
be an attorney-at-law having been admitted to practice before the courts of the
State of California at least five years prior to this appointment.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2704   Use of Hearing Officer by Other Agencies.
   Any local public agency within the County of San Bernardino may contract
with the County to employ the services of the County Hearing Officer.
Reimbursement to the County shall be on a pro rata basis of actual cost to the
County in providing the service, including salaries, overhead and any travel
expense. An agency contracting with the County under this Section is authorized
to conduct its hearings in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. If
an agency has adopted its own rules of procedures, such rules may be followed.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2705   State Hearing Officer.
   The County of San Bernardino or other local public agency within the County
may contract with the Office of Administrative Hearings of the State of
California pursuant to Government Code § 27727. A State hearing officer
assigned to hear a matter under that Section and the provisions of this Chapter
shall conduct proceedings pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2706   License Defined.
   As used in this Chapter, LICENSE means any right, authority, license, permit
or privilege which an agency may grant or issue or which an agency has granted
or issued.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2707   Application Defined.
   As used in this Chapter, APPLICATION means any request, whether by formal
application or informal request, for the granting of a license as defined in §
12.2706; provided, however, that an agency may require the completion and
filing of a formal application.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2708   Hearing Subject Matter.
   An agency may apply the provisions of this Chapter to proceedings regarding:
   (a)   Granting, denial, revocation, suspension or other action regarding a
license;
   (b)   Enforcement of a duty required by law;
   (c)   Appeal from a decision of an officer, employee or department or
agency;
   (d)   Personnel matters, including disciplinary action; provided however
that hearings conducted by or for the San Bernardino County Civil Service
Commission shall be conducted pursuant to the Personnel Rules adopted by the
Board of Supervisors;
   (e)   Any other matter regarding which any law, ordinance, rule or
regulation provides that a hearing be held or that findings of fact or
conclusions of law be made by an agency.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2709   License Application; Informal Hearing.
   When an application for license is filed with an agency, it shall be
reviewed by the department or departments having jurisdiction over the subject
matter of the application. Such departments shall report to the agency any fact
or condition pertinent to the granting or denial of the license for which
application is made. If the agency denies the license, the applicant shall be
notified and may file a written appeal within 15 days after the date on which
the notice of denial was mailed. The notice shall inform him or her of his
right to appeal and to request a hearing pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter and of his or her right to be represented by counsel at his or her own
expense.
   If the applicant files an appeal, the agency may schedule an informal
hearing to permit the applicant to be heard. In the alternative, upon receiving
applicant’s notice of appeal, the agency may institute formal proceedings in
accordance with §
12.2710 of this Code.
   At the conclusion of an informal hearing, the agency may take such action as
the record indicates and may affirm, reverse or amend its prior action. If the
agency’s decision is adverse to the applicant, and applicant fails to request a
formal hearing as provided herein, he or she shall be deemed to have waived his
or her appeal; it shall be dismissed; and the action of the agency shall be
final.
   The applicant may file a written request for a formal hearing for the
purpose of presenting evidence regarding his or her application. Such request
shall be filed no later than five days after any informal hearing held
hereunder. Any request for a formal hearing shall be accompanied by any fee
established by the agency for such filing. The agency may, upon a showing of
good cause, waive such fee. Upon the receipt of a valid request for a formal
hearing, the agency shall commence the procedure for a formal hearing pursuant
to §
12.2710.
   The notice provided for herein shall be in substantially the following form:
 
[Agency]
TO:                                             [Name of Applicant]   DATE: _______________________
You are hereby notified that the [agency] has denied your application for [type of license or permit] for the following
reason or reasons:
[List reasons in nontechnical language]
You are further notified that you have a right to appeal from this decision by filing a letter, or other written
document, indicating your appeal with [agency and agency address] within fifteen (15) days of the above date. The
[agency) may schedule an informal hearing to consider your appeal. In the alternative, the [agency] may initiate a formal
hearing for the purpose of taking evidence regarding your application. You have the right to request a formal hearing to
present evidence by filing a written request therefor accompanied by a filing fee of $ ________________. A request for a
formal hearing shall be filed no later than five (5) days after any informal hearing. You have the right to notice of any
hearing and the right to appear and be represented by counsel at your own expense.
 
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2710   License Application; Formal Hearing.
   A formal hearing to determine whether a license should be granted, issued or
renewed shall be initiated by filing a notice to show cause why such license
should be issued. [If the renewal is to be issued merely on the payment of an
additional fee, without further showing of entitlement to an existing holder of
a license, the proceeding shall be initiated in accordance with §
12.2711.] The notice shall be a written statement specifying the statutes and
rules with which the respondent must show compliance by producing proof at the
hearing and, in addition, any particular matters which have come to the
attention of the initiating party and which would authorize a denial of the
agency action sought by the respondent.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2711   Action Against License; Hearing.
   A hearing to determine whether a license should be revoked, suspended,
limited or conditioned shall be initiated by filing a notice to show cause why
such action should not be taken.
   The notice shall be a written statement of charges, which shall set forth in
ordinary and concise language the acts or omissions with which the respondent
is charged, to the end that respondent will be able to prepare his or her
defense. It shall specify the statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations which
the respondent is alleged to have violated, but shall not consist merely of
charges phrased in the language of such statutes, ordinances, rules or
regulations.
   If the agency issuing the notice concludes that the information in its
possession is of a substantial nature and that the matter involves imminent
danger to the health, safety and welfare of the people, it may issue with the
notice to show cause an interim order regarding such license pending any
hearing on the notice.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2712   Form: Notice to Show Cause.
   A notice to show cause issued pursuant to §§
12.2710 or
12.2711 shall be substantially in the following form:
BEFORE THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE COUNTY OF SAN BERNARDINO [or other agency]
In Re   [Name of applicant, licensee or other respondent],   NOTICE TO SHOW CAUSE
   Respondent.
TO:   [Respondent]
You [or: you, and each of you,] are hereby given notice to show cause [why the
_________________ license applied for by you should be granted -- or, why the
_________________________ license previously issued to you should not be revoked,
suspended, etc.: -- or other action should not be taken].
You are further notified that -- [here include factual and legal allegations
regarding any charges].
You may file a written answer with the [Board of Supervisors or other agency] at
its office located at [address of agency] within fifteen (15) days after service
upon you of this Notice to Show Cause. Failure to file an answer will constitute
a waiver of your right to a hearing and an admission of the matters set forth in
this Notice.
(San Bernardino County Code Section
12.2714.)
Date: ____________   _______________________________________________________
         (Signature and title of person executing Notice.)
 
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2713   Service of Notice; Answer.
   Upon the filing of a notice to show cause, under §
12.2710 or §
12.2711, the agency shall serve a copy thereof on the respondent. The agency
may include with the notice any information which it deems appropriate. The
notice shall include or be accompanied by a statement that the applicant or
licensee respondent may request a hearing by filing an answer within 15 days
after service upon him or her of the notice to show cause and that the failure
to do so will constitute a waiver of his or her right to a hearing and an
admission of the matters alleged in the notice to show cause. The answer may be
filed by delivering or mailing the answer to the agency.
   Service of a notice to show cause or an answer may be made by personal
service or by mail.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2714   Contents of Answer.
   In the answer filed by a respondent, he or she may:
      (1)   Request a hearing;
      (2)   Object to the notice to show cause on grounds that it does not
state acts or omissions upon which the agency may proceed;
      (3)   Object to the form of the notice to show cause on grounds of
indefiniteness or uncertainty;
      (4)   Admit the allegations in the notice to show cause in the whole or
in part;
      (5)   Deny the allegations in the notice to show cause in whole or in
part;
      (6)   Present new matter by way of defense;
      (7)   Allege facts by way of mitigation.
   Within the time specified, respondent may file one or more amended answers,
but all such answers shall be filed within 15 days after service upon him or
her of the notice to show cause.
   Respondent shall be entitled to a hearing on the merits if he or she files
an answer within the specified time. Any such answer shall be deemed a denial
of only those portions of the notice to show cause which are expressly denied
therein. Any allegation not denied will be deemed admitted. Failure to file an
answer shall constitute a waiver of respondent’s right to a hearing and an
admission of the matters alleged in the notice to show cause. Unless a timely
objection is included in the answer, all objections to the form of the notice
shall be deemed waived.
   The answer shall be in writing signed by the respondent or by an attorney-
at-law if respondent has legal counsel.
   If respondent fails to file an answer, the allegations in the notice to show
cause shall be deemed to be true. The agency may take such action as it deems
appropriate upon the facts so admitted and other information which has been
submitted to it. The agency need not, but may, schedule a hearing without
notice to respondent. Nothing herein shall be construed to deprive the
respondent of the right to make a showing by way of mitigation.
   An answer shall be substantially in the following form:
BEFORE THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE COUNTY OF SAN BERNARDINO [or other agency]
In Re [Name of applicant, licensee or other respondent],   ANSWER TO NOTICE TO
SHOW CAUSE
               Respondent.
Respondent answers the Notice to Show Cause, as follows:
[Enter here any denial, objection, admission, request, new matter or facts
regarding mitigating circumstances. See: San Bernardino County Code Section
12.2714.]
Date:    __________________________________________________________
                  (Signature of Respondent or Attorney)
                  ___________________________________
                  (Address)
 
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2715   Amended Notice to Show Cause.
   Before a matter is submitted for decision, the agency may file or permit the
filing of an amended or supplemental notice to show cause. Respondent shall be
served with a copy thereof. If new charges are included, the agency shall
afford a reasonable opportunity for respondent to prepare a defense thereto,
and respondent may file an amended answer.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2716   Notice of Hearing.
   If respondent has filed a timely answer, the agency or the hearing officer
shall deliver or mail a notice of hearing to all parties at least 10 days prior
to the hearing. The notice to respondent shall be substantially in the
following form that may include other information:
 
BEFORE THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS OF THE COUNTY OF SAN BERNARDINO [or other agency]
In Re      [Name of respondent],   NOTICE OF HEARING
         Respondent.
TO:   [Respondent and other parties.]
You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before [name of agency or
designation of hearing officer] at [place of hearing] on the ____________ day
of_______________________________,20____, at the hour of ____________.m. upon the
charges made in the notice to show cause served upon you. You may be present at the
hearing, may be, but need not be, represented by counsel, may present any relevant
evidence and will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses
testifying against you. You are entitled to the issuance of subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of books, documents or other things by
applying to [appropriate office of agency or hearing officer].
Date:______________________________      __________________________________________
                     (Signature and title of person executing Notice.)
 
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2717   Continuances.
   The agency may grant continuances. When a hearing officer has been assigned
to such hearing, no continuance may be granted except by him or her. A party
requesting a continuance may be required to make a showing of good cause.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2718   Prehearing Conference.
   The agency or a hearing officer may require attendance of the parties at a
prehearing conference. At such conference, the issues shall be reviewed and the
parties shall be requested to submit all documentary evidence and to designate
which items may be introduced without objection. Documents may be admitted into
evidence, and any not admitted shall be marked for identification. The parties
shall also be requested to enter stipulations into the record as to those
matters upon which they agree. Notice of a prehearing conference shall be
mailed to the parties at least ten days prior to the time set for the
conference. The notice shall set forth the requirements of this Section.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2719   Subpoenas; Witnesses.
   Before the hearing has commenced, the agency, or the assigned hearing
officer in accordance with Government Code § 27721, shall issue subpoenas and
subpoenas duces tecum at the request of any party for attendance or production
of documents at the hearing. Compliance with the provisions of Code of Civil
Procedure § 1985 shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a subpoena
duces tecum. After the hearing has commenced, the agency itself hearing a case
or a hearing officer sitting alone may issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces
tecum.
   If any person in proceedings before an agency disobeys or resists any lawful
order or refuses to respond to a subpoena, or refuses to take the oath or
affirmation as a witness or thereafter refuses to be examined, or is guilty of
misconduct during a hearing or so near the place thereof as to obstruct the
proceeding, the agency shall certify the facts to the Superior Court of the
County to initiate proceedings pursuant to Government Code §§ 25170—25176.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2720   Conduct of Hearing.
   Every hearing in a contested case may be conducted by the agency or may be
referred to a hearing officer pursuant to this Chapter. If the agency hears the
case itself, it may appoint a hearing officer to preside at the hearing, rule
on the admission and exclusion of evidence and advise the agency on matters of
law. The agency itself shall exercise all other powers relating to the conduct
of the hearing, but may delegate any or all of them to the Hearing Officer.
When a hearing officer alone hears a case, he or she shall exercise all powers
relating to the conduct of the hearing.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2721   Proceedings Recorded.
   All proceedings shall be recorded by an electronic recording device. Any
party may at his or her own expense provide for the taking of the testimony by
a qualified phonographic reporter.
   Upon payment of the requisite fees to the agency, the agency shall prepare a
duplicate recording or a duplicate tape of the proceedings and a copy of any
documentary evidence introduced into evidence and any pleading, notice, order,
recommended decision of final decision or other paper relating to the case.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2722   Testimony; Evidence.
   Oral evidence shall be taken only upon oath or affirmation.
   Each party shall have these rights: to call and examine witnesses to
introduce exhibits; to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant
to the issues, even though that matter was not covered on direct examination;
to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him or her to
testify; and to rebut the evidence against him or her. If respondent does not
testify on his or her own behalf, he or she may be called and examined as if
under cross-examination, and the party calling him or her in this manner is not
bound by the testimony elicited.
   The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to
evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the
sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or
statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over
objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the
same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions,
and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2723   Official Notice.
   In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after
submission of the case for decision, of any generally accepted technical or
scientific matter within the agency’s special field, and of any fact which may
be judicially noticed by the courts of this State. Parties present at the
hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed, and those matters shall
be noted in the record, referred to therein, or appended thereto. Any such
party shall be given a reasonable opportunity on request to refute the
officially noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation of
authority, the manner of such refutation to be determined by the agency.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2724   Agency Hearing.
   If the agency conducts the hearing, it shall render a written decision which
shall include findings of fact, conclusions of law and decision.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2725   Hearing Officer Recommended Decision.
   If a case is heard by a hearing officer, he or she shall prepare for the
agency’s consideration:
   1.   A resume of the testimony taken and other evidence presented;
   2.    Recommended findings of fact;
   3.    Recommended conclusions of law;
   4.    Recommended decision.
   The hearing officer shall submit the original copies of the resume and the
recommendations to the agency, and shall also serve a copy of each upon the
complainant and the respondent. If any party is represented by an attorney,
both the party and his or her attorney shall be served.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2726   Agency Action.
   Upon receiving the resume and recommendations of the hearing officer, the
agency may take action thereon without a hearing or may schedule a hearing for
the purpose of hearing oral argument from the parties. If a party is
represented by an attorney, only such attorney will be permitted to present
argument for such party. At the conclusion of the hearing, the agency may take
action or may submit the matter for consideration.
   The agency may issue its decision without further hearing or notice to the
parties and shall serve a copy of such decision upon the parties and their
attorneys if represented by counsel. The agency may reopen the matter if not
satisfied with the record and may order further proceedings, refer the matter
to the same or different hearing officer, or hear additional evidence without a
hearing officer. Any hearing after reopening shall be conducted on notice to
the parties.
   In its decision the agency may:
   1.   Adopt the recommendations of the hearing officer; or
   2.   Adopt the recommendations in part as a part of the agency’s decision;
or
   3.   Reject the hearing officer’s recommendations and enter its own findings
of fact, conclusions of law and decision based upon the record as set forth in
the resume of testimony and documentary evidence.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2727   Decision; Conditions.
   (a)   The decision shall become effective 15 days after it is delivered or
mailed to respondent or his or her attorney if represented by counsel, unless a
petition for reconsideration has been filed within that time, or the agency
itself orders that the decision shall become effective sooner, or a stay of
execution is granted.
   (b)   A stay of execution may be included in the decision. An agency may
make a probationary or conditional order in conjunction with a stay of
execution, including an express condition that respondent comply with specified
terms of probation.
   (c)   If respondent was required to register with any public officer, a
notification of any suspension or revocation shall be sent to such officer
after the decision has become effective.
   (d)   For good cause, the agency may, as a part of its decision, or as a
condition of probation, order a respondent to reimburse the agency for costs
incurred in conducting a proceeding under this Chapter.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2728   Reconsideration.
   Within 15 days following service of the agency’s decision, a party may file
with the agency a petition for reconsideration on one or more of the following
grounds:
   1.   That the decision is contrary to law;
   2.   That the decision is contrary to the findings of fact;
   3.   That the decision is contrary to the conclusions of law;
   4.   That the findings of fact or conclusions of law are not supported by
the evidence;
   5.   That the party has discovered evidence which with due diligence he or
she could not have discovered before the time of the hearing.
   The agency may order reconsideration on its own motion within 15 days after
service of its decision.
   The agency’s authority to act upon a petition for reconsideration shall
terminate at the expiration of 30 days after the service of its decision. If no
action has been taken regarding a petition within such 30- day period, the
petition shall be deemed denied.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2729   Petition; Waiver.
   Any assertion, issue or point not raised in a petition for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be waived by petitioner. If a petition for reconsideration
asserts any factual matter contained in the record, the petition shall set
forth the place in the record where such material may be found. If an
allegation is based upon newly discovered evidence, an affidavit or declaration
under penalty of perjury shall be filed setting forth such newly discovered
evidence and the reason or reasons why such evidence could not be produced at
the hearing. Any petition not in compliance with this provision may be
summarily denied.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
§ 12.2730   Action on Petition for Reconsideration.
   If a petition for reconsideration does not show good cause to reconsider the
decision, the agency may deny the petition with or without a hearing. If a
hearing is scheduled, the parties shall be limited to oral argument on the
merits of the petition. The agency may grant reconsideration and review the
matter on the same record or may schedule a hearing to take further evidence.
The matter may be referred to a hearing officer, and if a hearing officer heard
the case initially, he or she may be the same or a different hearing officer.
If reconsideration is granted, the agency may affirm or modify its previous
decision or enter a new and different decision on the record before it after
reconsideration.
(Ord. 1709, passed - -1972)
CHAPTER 28: COUNTY TREASURER-TAX COLLECTOR
Section
   
12.2801   Qualifications.
   
12.2802   Continuing Education.
   
12.2803   Delegation of Investment Authority.
   
12.2804   (Repealed by Ord. 4097, passed - -2010).
§ 12.2801   Qualifications.
   (a)   No person shall be eligible for election or appointment to the Office
of County Treasurer-Tax Collector unless that person meets at least one of the
following criteria:
      (1)   The person has served in a senior financial management position in
a county, city, or other public agency dealing with similar financial
responsibilities for a continuous period of not less than three years,
including, but not limited to, treasurer, tax collector, auditor, auditor-
controller, or the chief deputy or an assistant in those offices.
      (2)   The person possesses a valid baccalaureate, masters, or doctoral
degree from an accredited college or university in any of the following major
fields of study: business administration, public administration, economics,
finance, accounting, or a related field, with a minimum of 16 college semester
units, or their equivalent, in accounting, auditing, or finance.
      (3)   The person possesses a valid certificate issued by the California
State Board of Accountancy pursuant to Business and Professions Code §§ 5000 et
seq., showing that person to be, and a permit authorizing that person to
practice as, a certified public accountant.
      (4)   The person possesses a valid charter issued by the Institute of
Chartered Financial Analysts showing the person to be designated a Chartered
Financial Analyst, with a minimum of 16 college semester units, or their
equivalent, in accounting, auditing, or finance.
      (5)   The person possesses a valid certificate issued by the Treasury
Management Association showing the person to be designated a Certified Cash
Manager, with a minimum of 16 college semester units, or their equivalent, in
accounting, auditing, or financing.
   (b)   Should the qualification requirements of Government Code § 27000.7 be
amended by the legislature, the provisions of this Section shall be deemed
amended in the same manner.
(Ord. 3709, passed - -1998)
§ 12.2802   Continuing Education.
   (a)   After the election of a county treasurer-tax collector to office, that
person shall complete a valid continuing course of study as prescribed in this
Section, and shall during the person’s four-year term of office on or before
June 30 of the fourth year, render to the State Controller a certification
indicating that the person has successfully completed a continuing education
program consisting of, at a minimum, 48 hours, or an equivalent amount of
continuing education units within the discipline of treasury management, public
finance, public administration, governmental accounting, or directly related
subjects, offered by a recognized state or national association, institute, or
accredited college or university, or the California Debt and Investment
Advisory Commission, that provides the requisite educational programs
prescribed in this Section. The willful or negligent failure of any elected
county treasurer-tax collector to comply with the requirements of this Section
shall be deemed a violation of Government Code § 27000.8.
   (b)   Should the continuing education requirements of Government Code §
27000.8 be amended by the legislature, the provisions of this Section shall be
deemed amended in the same manner.
(Ord. 3709, passed - -1998)
§ 12.2803   Delegation of Investment Authority.
   Pursuant to Government Code § 27000.1, the Board of Supervisors hereby
delegates to the County Treasurer-Tax Collector the authority to invest or
reinvest the funds of the County and of other depositors in the County
treasury. The delegation of authority shall be deemed to automatically annually
renew and shall continue until the Board of Supervisors by ordinance revokes
it.
(Ord. 3682, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 12.2804   (Repealed by Ord. 4097, passed - -2010).
CHAPTER 29: COUNTY CHILDREN AND FAMILIES FIRST COMMISSION
Section
   
12.2901   Purpose.
   
12.2902   Establishment of Commission.
   
12.2903   Appointment of Commission Members.
   
12.2904   Terms of Office.
   
12.2905   Compensation of Members.
   
12.2906   Duties of the Commission.
   
12.2907   Establishment of Trust Fund.
§ 12.2901   Purpose.
   The voters of the State of California passed the California Children and
Families First Act of 1998 (commonly referred to as Proposition 10). The
purpose of this Chapter is to provide for implementation in San Bernardino
County of this Act and to provide for the required County commission to adopt,
promote, and implement the programs covered by the Act.
(Ord. 3745, passed - -1999)
§ 12.2902   Establishment of Commission.
   There is hereby created and established a County Children and Families First
Commission.
(Ord. 3745, passed - -1999)
§ 12.2903   Appointment of Commission Members.
   There are seven members of the Commission. All members of the Commission
shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors. One member of the Commission
shall be a member of the Board of Supervisors. One member of the Commission
shall be the Assistant County Administrator, Human Services. One member shall
be either the County of San Bernardino Health Officer or Public Health
Director. Four members of the Commission shall be from the following
categories: recipients of project services included in the County strategic
plan; educators specializing in early childhood development; representatives of
a local child care resource or referral agency, or a local child care
coordinating group; representatives of a local organization for prevention or
early intervention for families at risk; representatives of community-based
organizations that have the goal of promoting nurturing and early childhood
development; representatives of local school districts; and representatives of
local medical, pediatric, or obstetric associations or societies.
(Ord. 3745, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3908, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4023,
passed - -2007)
§ 12.2904   Terms of Office.
   The members of the Commission shall hold office for two years, except that
the individuals who serve as the Assistant County Administrator, Human Services
System and the County of San Bernardino Health Officer shall serve for the
duration of holding such office. The initial terms of the remaining members
shall be for one or two years as determined by the Board of Supervisors at time
of appointment to allow for staggered terms. The members of the Commission
shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 3745, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3908, passed - -2004)
§ 12.2905   Compensation of Members.
   Members of the Commission shall serve with no compensation, except they
shall be paid reasonable per diem and reimbursement of reasonable expenses for
attending meetings as provided in this Code.
(Ord. 3745, passed - -1999)
§ 12.2906   Duties of the Commission.
   The Commission shall annually adopt a strategic plan for the support and
improvement of early childhood development within the County, as prescribed in
Proposition 10, after a public hearing. The Commission shall submit its adopted
annual strategic plan to the State Commission. The Commission shall prepare and
adopt an annual audit and report pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 130150,
after a public hearing. The Commission shall conduct at least one public
hearing on each annual report by the State Commission prepared pursuant to
Health and Safety Code § 130150. The Commission shall perform any other duties
required of it by Proposition 10.
(Ord. 3745, passed - -1999)
§ 12.2907   Establishment of Trust Fund.
   There is hereby created and established the County Children and Families
First Trust Fund which shall be administered according to State law and
guidelines interpreting and implementing Proposition 10.
(Ord. 3745, passed - -1999)
CHAPTER 30: (DELETED BY ORD. 2425, PASSED - -1980)
CHAPTER 31: (DELETED BY ORD. 3584, PASSED - -1994)
CHAPTER 32: ASSISTANT COUNTY ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
Section
   
12.3201   Appointment of the Assistant County Administrative Officer.
   
12.3202   Responsibility of the Assistant County Administrative Officer.
   
12.3203   Authority of the Assistant County Administrative Officer.
§ 12.3201   Appointment of the Assistant County Administrative Officer.
   Appointment of the Assistant County Administrative Officer will be made by
the County Administrative Officer. The Assistant County Administrative Officer
shall be a County Officer in the Unclassified Service.
(Am. Ord. 3662, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3771, passed - -1999)
§ 12.3202   Responsibility of the Assistant County Administrative Officer.
   (a)   The Assistant County Administrative Officer will be the appointing
authority for the department heads of the departments of Human Resources,
Information Services, and Purchasing.
   (b)   The Assistant County Administrative Officer shall provide budgetary,
fiscal, and administrative support as it pertains to Board of Supervisors’
policy and procedures for the departments of Arrowhead Regional Medical Center,
Behavioral Health, Public Health, Auditor/Controller-Recorder, Assessor,
Treasurer/Tax Collector-Public Administrator, District Attorney, Sheriff/
Coroner, Public Defender, and Probation.
(Am. Ord. 3662, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3691, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3694,
passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3771, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3786, passed - -2000;
Am. Ord. 3838, passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 3947, passed - -2005)
§ 12.3203   Authority of the Assistant County Administrative Officer.
   (a)   The Assistant County Administrative Officer shall be the appointing
authority over those employees within the Human Resources, Information
Services, and Purchasing departments whose appointments are not otherwise
provided for by Charter or General Law including Deputy Administrative Officer
(s). The Assistant County Administrative Officer shall have the power to
delegate in writing this appointing authority to his or her subordinates.
   (b)   The Assistant County Administrative Officer shall have the power of
general administrative supervision and coordination over the operations of the
Human Resources, Information Services, and Purchasing departments. The
Assistant County Administrative Officer may direct such action as he or she
deems appropriate to exercise any power or jurisdiction, or to assume or
discharge any responsibility, or to carry out or effect any of the purposes
vested by law in any officer, employee, or division in the above named
departments except as otherwise provided by Charter or General Law.
   (c)   The Assistant County Administrative Officer shall have the power to
reorganize the Human Resources, Information Services and Purchasing departments
and in connection with such reorganization, the Assistant County Administrative
Officer has the power to transfer personnel from one department or division to
another.
   (d)   Subject to the overall supervision and direction of the Administrative
Officer, the Assistant County Administrative Officer shall be responsible for
the preparation and compilation of the annual budgets of the Human Resources,
Information Services, and Purchasing departments and shall be responsible for
their administration after adoption.
(Am. Ord. 3662, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3771, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3786,
passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 3947, passed - -2005)
CHAPTER 33: SENIOR AFFAIRS COMMISSION
Section
   
12.3301   Establishment of Commission.
   
12.3302   Membership of Commission.
   
12.3303   Term of Office.
   
12.3304   Officers.
   
12.3305   Time of Meetings.
   
12.3306   Authority to Regulate Commission Internal Business.
   
12.3307   Compensation of Commissioners.
   
12.3308   Duties of Commission.
   
12.3309   Standing Committees.
§ 12.3301   Establishment of Commission.
   There is hereby established a Senior Affairs Commission for the County of
San Bernardino and it shall consist of at least 16 but not more than 30 members
who are residents of the County of San Bernardino. Upon the effective date of
this Amended Ordinance, the terms of office of all existing members and
emeritus positions shall automatically expire and become vacant. New
appointments to the Commission shall be filled pursuant to the provisions set
forth in §
12.3302 below. The Commission shall reflect the geographic, racial, economic
and social complexion of San Bernardino County.
(Ord. 1827, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2783, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3139,
passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3554, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3656, passed - -1996;
Am. Ord. 3897, passed - -2003)
§ 12.3302   Membership of Commission.
   (a)   Appointed Members. Each supervisor shall appoint two commissioners to
represent his or her district. In addition, the Chairperson of the Board of
Supervisors shall appoint two members-at-large.
   (b)   Professional Members. At the recommendation of the Director of the
Department of Aging, the Board of Supervisors may appoint up to two
commissioners having relevant professional experience in fields including but
not limited to: gerontology, social work, education, banking, or financial
management.
   (c)   Representative Members. The chairs of the Regional Council on Aging or
a designated member shall serve on the Commission. In the event one or more of
the chairs of the Regional Council on Aging is already a member of the
Commission, he or she may continue to serve in the position of his or her
choice. The Regional Council on Aging shall designate a representative in the
event the chair elects to serve on the Commission in another position.
   In no circumstances will any member occupy more than one seat on the
Commission.
(Ord. 1827, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2783, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3139,
passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3554, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3656, passed - -1996;
Am. Ord. 3897, passed - -2003)
§ 12.3303   Term of Office.
   (a)   Appointed Members. The term of office of appointed members shall be
coterminous with the office of the appointing supervisor. The term of office of
the appointed members-at-large shall be coterminous with the office of the
appointing Chairperson of the Board. The initial terms of the appointed members
shall be for two or four years as determined by the Board of Supervisors at the
time of appointment to allow for staggered terms within each district and for
the members-at-large.
   (b)   Professional Members. The term of office for professional members
shall be four years.
   (c)   Representative Members. The term of office of the representative
members shall be coterminous with the term of office for the chairs of the
Regional Council on Aging.
   (d)   Conditions of Term of Office.
      (1)   Consecutive Terms.
         (A)   Appointed Members. No appointed commissioner shall serve more
than two consecutive terms unless specifically permitted by the Board of
Supervisors because of unusual circumstances.
         (B)   Professional Members. No professional member shall serve more
than two consecutive terms unless specifically permitted by the Board of
Supervisors because of unusual circumstances.
      (2)   Vacancies and Removals. The unexpired term for vacancies on the
Commission, from whatever cause, except temporary vacancies as hereinafter
provided, shall be filled as follows:
         (A)   Appointed Members. Vacancies shall be filled by the appointing
supervisor. Any appointed member may be removed from the Commission prior to
the expiration of his or her term at the pleasure of the appointing supervisor.
         (B)   Professional Members. Vacancies may be filled by the Board of
Supervisors using recommendations from the Director of the Department of Aging
and Adult Services. Any professional member may be removed from the Commission
by the Board of Supervisors or by a two-thirds majority vote of the
commissioners present at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission after
having announced such intent at the previous meeting.
         (C)   Representative Members. Any member designated by a chair of the
Regional Council on Aging may be removed from the Commission prior to the
expiration of his or her term at the pleasure of the appropriate Council on
Aging or by a two-thirds vote of the Commission.
      (3)   Temporary Vacancies. A member of the Commission may be granted a
leave of absence by the source of the seat and a temporary vacancy shall
thereupon exist for a period of such leave of absence.
         During the period of such temporary vacancy, the supervisor concerned
or the selecting authority may fill such vacancy by a temporary appointment to
said Commission, provided, however, that the period of such temporary
appointment shall not exceed the period of the regularly appointed term.
      (4)   Automatic Termination of Appointment. The appointment of any member
of the Commission who has been absent from three consecutive regular or special
meetings, or 50 percent of such meetings in a 12-month period, and who has
failed to notify the Commission, prior to or as soon thereafter as possible,
concerning such absence(s), shall automatically terminate as hereinafter set
forth.
      The Director of the Department of Aging and Adult Services shall report
the attendance record of each member of said Commission to the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors at the end of each six- month period. The first report is
to be made on the first day of the sixth month following adoption of this
Section. The appointment of any member who was absent without notice, as
defined above, as shown on said attendance report, shall be terminated
effective the date said report is filed with the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors.
      The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall notify any member whose
appointment has automatically terminated and report to the supervisor or the
selecting authority concerned that a vacancy exists on said Commission and that
an appointment should be made for the unexpired term.
(Ord. 1827, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2783, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3139,
passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3554, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3656, passed - -1996;
Am. Ord. 3897, passed - -2003)
§ 12.3304   Officers.
   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Secretary
from its membership. These officers shall hold office for two years or until
their successors are elected, unless their terms as members of the Commission
expire sooner. A Nominating Committee composed of three members of the
Commission shall be appointed as follows: the Chairperson shall appoint the
Nominating Committee Chairperson in October of each odd-numbered calendar year,
and the Nominating Committee Chairperson shall select the two additional
members of the Nominating Committee.
   The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Secretary shall be elected at the
Commission’s last meeting in December of each odd-numbered calendar year, and
they shall take office effective January 1 of each even-numbered calendar year.
   The Chairperson shall preside and maintain order and be ex officio officer
of all committees except the Nominating Committee. The Vice-Chairperson shall
preside in the absence of the Chairperson.
   The San Bernardino County Department of Aging and Adult Services shall serve
as staff for the Senior Affairs Commission.
(Ord. 1827, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2783, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3139,
passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3554, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3656, passed - -1996;
Am. Ord. 3897, passed - -2003)
§ 12.3305   Time of Meetings.
   The Commission shall establish a regular time and place for monthly meetings
and shall hold at least one regular meeting each quarter of every year. All
meetings of the Commission, including without limitation, regular, adjourned
regular and special meetings, shall be called, noticed, held and conducted in
accordance with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code §§
54950 et seq.).
(Ord. 1827, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2783, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3897,
passed - -2003)
§ 12.3306   Authority to Regulate Commission Internal Business.
   The Commission may propose to the Board of Supervisors for their approval
any additions or alterations to the rules governing its organization and
procedures which are not inconsistent with applicable policies of the County.
In the capacity of a Senior Affairs Commission, no member is to speak for the
supervisors or espouse policies or positions contrary to those of the Board of
Supervisors.
   One more than 50 percent of the members shall constitute a quorum and the
affirmative vote of a simple majority of those present is required to take any
action except as otherwise provided herein.
   The Commission will keep up-to-date minutes and records and see that they
are distributed to appropriate County departments, including the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 1827, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2783, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3139,
passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3897, passed - -2003)
§ 12.3307   Compensation of Commissioners.
   Commissioners shall serve without compensation but may be permitted their
necessary mileage to attend regular monthly meetings in accordance with the
provision of the County Travel Code and other such fees and expenses as may be
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 1827, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2783, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3897,
passed - -2003)
§ 12.3308   Duties of Commission.
   In coordination with the Department of Aging and Adult Services and the
Human Services System, the duties and powers of the Senior Affairs Commission
shall be to:
   (a)   Serve as adviser to the Area Agency on Aging;
   (b)   Act as an independent advocate for older persons, taking positions on
matters pertaining to Federal, State and local policies, programs and
procedures, and any legislation affecting older persons;
   (c)   Actively seek advice from community councils on aging, senior advocacy
organizations, local aging commissions, elected officials, and the general
public for the purpose of advocating for and making formal presentations on
issues of concern to older persons consistent with §
12.3306;
   (d)   Inform local senior advocates and organizations on specific
legislation pending before local, State and Federal governments;
   (e)   Disseminate information of interest and concern to older persons;
   (f)   Be actively involved in the development, implementation and monitoring
of the area plan;
   (g)   Hold public meetings on the area plans with no less than 30-day
notification to the general public and the aging constituency regarding dates,
time and location. Such notification shall contain understandable descriptions
of the Area Agency on Aging and community-level plans in order to promote
informed input; and
   (h)   Participate in the preparation of an annual report that gives its
recommendations to improve the lives of older persons, and a summary of its
activities for the previous year. The report shall be made available to the
Area Agency on Aging, the California Department on Aging, the California
Commission on Aging, and, insofar as resources permit, to all other interested
parties that seek a copy of the report.
In prescribing the above duties and functions of the Commission, it is not the
intent of the Board of Supervisors to duplicate or overlap the functions,
duties or responsibilities heretofore or hereafter assigned to any other County
Board or Commission or to a County Department. As to such functions or
responsibilities of another Board or Commission or of a Department of the
County, the Senior Affairs Commission will render assistance and advice to such
Board, Commission or County Department as may be requested.
(Ord. 1827, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2783, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3897,
passed - -2003)
§ 12.3309   Standing Committees.
   Standing committees of the Commission shall be at least the Executive
Committee, the Legislative Committee, and the Nutrition Committee. Other
committees of the Commission shall be as required to effectively carry out the
Commission duties as herein provided.
   The Executive Committee shall be composed of the Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson, Secretary, Standing Committee Chairpersons, with the Director of
the Department of Aging and Adult Services or his or her designee as advisor.
(Ord. 1827, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2783, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3139,
passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3897, passed - -2003)
CHAPTER 34: RISK MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
Section
   
12.3401   Risk Management Department Established.
   
12.3402   Risk Management Department Functions.
   
12.3403   Appointment of the Risk Manager.
   
12.3404   Filing of Claims.
   
12.3405   Authority of the Risk Manager.
   
12.3406   Self Insurance for Official Bonds.
§ 12.3401   Risk Management Department Established.
   There is hereby created and established a Risk Management Department.
(Ord. 2734, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3390, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3397,
passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.3402   Risk Management Department Functions.
   The purpose of the Risk Management Department is to provide protection for
the County’s assets by identifying risk exposure areas; by treating these areas
using methods of risk avoidance or reduction; by determining the best technique
or combination for treating such exposure that cannot be avoided or reduced,
such as risk retention, self-insurance, noninsurance and insurance on those
risks that are too great to assume.
(Ord. 2734, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3397, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 4368,
passed - -2019)
§ 12.3403   Appointment of the Risk Manager.
   The Risk Manager shall be appointed by the Chief Executive Officer and such
appointing authority power may be delegated in writing to an Assistant
Executive Officer or a Deputy Executive Officer.
(Ord. 2734, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3390, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3397,
passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.3404   Filing of Claims.
   All tort liability claims required to be presented to the County under the
provisions of the California Tort Claims Act of 1963 (Government Code §§ 900 et
seq.) shall be filed with the Risk Manager. For purposes of Government Code §
915 only, the Risk Manager is designated as a Deputy Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors. Any such claims received for filing by the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors shall be transmitted forthwith to the Risk Manager.
(Ord. 2734, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3397, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 4368,
passed - -2019)
§ 12.3405   Authority of the Risk Manager.
   (a)   The Risk Manager shall have the power to shut down any County or other
Board governed entity operation or facility which represents an imminent hazard
to County or other Board governed entity employees or to the public.
   (b)   The Risk Manager or his or her designee, with consent from the County
Counsel, is authorized to consent to the filing of a lawsuit, cross-complaint,
lien, or other legal action on behalf of San Bernardino County or other Board
governed entity to seek compensation for damage to property or personal injury
to a County or other Board governed entity employee occasioned in the course
and scope of the individual's employment.
   (c)   The Risk Manager or his or her designee is authorized to allow, deny,
compromise or settle any tort liability claim or lawsuit that is presented or
filed against San Bernardino County or other Board governed entity, its
officers or employees provided:
      (1)   The amount to be paid pursuant to such allowance, compromise or
settlement does not exceed $50,000; provided further, that if the matter is in
litigation, whether in a court of law or administrative proceeding, the
allowance, compromise or settlement is with the concurrence of the County
Counsel; and
      (2)   The claim or lawsuit is not subject to the terms of an insurance
policy wherein the insurer is granted the authority to allow, deny, compromise
or settle claims or actions within the scope of such policy.
   (d)   The Risk Manager or his or her designee is authorized to settle any
tort liability claim or lawsuit that is presented or filed by San Bernardino
County or other Board governed entity against any person or entity provided the
settlement is no more than $50,000 less than what is owed to the County or
other Board governed entity; provided further, that if the matter is in
litigation, whether in a court of law or administrative proceeding, the
compromise or settlement is with the concurrence of the County Counsel.
   (e)   The Risk Manager or his or her designee is authorized to negotiate and
settle any claim, lawsuit, lien, or other legal action that seeks to recover
money paid by San Bernardino County or other Board governed entity for workers'
compensation benefits provided:
      (1)   The County Counsel consents to the settlement terms; and
      (2)   Except when approved by the County Counsel, Chief Executive
Officer, and Chair of the Board of Supervisors, if the matter involves a claim
or lawsuit filed or presented against a third party by the employee who
received workers' compensation benefits, the County or other Board governed
entity shall not receive more than the lesser of: (i) Fifty percent of the
total amount to be paid to the employee by the third party in the settlement or
judgment; or (ii) An amount equal to fifty percent of the total amount of
workers' compensation benefits the County paid the employee.
   (f)   The Risk Manager or his or her designee is authorized to allow, deny,
compromise or settle a Workers' Compensation claim or lawsuit that is filed
against San Bernardino County or other Board governed entity provided:
      (1)   The claim or lawsuit is for benefits as defined under the Workers'
Compensation Laws of the State of California;
      (2)   The claim or lawsuit is not subject to the terms of an insurance
policy wherein the insurer is granted the authority to allow, deny, compromise
or settle claims or actions within the scope of such policy;
      (3)   That any such compromise or settlement is approved by the Workers'
Compensation Appeals Board (WCAB); and
      (4)   Except as hereinafter provided, the amount to be paid pursuant to
such compromise or settlement does not exceed $50,000; provided further, that
if the matter is in litigation, whether in a court of law or administrative
proceeding, the compromise or settlement is with the concurrence of County
Counsel or the attorney retained to represent San Bernardino County or other
Board governed entity. If the amount to be paid exceeds $50,000, the compromise
or settlement must be approved by the Board of Supervisors, unless the amount
of compromise or settlement is to meet State-mandated payments or benefits
under the Workers' Compensation Laws of the State of California such as WCAB-
approved lump sum payments for permanent disability, life pension, burial
expense and/or death benefits or unless the WCAB enters an award or other
judgment or order.
   (g)   In all claims or lawsuits that are allowed, compromised or settled,
the Auditor-Controller shall, upon written order of the Risk Manager or his or
her designee, and in accordance with the terms of such allowance, compromise or
settlement, cause the necessary warrant to be issued upon the Treasury of San
Bernardino County or other Board governed entity in an amount for which such
tort liability or Workers' Compensation claim or action has been allowed,
compromised or settled pursuant to this Section.
(Ord. 2734, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 2967, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 3397,
passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3942, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019;
Am. Ord. 4498, passed - -2025)
§ 12.3406   Self Insurance for Official Bonds.
   The self insurance program for the County of San Bernardino includes, and is
in lieu of, official bonds for any officer or employee employed by the County,
and for the officers or employees of any district governed by the Board of
Supervisors. The Risk Manager shall recommend that the Board of Supervisors
approve the purchase of bonds or insurance from commercial sources covering
risks included in official bonds when the Risk Manager deems it prudent to
supplement the self insurance program and protect the assets of the County.
(Ord. 3646, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
CHAPTER 35: HUMAN SERVICES GROUP
Section
   
12.3501   Human Services Group Established.
   
12.3502   Components of the Human Services Group.
   
12.3503   Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services.
   
12.3504   Appointment of the Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services.
   
12.3505   Responsibility of the Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services.
   
12.3506   Authority of the Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services.
§ 12.3501   Human Services Group Established.
   There is hereby created and established a Human Services Group of the County
of San Bernardino.
(Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.3502   Components of the Human Services Group.
   The Human Services Group shall consist of organizational units, which are
charged with providing public assistance on a Countywide basis to those
residents in need of various public services necessary to improve their
socioeconomic plight. The Human Services Group shall include the departments of
Child Support, Children and Family Services, Transitional Assistance, Preschool
Services, Aging and Adult Services, Veterans’ Affairs, Behavioral Health, and
Public Health. The Board of Supervisors may add or delete other organizational
units or functions as it deems appropriate. For purposes of Welfare and
Institutions Code § 10800, the Human Services Group shall be designated as the
County Welfare Department for the administration of public social services
provided under the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(Am. Ord. 4073, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.3503   Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services.
   The head of the Human Services Group shall be a County Officer in the
Unclassified Service and shall carry the title of Assistant Executive
Officer—Human Services.
(Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.3504   Appointment of the Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services.
   Appointment of the Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services will be made
by the Board of Supervisors.
(Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.3505   Responsibility of the Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services.
   The Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services will be responsible for the
Human Services Group and for establishing and administering policy and
procedures for the Human Services Group and its included organizational units
and shall coordinate and advise on human service programs with other County
organizational units and with representatives of business and industry. The
Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services will serve as assistant to the Chief
Executive Officer on matters related to public social services. Pursuant to
Welfare and Institutions Code § 10801, the Assistant Executive Officer—Human
Services shall be designated to serve as “County Director” of the County
departments and other organizational units providing and administering public
social services under §
12.3502 herein without additional compensation.
(Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
§ 12.3506   Authority of the Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services.
   (a)   The Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services shall be the appointing
authority over those employees within the Human Services Group whose
appointments are not otherwise provided for by the County Charter or general
law. The Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services shall have the power to
delegate in writing this appointing authority to his or her subordinates.
Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 10801, the Board of Supervisors is
the appointing authority of the “County Director” of the County departments
providing and administering public social services under §
12.3502 herein. Pursuant to Military and Veterans Code § 970, the Board of
Supervisors is the appointing authority of the County Veterans Service Officer.
   (b)   The Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services shall have the power of
general administrative supervision and coordination over the operations of each
department, division or district within the Human Services Group. The Assistant
Executive Officer—Human Services may direct such action as he or she deems
appropriate to exercise any power or jurisdiction or to assume or discharge any
responsibility, or to carry out or effect any of the purposes vested by law in
any officer, employee, department, division or district in the Human Services
Group, except as otherwise provided by the County Charter or general law.
   (c)   The Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services shall have the power to
reorganize the Human Services Group, or any department, division or district
within the Human Services Group, and in connection with such reorganization,
the Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services has the power to transfer
personnel from one department, division or district within the Human Services
Group to another.
   (d)   Subject to the overall supervision and direction of the Chief
Executive Officer, the Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services shall be
responsible for the preparation and compilation of the annual budget of the
Human Services Group and shall be responsible for its administration after
adoption.
   (e)   The Assistant Executive Officer—Human Services is authorized to
develop and implement County rules and procedures for welfare-to-work programs
consistent with the San Bernardino County CalWORKS Plan and State and Federal
law.
(Ord. 1871, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2809, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3390,
passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3679, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3710, passed - -1998;
Am. Ord. 3771, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3786, passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 3908,
passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 3936, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 3947, passed - -2005;
Am. Ord. 4368, passed - -2019)
CHAPTER 36: (REPEALED BY ORD. 4153, PASSED - -2011)
CHAPTER 37: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES
Section
   
12.3701   Termination of Office.
§ 12.3701   Termination of Office.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, and unless otherwise
provided by statute, the appointment of each person appointed to any board,
commission, or committee (including a municipal advisory council, but excluding
a joint powers authority) by an individual supervisor or by the Board of
Supervisors at the request and on the recommendation of an individual
supervisor shall expire when the supervisor appointing or recommending the
appointment leaves office, and the successor supervisor shall appoint or
recommend appointment of a person to serve the balance of the underlying term.
An incumbent appointee shall, however, hold over until his or her successor is
appointed. This Section shall not apply to joint powers authorities.
(Ord. 2702, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3075, passed - -1986)
CHAPTER 38: AFFIRMATIVE ACTION COMMISSION
Section
   
12.3801   Establishment of Commission.
   
12.3802   Compensation of Commission Members.
   
12.3803   Name of Commission.
§ 12.3801   Establishment of Commission.
   There is hereby established an Equal Opportunity Commission, which shall
succeed the Affirmative Action Commission and shall consist of 11 members who
shall be qualified electors of the County. Commissioners shall not hold any
paid County office or employment. All appointments to the Equal Opportunity
Commission shall be made by the Board of Supervisors and shall continue in
effect until a successor is appointed. Each Supervisor shall appoint two
members of the Equal Opportunity Commission. In addition, one member of the
Equal Opportunity Commission shall be appointed at large by the Board of
Supervisors. Members of the Equal Opportunity Commission shall be selected on
the basis of interest in upholding high standards of public service employment,
County productivity, and the fair treatment of County employees, as well as
knowledge of equal employment opportunity principles and personnel
administration. Equal Opportunity Commission members shall serve a term of four
years with terms of office which shall be staggered. Five of the initial
appointments by the Board of Supervisors to the Commission shall be for two
year terms to permit the terms of office of the Commission to be staggered.
Terms of office shall begin on January 1 of the appropriate year and end on the
last day of December. Commission members shall serve at the pleasure of the
Board member who is responsible for the appointment except that the member
appointed at large by the Board of Supervisors shall serve at the pleasure of a
majority of the Board of Supervisors. The Equal Opportunity Commission
responsibilities shall consist of monitoring and reviewing the equal employment
opportunity programs and advising the Board of Supervisors of progress in equal
employment opportunity. The Commission shall review and make recommendations on
the Equal Employment Opportunity Plan, amendments thereto, or any plan which
succeeds the Equal Employment Opportunity Plan. The Board of Supervisors may
establish guidelines for the Commission to follow in carrying out its
functions.
(Ord. 2825, passed --1984; Am. Ord. 3732, passed --1998; Am. Ord. 3892, passed
--2003; Am. Ord. 4148, passed - -2011)
§ 12.3802   Compensation of Commission Members.
   Members of the Equal Opportunity Action Commission shall be compensated for
attendance at Commission meetings at the rate of $75.00 per meeting.
(Ord. 2825, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 3366, passed - -1989)
§ 12.3803   Name of Commission.
   The Affirmative Action Commission shall be known as the Equal Opportunity
Commission. All references in this Code to the Affirmative Action Commission
shall be interpreted to mean the Equal Opportunity Commission.
(Ord. 3527, passed - -1992)
CHAPTER 39: OFFICE OF COUNTY SAFETY AND SECURITY
Section
   
12.3901   Office of County Safety and Security Established.
   
12.3902   Director of County Safety and Security
   
12.3903   Appointment of the Director of County Safety and Security.
   
12.3904   Responsibilities of the Director of the County Safety and Security.
   
12.3905   Authority of the Director of County Safety and Security.
   
12.3906   (Repealed by Ord. 4306, passed - -2016).
§ 12.3901   Office of County Safety and Security Established.
   There is hereby created and established an Office of County Safety and
Security of the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 3595, passed - -1995)
§ 12.3902   Director of County Safety and Security.
   The Director of County Safety and Security shall be a County officer in the
Unclassified Service and shall be responsible and have authority for the Office
of County Safety and Security.
(Ord. 3595, passed - -1995)
§ 12.3903   Appointment of the Director of County Safety and Security.
   The appointment of the Director of County Safety and Security shall be made
by the County Administrative Officer.
(Ord. 3595, passed - -1995)
§ 12.3904   Responsibilities of the Director of County Safety and Security.
   The Director of County Safety and Security shall be responsible for
coordinating the administrative activities of, and for establishing and
implementing administrative policy and procedures for the Office of County
Safety and Security.
(Ord. 3595, passed - -1995)
§ 12.3905   Authority of the Director of County Safety and Security.
   (a)   The Director of County Safety and Security shall be the appointing
authority over those employees within the Office of County Safety and Security
whose appointment is not otherwise provided for by charter or general law. The
Director of County Safety and Security shall have the power to delegate in
writing this appointing authority.
   (b)   The Director of County Safety and Security shall have the power of
general administrative supervision and coordination over the operations within
the Office of County Safety and Security. The Director of County Safety and
Security may direct such actions as he or she deems appropriate to exercise any
power or jurisdiction or to assume or discharge any responsibility vested in
him or her by this Chapter.
   (c)   Subject to the general direction of the County Administrative Officer,
the Director of County Safety and Security shall be responsible for the
preparation and compilation of the annual budget of the Office of County Safety
and Security and shall be responsible for its administration after adoption.
(Ord. 3595, passed - -1995)
§ 12.3906   (Repealed by Ord. 4306, passed - -2016).
CHAPTER 39b: (DELETED BY ORD. 3896, PASSED - -2003)
CHAPTER 40: OFFICE OF REVENUE RECOVERY
Section
   
12.4001   Office of Revenue Recovery Established.
   
12.4002   Director of Revenue Recovery.
   
12.4003   Responsibilities of the Director of Revenue Recovery.
   
12.4004   Authority of the Director of Revenue Recovery.
§ 12.4001   Office of Revenue Recovery Established.
   There is hereby created and established an Office of Revenue Recovery of San
Bernardino County, as a subordinate Division of the constituent department
denominated as the Office of the Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector
(formerly the Office of Central Collections, Ord. 3662, passed – 1996), to
provide credit and collection services for County departments, the Arrowhead
Regional Medical Center and the San Bernardino County Superior Court. The
Office of Revenue Recovery shall be referred to as the Revenue Recovery
Division.
(Ord. 4420, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4002   Director of Revenue Recovery.
   The Director of Revenue Recovery shall be the elected Auditor-Controller/
Treasurer/Tax Collector, and shall be responsible and have authority for the
Revenue Recovery Division.
(Ord. 4420, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4003   Responsibilities of the Director of Revenue Recovery.
   The Director of Revenue Recovery shall be responsible for coordinating the
administrative activities of, and for establishing and implementing
administrative policy and procedures for, the Revenue Recovery Division. The
Director of Revenue Recovery will be responsible to provide credit and
collection services for County departments, the Arrowhead Regional Medical
Center and the San Bernardino County Superior Court, as well as accounting and
collections distributions of fines, forfeitures and penalties to other
governmental entities for the Court-ordered portions collected.
(Ord. 4420, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4004   Authority of the Director of Revenue Recovery.
   (a)   The Director of Revenue Recovery shall be the appointing authority
over those employees within the Revenue Recovery Division whose appointment is
not otherwise provided for by Charter or General Law. The Director of Revenue
Recovery shall have the power to delegate in writing this appointing authority.
   (b)   The Director of Revenue Recovery shall have the power of general
administrative supervision and coordination over the operations within the
Revenue Recovery Division. The Director of Revenue Recovery may direct such
action as he or she deems appropriate to exercise any power or jurisdiction or
to assume or discharge any responsibility vested in him or her by this Chapter.
   (c)   Subject to the general direction of the County Chief Executive
Officer, the Director of Revenue Recovery shall be responsible for the
preparation and compilation of the annual budget of the Revenue Recovery
Division and shall be responsible for its administration after adoption.
(Ord. 4420, passed - -2021)
CHAPTER 41: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
12.4101   Establishment.
   
12.4105   Appointment of Members.
   
12.4110   Term of Office.
   
12.4115   Stipend and Expenses.
   
12.4120   Functions.
   
12.4125   Procedures.
§ 12.4101   Establishment.
   Pursuant to the provisions of the California Government Code, there is
established a Planning Commission for the County of San Bernardino, State of
California.
(Ord. 3698, passed - -1997)
§ 12.4105   Appointment of Members.
   (a)   The Planning Commission shall consist of five members. The Board of
Supervisors shall appoint one member for each supervisorial district, who has
been recommended and nominated by the supervisor from that district. Each
appointment shall be by majority vote of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   In compliance with Public Utilities Code § 21670.1, when a decision
involving land use and/or a development project located within the boundaries
of an airport comprehensive land use plan, an airport land use compatibility
plan or similarly entitled plan, and the Planning Commission is acting in the
capacity of an Airport Land Use Commission, the Planning Commission shall be
augmented with two members who have expertise in aviation as defined in the
Public Utilities Code § 21670(e). The two additional members of the Planning
Commission shall be chosen from the appointed membership of the County Airports
Commission as described in Chapter 16 of this division and title. The members
of the Airports Commission selected to augment the Planning Commission shall
include one member that represents the Supervisorial District in which the
development project is located, if feasible. The other member, or both members
if it is not feasible to include one member that represents the Supervisorial
District in which the development project is located, shall be chosen by the
Airports Commission on a rotational basis and considering a member's
availability. This augmentation shall be required even if the Planning
Commission already has as part of its regular membership one member who has
expertise in aviation. If the Planning Commission already has as part of its
regular membership two members who have expertise in aviation, the Commission
shall not be augmented with additional members.
(Ord. 3698, passed --1997; Am. Ord. 4071, passed - -2009)
§ 12.4110   Term of Office.
   (a)   Pursuant to San Bernardino County Code §
12.3701, the appointment of a commissioner shall expire on the date that the
Supervisor who recommended the appointment leaves office, while the underlying
term shall continue pursuant to Subdivision (b) below.
   (b)   Each term of office for a planning commissioner position shall be four
years, commencing on February 1 and ending on January 31 of the fourth
succeeding year. The terms of office for commissioners for the Section and
Fourth Supervisorial Districts shall expire on January 31, 1999, and on January
31 of each fourth succeeding year thereafter. The terms of office for
commissioners for the First, Third and Fifth Supervisorial Districts shall
expire on January 31, 2001, and on January 31 of each fourth succeeding year
thereafter.
   (c)   Notwithstanding Subdivisions (a) and (b) above, any member of the
Planning Commission may be removed from the Commission at any time on the
motion of the supervisor who nominated the commissioner, approved by majority
vote of the Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   The eligibility of any member of the Airports Commission to augment
the Planning Commission for review of any development project located within
the boundaries of an airport comprehensive land use plan, an airport land use
compatibility plan or similarly entitled plan shall cease at the expiration of
the term of appointment of that Airport Commissioner in accordance with §
12.1603 of this division and title.
(Ord. 3698, passed --1997; Am. Ord. 4071, passed - -2009)
§ 12.4115   Stipend and Expenses.
   Planning Commissioners shall receive a stipend and expenses for their
attendance at each meeting in a sum to be fixed by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 3698, passed - -1997)
§ 12.4120   Functions.
   The functions of the Planning Commission shall be as set forth in the
California Government Code, San Bernardino County Code and County policy.
(Ord. 3698, passed - -1997)
§ 12.4125   Procedures.
   Rules adopted by the Planning Commission for the time, place and conduct of
its meetings shall take effect upon ratification by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 3698, passed - -1997)
CHAPTER 42: IN-HOME SUPPORTIVE SERVICES PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Section
   
12.4201   Establishment of In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority.
   
12.4202   Purpose.
   
12.4203   Board of Directors.
   
12.4204   Officers and Administrative Employees of the In-Home Support Services
Public Authority.
   
12.4205   Meetings; Quorum; Minutes; Bylaws.
   
12.4206   Annual Budget.
   
12.4207   Powers.
   
12.4208   Duties.
   
12.4209   Fiscal Provisions.
   
12.4210   Annual Report and Plan.
   
12.4211   Establishment of In-Home Supportive Services Advisory Committee.
   
12.4212   Termination.
   
12.4213   Enumeration of Powers.
   
12.4214   Severability.
§ 12.4201   Establishment of In-Home Supportive Services Public Authority.
   As authorized by Welfare and Institutions Code § 12302.25, the Board of
Supervisors for the County of San Bernardino (hereinafter Board of Supervisors)
hereby establishes a public authority whose powers are derived from and are
consistent with the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code § 12301.6. The
name of this public authority shall be the San Bernardino County In-Home
Supportive Services Public Authority, and shall be referred to in this Chapter
as the “IHSS PA.” The IHSS PA shall be governed by a Board of Directors as
provided in §
12.4203 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4202   Purpose.
   The purpose of the IHSS PA is to act as the employer for San Bernardino In-
Home Supportive Services (hereinafter IHSS) providers pursuant to Welfare and
Institutions Code § 12301.6(c)(1) and to perform other IHSS functions as
required by Welfare and Institutions Code § 12301.6(e) and not retained by the
County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4203   Board of Directors.
   (a)   Board of Directors. The governing body of the IHSS PA shall be the
Board of Directors comprised of five members who shall be the members of the
Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. A Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson
shall be elected at the first regular meeting of the Board of Directors in each
odd numbered calendar year, and shall hold office for two year terms and until
their successors are appointed. The Chairperson shall sign all contracts on
behalf of the IHSS PA, unless the bylaws provide otherwise, and shall perform
such other duties as may be imposed by the Board of Directors in the bylaws.
The Vice-Chairperson shall sign contracts and perform all of the Chairperson’s
duties in the absence of the Chairperson.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 3998, passed - -2006)
§ 12.4204   Officers and Administrative Employees of the In-Home Supportive
Services Public Authority.
   (a)   IHSS PA Executive Director. The Executive Director of the IHSS PA
shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Board of Directors and shall serve
at the pleasure of the Board of Directors. The Board of Directors shall further
provide for the duties and responsibilities of the Executive Director in the
bylaws.
   (b)   Secretary. The Board of Directors shall appoint a Secretary to the
Board. The Secretary shall serve at the pleasure of the Board. The Secretary
shall be responsible to the Board for the call and noticing of the meetings
pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code §§ 54950 et seq.). The
Secretary shall have charge of, handle and have access to all records, other
than those held by the Treasurer, of the Board. The Board shall further provide
for the duties and responsibilities of the Secretary in the bylaws.
   (c)   Treasurer. The San Bernardino County Auditor-Controller is hereby
designated as the Treasurer of the IHSS PA. The Treasurer shall be the
depository, shall have custody of all of the accounts, funds and money of the
IHSS PA from whatever source, and shall assure strict accountability of all
funds and reporting of all receipts and disbursements of the IHSS PA. The
Treasurer shall make arrangements with a certified public accountant or firm of
certified public accountants for the annual audit of accounts and records of
the IHSS PA. The Treasurer shall serve without any additional bond. The
Treasurer shall have charge of, handle and have access to all accounts, funds
and money of the IHSS PA.
   (d)   Provision for Officers and Administrative Employees. Pursuant to §
12.4207, the IHSS PA shall have the power and authority to either establish
itself as an employer or contract with the County for various administrative
personnel, including the Executive Director. Should the IHSS PA decide to
contract with the County of San Bernardino for such personnel, the IHSS PA
shall be responsible for the duties, responsibilities and performance of such
personnel. Legal services shall be provided through the Office of the San
Bernardino County Counsel, unless that Office recommends the retention of other
legal services. The IHSS PA shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
County and its authorized officers, employees and agents and volunteers from
any and all claims, actions, losses, damages, and/or liability arising out of
the County’s provision of personnel to the IHSS PA.
      All of the privileges and immunities from liability, exemption from laws,
ordinances and rules, and all pension, relief, disability, workers’
compensation and other benefits, which apply to the activities of officers,
agents, or employees of a public agency when performing their respective
functions, shall apply to the officers, agents or employees of the IHSS PA to
the same degree and extent while engaged in the performance of any of the
functions and other duties of such officers, agents or employees under this
Chapter.
   None of the officers, agents, or employees under contract with the County,
or directly employed by the Board of Directors, shall be deemed to be employed
by the County or, by reason of their employment by the Board, to be subject to
any of the requirements of the County.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4205   Meetings; Quorum; Minutes; Bylaws.
   (a)   Meetings of the Board of Directors.
      (1)   Regular Meetings. The Board of Directors shall hold at least one
regular meeting each quarter of every year. The date, hour and place of the
regular meetings shall be fixed by action of the Board of Directors and
contained in the bylaws.
      (2)   Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Board of Directors may be
called in accordance with the provisions of Government Code § 54956.
      (3)   Call, Notice and Conduct of Meetings. All meetings of the Board of
Directors, including without limitation, regular, adjourned regular and special
meetings, shall be called, noticed, held and conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code §§ 54950 et seq.).
   (b)   Quorum. A majority of the Board of Directors shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business, except that less than a quorum may adjourn
from time to time. The affirmative votes of at least a majority of the
Directors present at any meeting at which a quorum is present shall be required
to take any action by the Board.
   (c)   Minutes. The Secretary shall cause to be kept minutes of the meetings
of the Board, and shall, as soon as possible after each meeting, cause a copy
of the minutes to be forwarded to each member of the Board of Directors.
   (d)   Bylaws. The Board of Directors shall adopt, from time to time, bylaws
for the conduct of its meetings and, as necessary, for administration of this
Chapter. The Board may adopt, from time to time, additional resolutions, rules,
regulations, and policies for the conduct of its meetings and, as necessary,
for administration of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4206   Annual Budget.
   The Board of Directors shall adopt an annual budget for each fiscal year.
The bylaws shall further provide for the presentation and content of the budget
as well as an annual fiscal report by the Treasurer.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4207   Powers.
   (a)   The IHSS PA shall be an entity separate from the County and shall file
the Statement of Fact for the Roster of Public Agencies required by Government
Code § 53051.
   (b)   The IHSS PA shall be a corporate public body, exercising public and
essential governmental functions with all powers necessary and convenient to
carry out the delivery of IHSS, including the power to contract for services
pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 12302 and 12302.1, subject to any
limitations set forth in this Chapter.
   (c)   Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 12301.6(f)(3), the County
shall be immune from any liability resulting from its implementation of said
Section in the administration of the IHSS Program. Any obligation or legal
liability of the IHSS PA, whether statutory, contractual or otherwise, shall be
the obligation or liability solely of the IHSS PA and shall not be the
obligation or liability of the County. All contracts between the IHSS PA and
third parties shall contain an express provision advising the contractor(s)
that the IHSS PA is a separate governmental entity and that such agreement does
not bind the County.
   (d)   All contracts, leases, or other agreements of any nature, including
collective bargaining agreements, between the IHSS PA and any party, except
those with the County, shall contain the following statement: “The IHSS PA is
an independent legal entity, separate and apart from the County. The IHSS PA
has no power to bind the County to any contractual or legal obligations, nor
may the obligees of the IHSS PA seek recourse against the County for any
financial or legal obligations of the IHSS PA.”
   (e)   Employees of the IHSS PA shall not be employees of the County for any
purpose.
   (f)   The IHSS PA shall be deemed to be the employer of IHSS providers
referred to consumers from the registry pursuant to Welfare and Institutions
Code §§ 12301.6(c)(1) and (h) and 12302.25 for the limited purpose of
collective bargaining within the meaning of Government Code §§ 3500 et seq.,
commonly known as the Meyers-Milias-Brown Act. The IHSS PA shall not be deemed
to be the employer of IHSS providers under this Chapter for purposes of
liability, including but not limited to, the negligence or intentional torts of
the IHSS providers.
   (g)   Nothing in these enumerated powers shall be construed to limit or
interfere with the consumers’ right to retain, select, terminate, and direct
the work of any IHSS provider providing services to them, pursuant to Welfare
and Institutions Code § 12302.25(a).
   (h)   Nothing in these enumerated powers shall be construed to alter,
require the alteration of, or interfere with the state’s payroll system and
other provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code § 12302.2 for IHSS providers,
or to affect the state’s responsibilities with respect to unemployment
insurance, or workers’ compensation for IHSS providers.
   (i)   The IHSS PA shall maintain general liability insurance in an amount
determined to be adequate by the Board of Directors, and shall name the County
as an additional insured.
   (j)   The Board of Directors as the governing body of the IHSS PA may hire
staff, and adopt rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Chapter, in order to implement and interpret this Chapter.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4208   Duties.
   Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 12301.6, the IHSS PA shall
provide for the following functions:
   (a)   Assist consumers in finding IHSS providers through the establishment
of a registry;
   (b)   Investigate the qualifications and background of potential IHSS
providers listed in the registry;
   (c)   Establish a referral system under which potential IHSS providers are
made known to consumers;
   (d)   Provide for training for IHSS providers and consumers. The IHSS PA
shall only pay for training that it provides directly, has contracted for, or
for which it has provided prior payment approval. The IHSS PA may not require
that any IHSS provider or consumer attend or complete any training;
   (e)   Ensure the requirements of the personal care option pursuant to
Subchapter 19 (commencing with § 1396) of Chapter 7 of Title 42 of the United
States Code are met;
   (f)   Perform any other function related to the delivery of IHSS, unless
otherwise prohibited by this Chapter;
   (g)   The IHSS PA shall not have the authority to determine a consumer’s
eligibility for IHSS PA or the number of hours of services each eligible
consumer shall receive. Such duties shall be reserved to the County. The County
and the IHSS PA shall not reduce authorized hours of service to consumers in
order to fund the IHSS PA, fund wage and/or benefit increases to IHSS
providers, or comply with Government Code §§ 3500 et seq.;
   (h)   The IHSS PA shall provide the County with information necessary for
the County to bill the California Department of Social Services for the State
and Federal share of the IHSS PA costs;
   (i)   The IHSS PA shall assist the County in developing and submitting the
information and documentation necessary to obtain approval from the California
Departments of Social Services and Health Services for the IHSS PA’s
reimbursement rate and any rate adjustment.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4209   Fiscal Provisions.
   (a)   The IHSS Program is a Federal and State funded program with differing
levels of required County matching funds. The establishment and operation of
IHSS PA or application of Government Code §§ 3500 et seq. shall not result in
payments from the County’s general fund beyond the County’s annual
appropriation for the IHSS PA, if any, which shall be an absolute limit on
County cost.
   (b)   The IHSS PA shall seek to maximize the benefit of any available new or
increased non-County matching Federal or State funds authorized for IHSS.
   (c)   The total of all operating costs, wages and benefits proposed or
established by the IHSS PA must be consistent with the provisions of the County
budget. The IHSS PA may not establish a payment rate that includes the costs of
wages, benefits and operation, until the governing body of the IHSS PA makes a
finding that the funds necessary for payment of that rate are legally
available.
   (d)   The IHSS PA shall adopt its budget under the same laws and policies
that control the County budget process.
   (e)   The IHSS PA shall not spend funds or contractually, or otherwise,
obligate funds in excess of the limits of its budget as set out in this
Chapter.
   (f)   The IHSS PA shall not have the authority to agree to, or approve any
collective bargaining, or other agreement, that requires an increase in wages
or economic benefits, or results in costs, unless there is a State and/or
Federal funding match for such increase. The IHSS Program shall not be reduced
in order to fund the IHSS PA or wage and benefit increases to IHSS providers.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4210   Annual Report and Plan.
   The IHSS PA shall submit annually a report to the Board of Supervisors
detailing its functions, evaluating its operations for that year, and detailing
any specific goals and objectives for the coming year and its plan for meeting
those goals and objectives. If, for any coming year, the IHSS PA intends to
expand its duties, the IHSS PA shall present a detailed plan and budget for the
implementation of that expansion of duties. Such plan shall be circulated to
all interested County departments and community groups prior to presentation to
the Board of Supervisors for its approval.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4211   Establishment of In-Home Supportive Services Advisory Committee.
   The Board of Supervisors hereby establishes an IHSS Advisory Committee whose
powers are derived from and are consistent with the provisions of Welfare and
Institutions Code §§ 12301.4 and 12301.6.
   Because the County’s In-Home Supportive Services Advisory Committee
established by the Board of Supervisors by Res. 2000-244 was established in
compliance with the requirements of the Welfare and Institutions Code § 12301.6
(b)(3)(C) and (D), it meets the hereinafter provided requirements and its
members shall comprise the initial members of the IHSS Advisory Committee
provided by this Section. The IHSS Advisory Committee members and alternates
appointed under the above Resolution shall complete their current terms
pursuant to this Section. All new appointments shall be made pursuant to this
Section and shall be residents of the County of San Bernardino.
   (a)   Duties. Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 12301.3, 12301.4,
and 12302.25, the IHSS Advisory Committee shall submit recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors on the preferred mode or modes of service to be utilized
in the County for in-home supportive services and shall provide ongoing advice
and recommendations regarding in-home supportive services to the Board of
Supervisors, any administrative body in the County that provides the delivery
and administration of in-home supportive services, and the Board of Directors.
The IHSS Advisory Committee shall meet no less than quarterly.
   (b)   Voting Members. The IHSS Advisory Committee shall be comprised of not
more than 11 voting members of which no less than 50 percent shall be current
or past users of personal assistance services paid for through public or
private funds (“Required Composition”), including the IHSS program. The
Director of the County Department of Aging and Adult Services (hereinafter
DAAS), or his or her designee, shall be appointed as a voting member of the
Committee upon the first vacancy of an initial member, which maintains the
Required Composition. The Director of DAAS shall designate a County employee to
provide ongoing advice and support to the IHSS Advisory Committee. Members of
the Advisory Committee, excluding the Director, or designee, of DAAS, shall be
appointed by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors.
   (c)   Term of Office. The voting members shall hold office for two years,
and may be reappointed for an additional two years. The initial terms of the
members shall be for one or two years as determined by the Board of Supervisors
at the time of appointment to allow for staggered terms. The members of the
IHSS Advisory Committee shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Supervisors.
   (d)   Alternate Members. The IHSS Advisory Committee shall also be comprised
of five alternate members appointed by a majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors.
      (1)   Alternate members shall serve for a one year term, and may be
reappointed for an additional one year term. The alternate members shall serve
at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors. Alternate members shall fulfill
the same duties as voting members, except alternate members shall not vote on
any matters before the IHSS Advisory Committee.
      (2)   An alternate member shall be appointed to fulfill any vacancy in
the voting membership where the member whose position was vacated has a
remaining unexpired term. Following appointment to the vacant voting member
position, the alternate member shall assume the full duties of a voting member.
   (e)   Compensation. Voting and alternate members of the Committee shall be
entitled to the stipend provided for in County Code §
13.0618(a).
   (f)   Funding. Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 12301.4, the
County is eligible to receive State and/or Federal reimbursements of IHSS
Advisory Committee’s administrative costs.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4212   Termination.
   (a)   Termination of the IHSS PA. By repeal of this Chapter, the Board of
Supervisors may abolish the IHSS PA.
   (b)   Distribution of Assets upon Termination. Upon repeal of this Chapter
and after resolution of all debts, liabilities and obligations, all property,
both real and personal, of the IHSS PA shall be automatically transferred to
the County.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4213   Enumeration of Powers.
   The enumeration of powers in this Chapter of some of the provisions of
Welfare and Institutions Code § 12301.6 shall not be interpreted as manifesting
the intent of the Board of Supervisors to subject either the County or the IHSS
PA to duties or liabilities not imposed by that statute.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
§ 12.4214   Severability.
   (a)   If any provision of this Chapter, or the application of any such
provision to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, the remainder
of this Chapter, to the extent it can be given effect, or the application of
those provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is
held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and to this end the provisions of
this Chapter are severable.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Subdivision (a), if any provision of
this Chapter imposing limitations or restrictions on the IHSS PA, or the powers
or duties of the IHSS PA, including the ability of the IHSS PA to propose or
establish payment rates, shall be held invalid, the provisions of this Chapter
shall not be deemed severable and this Chapter shall be held invalid in its
entirety.
(Ord. 3842, passed - -2002)
CHAPTER 43: CAMPAIGN FINANCE REFORM
Section
   
12.4301   Name of Chapter.
   
12.4302   Purpose of the Chapter.
   
12.4303   Relationship to the Political Reform Act of 1974.
   
12.4304   Definitions.
   
12.4305   Contribution Limit.
   
12.4306   Contribution Through Intermediary and Disclosure.
   
12.4307   Aggregation of Contributions.
   
12.4308   Reasonable Diligence and Disclosure of Aggregated Contributions.
   
12.4309   Candidate’s Own Contributions; Family Contributions.
   
12.4310   Intra-Candidate Transfer of Funds.
   
12.4311   Electronic Filing of Campaign Statements.
   
12.4312   Non-Application to Other Elections and Recall Elections.
   
12.4313   Maintenance and Access to Records.
   
12.4314   San Bernardino County Campaign Accountability Commission.
   
12.4315   Qualifications of Commissioners.
   
12.4316   Violations and Enforcement—Administrative.
   
12.4317   Construction.
   
12.4318   Officeholder Accounts.
   
12.4319   Effective Date.
§ 12.4301   Name of Chapter.
   This Chapter shall be known and cited as the "San Bernardino County Campaign
Finance Reform Ordinance" or the "Campaign Finance Reform Ordinance."
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4302   Purpose of the Chapter.
   The United States Supreme Court has held that the purpose of a campaign
reform ordinance must be to reduce corruption or the appearance of corruption
in the electoral process, and that corruption in this context means "quid pro
quo" corruption, that is, the contribution of money or resources for political
favors. This Chapter does this primarily in three ways. First, this Chapter
establishes a limit on the amount that individuals and entities may contribute
to candidates for elective County office and their controlled committees.
Second, with respect to such elections, this Chapter prohibits the hiding of
the identity of contributors through the making of contributions via
intermediaries without disclosure. Such contributions are attributed to the
real contributor and subject to the contribution limit. Third, with respect to
all elections under the jurisdiction of the Registrar of Voters, this Chapter
provides optional electronic filing opportunities, in lieu of paper filing, for
any elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required by the
Political Reform Act to file statements, reports, or other documents with the
Registrar of Voters. All of these requirements are intended to make it more
difficult for candidates and influential individuals and entities to engage in
quid pro quo corruption, to make the financing of campaigns for elective office
more transparent, and to make more information, especially financial
information, regarding candidates and their supporters available to voters.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4370,
passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4479, passed - -2024)
§ 12.4303   Relationship to the Political Reform Act of 1974.
   (a)   The Political Reform Act, as amended and codified, already establishes
certain minimum reporting and other requirements for candidates and certain
committees making independent and other expenditures. The Political Reform Act
establishes contribution limits for candidates for State office and for county
offices if a county has not enacted a contribution limit for county offices.
   (b)   Unless a word or term is specifically defined in this Chapter or the
contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, words and terms shall
have the same meaning as when they are used in the Political Reform Act, as
amended and codified, and in the related regulations of the Fair Political
Practices Commission.
   (c)   If any provision of this Chapter prevents any candidate or person from
complying with the Political Reform Act, such provision is preempted by the
Political Reform Act to the extent necessary to bring this Chapter into full
compliance therewith.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4304 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, certain words are defined as follows:
   CANDIDATE. Any individual who is a candidate for Supervisor, Sheriff/
Coroner/Public Administrator, District Attorney, Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/
Tax Collector, Assessor-Recorder, County Superintendent of Schools, or any
other elective County office. Such office would include any elected County
offices that have been consolidated or later separated. The provisions of
Government Code § 82007 shall also apply to such individual.
   COUNTY. San Bernardino County.
   ELECTION. A primary, general, special, or recall election. Each of these is
a separate election for purposes of this Chapter.
   ELECTIVE OFFICER. An individual who is a Supervisor, Sheriff/Coroner/Public
Administrator, District Attorney, Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector,
Assessor-Recorder, County Superintendent of Schools, or holder of any other
elective County office.
   ENTITY. Any person, other than an individual.
   INDIVIDUAL. A human being.
   OFFICEHOLDER. An elective officer.
   OFFICEHOLDER ACCOUNT. The bank account established at a financial
institution located in the State of California pursuant to §
12.4318.
   OFFICEHOLDER CONTROLLED COMMITTEE. A committee formed pursuant to §
12.4318(c).
   OFFICEHOLDER FUNDS. Money in the officeholder account.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture,
syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, limited liability company,
association, committee, and any other organization or group of persons acting
in concert.
   SPONSOR. Any entity that sponsors a committee. A candidate or other
individual may not sponsor a committee. An entity sponsors a committee if any
of the following applies:
      (1)   The committee receives 80 percent or more of its contributions from
the entity or its members, officers, employees, or shareholders.
      (2)   The entity collects contributions for the committee by use of
payroll deductions or dues from its members, officers, or employees.
      (3)   The entity, alone or in combination with other organizations,
provides all or nearly all of the administrative services for the committee.
      (4)   The entity, alone or in combination with other organizations, sets
the policies for soliciting contributions or making expenditures of committee
funds.
   SPONSORED COMMITTEE. A committee, other than a controlled committee, which
has one or more sponsors.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Ord. 4350, passed -
-2018; Am. Ord. 4479, passed - -2024)
§ 12.4305 Contribution Limit.
   (a)   Limit on Contributions to a Candidate or a Candidate's Controlled
Committee. A person may not make to a candidate or the candidate's controlled
committee, and a candidate or the candidate's controlled committee may not
accept from a person, any contribution or contributions totaling more than
$10,000 per calendar year, except as further provided in this Section.
   (b)   A political party committee may contribute up to $100,000 to a
candidate per calendar year. A candidate may not accept more than $100,000 from
political party committees per calendar year.
   (c)   If a candidate does not receive more than 50% of the vote in the
primary election and the candidate's name will appear on the ballot in the
general election, the contribution limits contained in subsection (a) are
doubled for that year.
   (d)   Beginning on January 1, 2025, the campaign contribution limits shall
be increased by five (5) percent on January 1 of every odd-numbered year. The
adjustment shall be rounded up to the nearest one hundred dollars ($100) and
shall be effective on January 1 of the odd-numbered year. The Registrar of
Voters shall maintain a record of any increased contribution limits pursuant to
this subsection and shall make such record available to the public and all
candidates.
   (e)   Return of Contribution in Excess of Limits.
      (1)   A monetary contribution or contributions that exceed the limits of
§
12.4305(a) - (d), shall be returned prior to deposit or negotiation, within 14
days of receipt.
      (2)   Any contributions returned pursuant to this section shall be deemed
not to have been accepted within the meaning of that provision and are not
subject to review by the San Bernardino County Campaign Accountability
Commission.
      (3)   A non-monetary contribution shall be returned by returning to the
contributor, within the deadline specified in §
12.4305(e)(1), any of the following: the non-monetary contribution; its
monetary equivalent; the monetary amount by which the value of the non-monetary
contribution exceeds the contribution limits of §
12.4305(a) - (d).
      (4)   Subdivision (e) shall not be construed to authorize the making or
solicitation of any contribution in excess of the contribution limits of §
12.4305(a) - (d).
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4306 Contribution Through Intermediary and Disclosure.
   With respect to contributions earmarked for a candidate or contributions
made to a candidate through a person acting on behalf of another or acting as
the intermediary or agent of another, the contributors, intermediaries, agents,
committees, and recipients of such contributions shall comply with all
disclosure, reporting, and other requirements of Government Code §§ 84302 and
85704.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4336,
passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4479, passed - -2024)
§ 12.4307 Aggregation of Contributions.
   (a)   For purposes of the contribution limit and reporting requirements of
this Chapter, the contributions from certain combinations of individuals and
entities must be added together to determine the total amount that will be
treated as made by, and received from, a single contributor. Such aggregated
amount shall not exceed the contribution limit established under §
12.4305.
   (b)   Contributions of an Entity Treated as Contributions of an Individual.
      (1)   The contributions of an entity whose contributions are directed and
controlled by an individual shall also be treated as the contributions of the
individual.
      (2)   The contributions of an entity whose contributions are directed and
controlled by two or more individuals shall also be treated as the
contributions, on a pro rata basis, of the individuals.
      (3)   The contributions of an entity that is majority-owned by an
individual shall also be treated as the contributions of the individual, unless
the entity acts independently in its decision to make the contributions.
   (c)   Contributions of an Entity Treated as Contributions of Another Entity.
      (1)   The contributions of an entity whose contributions are directed and
controlled by an individual shall also be treated as the contributions of any
other entity whose contributions are directed and controlled by the same
individual.
      (2)   The contributions of an entity whose contributions are directed and
controlled by a majority of persons shall also be treated as the contributions
of all other entities whose contributions are directed and controlled by the
same majority of persons.
      (3)   The contributions of an entity that is majority-owned by a person
shall also be treated as the contributions of all other entities majority owned
by the same person, unless the entity acts independently in its decision to
make the contributions.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4308 Reasonable Diligence and Disclosure of Aggregated Contributions.
   (a)   Candidates, their controlled committees and treasurers, and any person
must exercise reasonable diligence to determine whether a particular
contribution must be aggregated with another contribution by operation of any
provision of this Chapter or law.
   (b)   Any person who makes a contribution that is subject to aggregation by
operation of any provision of this Chapter or law shall, at the time of making
the contribution, disclose in writing to the candidate, or to the candidate's
controlled committee, the existence of all other contributions that must be
aggregated with such contribution. This requirement does not relieve the
candidate and the candidate's controlled committee and treasurer of the
obligations under §
12.4308(a) or law.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4309 Candidate’s Own Contributions; Family Contributions.
   (a)   Contribution of Candidate's Own Funds. The provisions of §
12.4305 do not apply to a candidate's contributions of his or her personal
funds or community property to his or her campaign.
   (b)   Contribution of Spouses or Domestic Partners. For purposes of this
Chapter, a single contribution made by both spouses or by both registered
domestic partners shall not be aggregated but shall be divided equally between
both spouses or between both domestic partners.
   (c)   Contribution of Minor. A contribution made by a child less than 18
years of age is presumed to be a contribution from the parent or guardian of
the child. For contribution tracking purposes, if the parents or guardians of
the child are married or have joint legal custody of child, the contribution
shall be divided equally between them. If one parent or guardian has primary or
sole legal custody of the child, then the contribution shall be attributed to
that parent or guardian. The committee or candidate accepting a contribution
from a child under the age of 18 shall obtain the information concerning
parental or guardian attribution.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4310 Intra-Candidate Transfer of Funds.
   (a)   A candidate for a non-County office may transfer campaign funds from
one controlled committee for a non-County office to a controlled committee for
a County office for the same candidate. Contributions transferred shall be
attributed to specific contributors using a "last in, first out" or "first in,
first out" accounting method, and these attributed contributions when
aggregated with all other contributions from the same contributor may not
exceed the limits set forth in §
12.4305.
   (b)   Notwithstanding §
12.4310(a), a candidate for County office may spend contributions raised in
connection with one election to County office to pay campaign expenditures
incurred in connection with a subsequent election for the same County office.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4311 Electronic Filing of Campaign Statements.
   (a)   This Section applies to any elected officer, candidate, committee, or
other person required by the Political Reform Act to file statements, reports,
or other documents with the Registrar of Voters. This Section is not limited to
filings pertaining to elective County office.
   (b)   Any elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required by
the Political Reform Act to file statements, reports, or other documents
required by Chapter 4 (commencing with § 84100) of the Government Code, has the
option to file those statements, reports, or other documents online or
electronically with the Registrar of Voters.
   (c)   In any instance in which the original statement, report, or other
document is required to be filed with the Secretary of State and a copy of that
statement, report, or other document is required to be filed with the Registrar
of Voters, the copy may, but is not required to be, filed online or
electronically.
   (d)   Any statement, report, or other document filed online or
electronically pursuant to this Section is not required to be filed with the
Registrar of Voters in paper format.
   (e)   The Registrar of Voters shall cause to be placed on the County's web
site a copy of each statement, report, or other document within one working day
of the statement, report, or other document being filed with the Registrar of
Voters.
   (f)   The County shall comply with all applicable provisions of Government
Code § 84615.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4370,
passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4479, passed - -2024)
§ 12.4312 Non-Application to Other Elections and Recall Elections.
   Non-County Election. In the event a candidate also runs for election for a
State, Federal, city, special district, or other non-County office, the
provisions of this Chapter do not apply to the candidate's campaign for such
other office nor to any committee established solely for the purpose of running
for such other office.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4313 Maintenance and Access to Records.
   (a)   Maintenance of Records. Candidates and their controlled committees
shall maintain, for the period of time required in Government Code § 84104,
such detailed accounts, records, bills, receipts, and other documentation
necessary to prepare campaign statements and to comply with the provisions of
this Chapter.
   (b)   Disclosure of Records. Candidates and their controlled committees
shall deliver to the Registrar of Voters and any public entity or official
having authority to implement or enforce this Chapter, upon demand, the
documentation and information described in Subdivision (a) and any other
information and documentation sufficient to allow the determination of whether
any provision of this Chapter has been violated.
   (c)   Authorization to Access Records. Candidates and their controlled
committees shall deliver to the Registrar of Voters and any public entity or
official having authority to implement or enforce this Chapter, upon demand, a
written authorization permitting such entity or official to have access to all
documentation and information pertaining to the campaign contribution checking
account.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4314 San Bernardino County Campaign Accountability Commission.
   (a)   The San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors establishes the San
Bernardino County Campaign Accountability Commission (Commission). The
Commission shall consist of nine members. The Board of Supervisors shall
appoint one member for each supervisorial district, who has been recommended
and nominated by the supervisor from that district. Additionally, the Board of
Supervisors will appoint one member who has been recommended and nominated by
the Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator, District Attorney, Auditor-
Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector, and Assessor-Recorder.
   (b)   For all nine commissioners, the following applies:
      (1)   Each appointment of a commissioner shall be approved by a majority
of the Board of Supervisors. Each commissioner can be removed by a majority
vote of the Board of Supervisors.
      (2)   Pursuant to San Bernardino County Code §
12.3701, the appointment of a commissioner shall expire on the date that the
Supervisor, Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator, District Attorney, Auditor-
Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector, or Assessor-Recorder who recommended the
appointment leaves office, while the underlying term shall continue pursuant to
Subdivision (3) below.
      (3)   Each term of office for a commissioner position shall be four
years, commencing on February 1 and ending on January 31 of the fourth
succeeding year. The terms of office for commissioners recommended and
nominated by the Second and Fourth Supervisorial Districts shall expire on
January 31, 2027, and on January 31 of each fourth succeeding year thereafter.
The terms of office for commissioners recommended and nominated by the First,
Third and Fifth Supervisorial Districts shall expire on January 31, 2029, and
on January 31 of each fourth succeeding year thereafter. The terms of office
for commissioners recommended and nominated by the Sheriff/Coroner/Public
Administrator, District Attorney, Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector,
or Assessor-Recorder shall expire on January 31, 2027, and on January 31 of
each fourth succeeding year thereafter.
   (c)   The Commission is responsible for enforcing the San Bernardino County
Campaign Finance Reform Ordinance.
   (d)   All enforcement actions taken by the Commission require a two-thirds
vote of the entire Commission. This means a minimum of six out of nine
commissioners must vote in favor of the enforcement action for the enforcement
action to be approved. If the Commission does not have all nine commissioners
at a meeting due to either an absence or a vacancy, all enforcement actions
shall still require a minimum of six commissioners vote in favor or the
enforcement action.
   (e)   Commissioners shall receive a stipend in the amount of $100.00 per
meeting and expense reimbursements pursuant to §
13.0618(b).
   (f)   Commission meetings shall be open to the public and are subject to the
Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code §§ 54950 et seq.).
   (g)   Rules adopted by the Commission for the time, place and conduct of its
meetings shall take effect upon ratification by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 4479, passed - -2024)
§ 12.4315 Qualifications of Commissioners.
   (a)   A member of the Commission must be a registered voter in the County.
   (b)   A person shall not be appointed or serve on the Commission if:
      (1)   The person is a County elective officer or a family member, staff
member, or paid campaign staff of a County elective officer. Family member
means a spouse, parent, sibling, child, or in-law. Spouse means a spouse or
registered domestic partner as defined by California Family Code § 297.
      (2)   The person has served as a staff member of a County elective
officer in the past four years.
      (3)   The person has served in an elected office or campaigned for an
elected office in the past four years.
      (4)   The person has served as a member of a political party central
committee in the past four years.
      (5)   The person has contributed over $500.00 in any one year to any
candidate for a County elective office in the past four years.
(Ord. 4479, passed - -2024)
§ 12.4316 Violations and Enforcement—Administrative.
   (a)   Any person who, pursuant to an appropriate administrative action, is
determined to have violated any provision of this Chapter, purposely caused any
other person to violate any provision of this Chapter, or aided and abetted any
other person in the violation of any provision of this Chapter, shall be
subject to an administrative order requiring that the person to do all or any
of the following:
      (1)   Cease and desist violation of this Chapter;
      (2)   File any reports, statements, or other documents or information
required by this Chapter; and/or
      (3)   Pay a monetary penalty of up to $1,000.00 per violation.
   (b)   If two or more persons are responsible for any violation of any
provision of this Chapter, then they shall be jointly and severally liable.
   (c)   No administrative action brought alleging a violation of any provision
of this Chapter shall be commenced more than twelve (12) months after the date
on which the violation occurred.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4317 Construction.
   This Chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purposes.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
§ 12.4318 Officeholder Accounts.
   (a)   Officeholder Account Contribution Limits.
      (1)   No person shall make, and no officeholder shall receive from a
person, a contribution pursuant to this subdivision exceeding the limits stated
in §
12.4305(a) - (d).
      (2)   No officeholder shall receive contributions pursuant to Paragraph
(1) that, in the aggregate, exceed the limits stated in §
12.4305(a) - (d).
      (3)   Any contribution received pursuant to this Section shall be deemed
to be a contribution to that candidate for election to any County office that
he or she may seek during the term of office to which he or she is currently
elected, including, but not limited to, reelection to the office he or she
currently holds, and shall be subject to any applicable contribution limit
provided in this Chapter.
   (b)   If an officeholder account is established pursuant to this Section,
the officeholder shall maintain officeholder funds in a single bank account
separate from any other bank account held by the officeholder.
   (c)   Establishing the Officeholder Controlled Committee, Reporting, and
Recordkeeping.
      (1)   Formation. The officeholder shall establish a controlled committee
by filing a statement of organization pursuant to Government Code § 84101 if
the officeholder receives $2,000 or more in officeholder contributions in a
calendar year. An officeholder account and an officeholder controlled committee
may only be established after the officeholder closes his or her campaign
account and any campaign committee.
      (2)   Committee Name. The controlled committee name shall include the
officeholder's last name, the office held, the year the officeholder was
elected to the current term of office, and the words "Officeholder Account."
The statement of organization shall include the name, account number, and
address of the financial institution where the committee established the
officeholder account.
      (3)   Filing Requirements. The controlled committee shall file campaign
statements and reports at the same times and in the same places as it otherwise
would be required to do for any other controlled committee formed by the
officeholder for election to County office.
      (4)   Required Recordkeeping. The officeholder and treasurer shall be
subject to recordkeeping requirements under §
12.4313.
   (d)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   Officeholder funds may not be contributed or transferred to another
state or local committee, including any other controlled committee of the
officeholder, except as permitted in Subdivisions (g)(2) and (g)(3).
      (2)   Officeholders may not use officeholder funds to pay "campaign
expenses" as defined in California Code of Regulations, Title 2, § 18525(a).
      (3)   The officeholder may not transfer or contribute funds from any
other committee he or she controls to the officeholder account, except as
permitted in Subdivision (g)(2) and (g)(3).
   (e)   Contributions to the Officeholder Account.
      (1)   Required Notices. In addition to the requirements of California
Code of Regulations, Title 2, § 18523.1, a written solicitation for
contributions to the officeholder account shall include the following: "For
purposes of the San Bernardino County Campaign Finance Reform Ordinance's
contribution limits, a contribution to an officeholder account is also
considered to be a contribution to all campaign committees for future elective
County office the officeholder seeks during his or her current term of office."
      (2)   In addition to the requirements of Subdivision (1) above, an
officeholder who files a statement of intention to be a candidate for any
elective County office during the officeholder's term of office shall provide
notice of this filing to every person that has made a contribution to his or
her officeholder account. The notice shall contain the language in Subdivision
(1) and be transmitted or mailed within ten days of filing the statement of
intention to be a candidate.
      (3)   Cumulation. A contribution to the officeholder account shall also
be deemed a contribution to the officeholder's controlled committee for
election to elective County office for the purposes of §
12.4318(a)(3) only under all of the following circumstances:
         (A)   The contributor makes the contribution between the day the
election was held for the term of office for which the officeholder account was
established and the end of that term of office;
         (B)   The officeholder maintains the controlled committee, established
for a future term of elective County office, at any time during the period
covered in Subdivision (A).
      (4)   Multiple Officeholder Accounts. When an officeholder maintains more
than one officeholder account in the same calendar year, he or she may not
receive the following contributions to any of those accounts during that
calendar year:
         (A)   Contributions from a single contributor that, when cumulated for
all the accounts, exceed the maximum amount the contributor could give to the
officeholder account having the highest per person contribution limit under §
12.4305(a) - (d).
         (B)   Contributions from all contributors that, when cumulated for all
the accounts, exceed the maximum amount in total contributions the officeholder
could receive in the officeholder account having the highest aggregate
contribution limit under §
12.4305(a) - (d).
   (f)   Contributions Over the Limits.
      (1)   An officeholder shall return to the contributor the portion of any
contribution to his or her officeholder account that exceeds the limits of §§
12.4305 or
12.4318 (either alone or after cumulation) by the earlier of 14 days of receipt
or 14 days of the date the officeholder files a statement of intention to be a
candidate for elective County office pursuant to Government Code § 85200.
      (2)   A contributor to the officeholder account does not violate the
contribution limits applying to the officeholder's election to a future
elective County office as otherwise provided under §
12.4318(a)(3) if, when he or she makes the contribution, the officeholder has
not filed a statement of organization to establish a controlled committee for
election to a future elective County office.
   (g)   Terminating Officeholder Accounts and Committees.
      (1)   The officeholder may not accept contributions after the
officeholder's term of office ends or the date he or she leaves that office,
whichever is earlier.
      (2)   The officeholder may redesignate the officeholder account as an
officeholder controlled committee for a future term of the same office for
purposes of paying expenses associated with holding the office by amending the
statement of organization for the committee to reflect the redesignation for
the future term of office prior to the date the officer's term of office ends.
      (3)   An officeholder may redesignate officeholder funds in the
redesignated officeholder account as officeholder funds for the new term of
office, subject to the limitations in Subdivision (e)(4).
      (4)   Once the officeholder's term of office ends or he or she leaves
that office, whichever is earlier, the officeholder may only use his or her
officeholder funds for the following purposes:
         (A)   Paying outstanding officeholder expenses.
         (B)   Repaying contributions to contributors to the officeholder
account.
         (C)   Making a donation to a bona fide charitable, educational, civic,
religious, or similar tax-exempt, nonprofit organization, if no substantial
part of the proceeds will have a material financial effect on the officeholder,
a member of his or her immediate family, or his or her committee treasurer.
         (D)   Paying for professional services reasonably required by the
officeholder controlled committee to assist in the performance of its
administrative functions.
         (E)   The officeholder shall terminate the officeholder controlled
committee within 90 days of the date the officer's term of office ends or he or
she leaves that office, whichever is earlier.
(Ord. 4350, passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4479, passed - -2024)
§ 12.4319 Effective Date.
   The Campaign Finance Reform Ordinance shall be effective on October 11,
2024. The Campaign Finance Reform Ordinance shall apply only to contributions
made to, or received by, a candidate on or after October 11, 2024. No
contribution made to, or received by, a candidate prior to October 11, 2024,
shall be considered whatsoever for purposes of the contribution limit, the
aggregation of contributions provision, or any other requirement of the
Campaign Finance Reform Ordinance.
(Ord. 4184, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4226, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4479,
passed - -2024)
CHAPTER 44: ASSESSOR/RECORDER
Section
   
12.4401   Consolidation of Offices.
§ 12.4401 Consolidation of Offices.
   Effective January 3, 2011, the offices of Assessor and Recorder are hereby
consolidated. The person to fill the consolidated office shall be known as the
Assess/Recorder and shall take the oath and give the bond required for each
office, and shall discharge all duties pertaining to each office. The current
salary of the Assessor shall be increased in the amount of $30,000 in
recognition of the additional duties resulting from the consolidation of
offices. Any reference in this Code to Assessor or Recorder shall mean
Assessor/Recorder.
(Ord. 4097, passed - -2010)
CHAPTER 45: MUNICIPAL ADVISORY COUNCILS AND ADVISORY COMMITTEES
Section
   
12.4501   MACs and Committees in General.
   
12.4502   MAC and Committee Responsibilities.
   
12.4503   Qualifications for Appointment.
   
12.4504   Appointments.
   
12.4505   Terms of Office.
   
12.4506   Standards of Ethics and Conduct.
   
12.4507   MAC and Committee Officers.
   
12.4508   Meetings of MACs and Committees.
   
12.4509   Dissolution of MACs and Committees.
§ 12.4501 MACs and Committees in General.
   (a)   Municipal Advisory Councils (“MACs”) are formed pursuant to Government
Code § 31010 and operate in accordance with the resolutions by the Board of
Supervisors establishing the MAC and the provisions set forth in this Chapter.
   Government Code § 31010 provides that, “The board of supervisors of any
county may by resolution establish and provide funds for the operation of a
municipal advisory council for any unincorporated area in the county to advise
the board on such matters which relate to that area as may be designated by the
board concerning services which are or may be provided to the area by the
county or other local governmental agencies, including but not limited to
advice on matters of public health, safety, welfare, public works, and
planning.”
   (b)   Advisory Committees (“Committees”) are formed pursuant to Government
Code § 31000.1 and operate in accordance with the resolutions by the Board of
Supervisors establishing the respective Committees and the provisions set forth
in this Chapter.
   Government Code § 31000.1 provides that, “The board of supervisors may
appoint commissions or committees of citizens to study problems of general or
special interest to the board and to make reports and recommendations to the
board. The members of such committees need not be specially trained or
experienced with respect to the matters to be studied.”
   (c)   MACs and Committees shall function in accordance with this Chapter. A
listing of all MAC and Committee members shall be available in the office of
the Clerk of the Board Supervisors.
(Ord. 4149, passed - -2011)
§ 12.4502 MAC and Committee Responsibilities.
   (a)   MACs and Committees are advisory groups to the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Each MAC or Committee shall act within the scope of the authority
specifically authorized by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to State law.
   (c)   These responsibilities shall not be amended, changed or restricted
without specific action of the Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   MAC and Committee recommendations shall be in the form of a resolution
or motion which, upon approval, will be sent to the member of the Board of
Supervisors who represents the Supervisorial District in which the MAC or
Committee is located.
   (e)   MACs and Committees are wholly advisory. MACs and Committees do not
have the authority to disburse funds, sign contracts, authorize payment, direct
County operations or act in any other capacity that involves the direct
management or supervision of the operations of any governmental agency or
department of the County.
   (f)   MAC or Committee comments are official only when MAC or Committee
members meet in a legally noticed meeting pursuant to the Brown Act and take
action by motion or resolution. An individual MAC or Committee member shall not
speak for the MAC, Committee, or the Board of Supervisors unless carrying out
the formally expressed wishes of the MAC, Committee, or the Board of
Supervisors when authorized to do so by those entities.
   (g)   MAC or Committee members may attend various community meetings related
to their responsibilities. However, when attending such meetings as a member of
the MAC or Committee, they are not to speak for the Board of Supervisors,
oppose the general policies of the Board of Supervisors, or support legislation
not approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 4149, passed - -2011)
§ 12.4503 Qualifications for Appointment.
   Members of a MAC or Committee shall be residents and registered voters of
the area served. Members are not required to be property owners unless so
provided in the resolution of appointment or formation.
(Ord. 4149, passed - -2011)
§ 12.4504 Appointments.
   (a)   Candidates for appointment to a MAC or Committee should submit
applications to the member of the Board of Supervisors who represents the
Supervisorial District in which the MAC or Committee is located.
   (b)   MAC and Committee members shall be recommended by the member of the
Board of Supervisors who represents the Supervisorial District in which the MAC
or Committee is located. Such recommendations will be submitted for
consideration by the Board of Supervisors at a scheduled meeting.
   (c)   MAC and Committee members shall be appointed subject to a majority
vote by a quorum of the Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   The total number of members of a MAC or Committee shall be established
by the resolution of formation.
(Ord. 4149, passed - -2011)
§ 12.4505 Terms of Office.
   (a)   The term of office for a MAC or Committee member shall be the duration
of the MAC or Committee and in no event shall be more than four years.
   (b)   Appointments shall be made for either a full term or the completion of
an unexpired term.
   (c)   Any appointment to fill an unexpired term of office shall be
considered a full term if the appointee serves for three years or more of that
unexpired term.
   (d)   No MAC or Committee member may serve collectively more than three
consecutive terms on the MACs and Committees located in any Supervisorial
District.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, MAC and Committee members serve
at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors and may be removed from the MAC or
Committee at any time by the Board of Supervisors.
   (f)   The resignation of a MAC or Committee member shall be submitted to the
Clerk of the Board and shall be effective upon receipt by the Clerk of the
Board.
(Ord. 4149, passed - -2011)
§ 12.4506 Standards of Ethics and Conduct.
   (a)   The County shall inform MAC and Committee members of all applicable
conflict of interest statutes, ordinances and policies, and members shall
comply with all such applicable statutes, ordinances and policies.
(Ord. 4149, passed - -2011)
§ 12.4507 MAC and Committee Officers.
   (a)   MACs and Committees shall yearly elect a chairperson, a vice
chairperson and any other such officers as needed, unless the Board of
Supervisors in its discretion appoints a chairperson or other officers for the
MAC or Committee. The chairperson shall preside over all meetings under
established rules and procedures set forth in §
12.4508.
   (b)   A MAC or Committee secretary shall be appointed and shall maintain
records of all meetings and act as clerk of the MAC or Committee. The secretary
may or may not be a member of the MAC or Committee. The secretary shall be
responsible for submitting all minutes to the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors.
(Ord. 4149, passed - -2011)
§ 12.4508 Meetings of MACs and Committees.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   Each MAC and Committee shall meet a minimum of one time per year,
unless otherwise specified.
      (2)   All MAC and Committee meetings will follow “Robert’s Rules of
Order” as provided by the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Brown Act Requirements. All MACs and Committees are subject to the
provisions of the Brown Act (see California Government Codes §§ 54950 et seq.).
Some specific Brown Act provisions include, but are not limited to the
following:
      (1)   A meeting is defined as any gathering of a quorum of a MAC or
Committee to discuss or transact business under the body’s jurisdiction.
      (2)   A MAC or Committee must conduct its meetings within the boundaries
of its jurisdiction unless it qualifies for a specific exemption.
      (3)   Each meeting must have an agenda containing a brief general
description of each matter to be considered or discussed and be posted at least
72 hours prior to the meeting.
      (4)   The public may comment on agenda items before or during
consideration by the MAC or Committee. Time must be set aside for the public to
comment on any other matters under the MAC or Committee’s jurisdiction.
      (5)   Meetings may not be conducted in a facility that excludes persons
on the basis of their race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex,
sexual orientation, marital status, or that is inaccessible to disabled
persons, or where members of the public may not be present without making a
payment or purchase.
      (6)   Members of the public may obtain a copy, at cost, of an existing
tape recording made by the MAC or Committee of its public sessions, and may
listen to or view the MAC or Committee’s original tape on a tape recorder or
viewing device provided by the agency.
      (7)   All votes must be cast in public. No secret ballots, whether
preliminary or final, are permitted.
      (8)   Members of the public may not be asked to register or identify
themselves or to pay fees in order to attend public meetings.
      (9)   Materials provided to a majority of the MAC or Committee members,
which are not exempt from disclosure under the Public Records Act, must be
accessible, upon request, to members of the public without delay.
(Ord. 4149, passed - -2011)
§ 12.4509 Dissolution of MACs and Committees.
   The dissolution of MACs and Committees shall occur at the end of each term
of the County Supervisor who represents the Supervisorial District in which the
respective MAC or Committee is located, upon that Supervisor leaving office
prior to the end of such term, or upon the effective date of the establishment
of new Supervisorial Districts which are the result of redistricting. Board of
Supervisors’ action in the form of a resolution shall be required to
reestablish the MAC or Committee.
(Ord. 4149, passed - -2011)
CHAPTER 46: ANIMAL CARE COMMUNITY OUTREACH COMMISSION
Section
   
12.4601   Establishment.
   
12.4602   Appointment of Commission Members.
   
12.4603   Term of Office.
   
12.4604   Duties of Commission.
   
12.4605   Compensation of Commissioners.
   
12.4606   Officers.
   
12.4607   Time of Meetings.
   
12.4608   Authority to Regulate Commission Internal Business.
   
12.4609   Director of Public Health’s Relationship to the Commission.
   
12.4610   Sunset Provision.
§ 12.4601 Establishment.
   There is hereby created and established an Animal Care Community Outreach
Commission of the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 4182, passed - -2012)
§ 12.4602 Appointment of Commission Members.
   The Animal Care Community Outreach Commission shall consist of seven voting
members: one from each Supervisorial District, a licensed veterinarian and a
person from the Department of Public Health’s Animal Care and Control Division.
All of the members shall be residents of the County and citizens of the United
States. Each member representing a Supervisorial District shall be a resident
of that District and shall be nominated for appointment by the Supervisor of
that District. The County Executive Officer or designee shall nominate for
appointment a licensed veterinarian who is not an employee of, but may be a
contractor for the County and a person from the Animal Care and Control
Division. Each appointment shall be made by majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors.
(Ord. 4182, passed - -2012)
§ 12.4603 Term of Appointments.
   (a)   Appointments shall not exceed four years in length and the terms of
office shall be staggered to ensure that no more than two-thirds of the terms
shall expire in any one-year period. Terms shall expire on January 31 of the
appropriate year and subsequent new terms shall begin February 1 of that year.
Members who have served two consecutive full terms may not be reappointed to
the Commission for a period of two years unless authorized by specific Board of
Supervisors’ action.
   (b)   A Commissioner whose term of office has expired shall continue to
serve in that capacity until a new appointment is made or the Board of
Supervisors declares that position vacant. All final appointments shall be made
for either a full term or the completion of an unexpired term. Any appointment
to fill an unexpired term of office shall be considered a full term if the
appointee serves for three years or more of that unexpired term.
   (c)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the term of office of
a Commissioner representing a Supervisorial District shall be subject to the
provisions of County Code §
12.3701.
(Ord. 4182, passed - -2012)
§ 12.4604 Duties of Commission.
   The Animal Care Community Outreach Commission shall be an advisory body and
shall serve as a conduit between the public and the Board of Supervisors, and
act in a support capacity to the Animal Care and Control Division regarding
animal control related matters. The Commission shall facilitate community
involvement and awareness, provide opportunities for citizen participation in
support of animal care related issues, and work to assure that the public is
informed of the Animal Care and Control Division’s programs and services
available to residents and pets of the unincorporated areas of the County. The
Commission may make such recommendations through the Director of Public Health
to the Board of Supervisors as it may deem to be reasonable and necessary or
advisable in matters concerned with the care and control of animals in the
County that it has been requested to review and comment upon by the Board of
Supervisors. The Commission shall receive public comment on matters assigned to
it at each Commission meeting. The Commission is not authorized to sign
contracts, disburse funds, investigate or adjudicate issues, implement
programs, employ or consider any personnel matters, or act in any other
capacity that involves the direct management or operation of the Animal Care
and Control Division or the Animal Care Joint Powers Authority.
(Ord. 4182, passed - -2012)
§ 12.4605 Compensation of Commissioners.
   Each member of the Commission shall receive no compensation for attendance
at any meeting of the Commission. Commission members shall receive actual and
necessary travel expenses within the County in the course of their duties as
Commission members, and, with prior approval of the Board of Supervisors,
outside the County. Such expenses shall be paid on the same basis as expenses
of County employees.
(Ord. 4182, passed - -2012)
§ 12.4606 Officers.
   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from the
members thereof, each of whom shall serve for a period of one year, and
thereafter until their successors are elected. The Commission member from the
Department of Public Health’s Animal Care and Control Division shall also act
as Secretary to the Commission.
(Ord. 4182, passed - -2012)
§ 12.4607 Meetings.
   The Commission shall hold regular meetings quarterly at such times and
places as may be determined by a majority vote of the Commission.
(Ord. 4182, passed - -2012)
§ 12.4608 Authority to Regulate Commission Internal Business.
   The Commission may also prepare and adopt rules and regulations for internal
business, subject to the approval or the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 4182, passed - -2012)
§ 12.4609 Director of Public Health's Relationship to the Commission.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Health or his or her designee
(the designee may also be the Commission member from the Department of Public
Health’s Animal Care and Control Division), subject to policy direction of the
Board of Supervisors and within the limits of the applicable laws, ordinances
and regulations to:
   (a)   Attend meetings of the Commission;
   (b)   Advise and inform the Commission regarding animal care and control
related issues that may affect the County and/or operation of the Animal Care
and Control Division or the Animal Care Joint Powers Authority;
   (c)   Forward the advice and recommendations of the Commission through the
County Administrative Office to the Board of Supervisors, and keep the
Commission advised of the Board’s actions and requests.
(Ord. 4182, passed - -2012)
§ 12.4610 Sunset Provision.
   The Commission shall sunset and cease to exist on June 30, 2014 and each
June 30th thereafter, unless the Board of Supervisors earlier extends or
terminates its existence annually by a majority vote.
(Ord. 4182, passed - -2012)
CHAPTER 47: (REPEALED BY ORD. 4366, PASSED - -2019)
CHAPTER 48: ADVISORY REDISTRICTING COMMISSION
Section
   
12.4801   Establishment.
   
12.4802   Appointment of Members.
   
12.4803   Term of Office.
   
12.4804   Qualification of Members.
   
12.4805   Officers.
   
12.4806   Stipend and Expenses.
   
12.4807   Meetings.
   
12.4808   Requirements of the Redistricting Advisory Commission.
   
12.4809   Duty and Authority of the Advisory Redistricting Commission.
   
12.4810   Removal from Office.
§ 12.4801 Establishment.
   Pursuant to the provisions of § 606 of the County of San Bernardino Charter
and Chapter 9 (commencing with § 23000) of Division 21 of the California
Elections Code, there is established an Advisory Redistricting Commission of
the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 4399, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4802 Appointment of Members.
   (a)   The Advisory Redistricting Commission shall consist of seven members
and five alternate members. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint one member
for each Supervisorial District, who has been recommended and nominated by the
Supervisor from that district. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint one
alternate member for each Supervisorial District, who has been recommended and
nominated by the Supervisor from that district. Each appointment shall be
approved by majority vote of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Two members of the Advisory Redistricting Commission shall be
appointed by the Presiding Judge of the Superior Court of California, County of
San Bernardino. These two members may be retired judges from either the
California courts or Federal courts located in California or other qualified
individuals who meets the qualifications of §
12.4804. One of the two members appointed by the Presiding Judge of the
Superior Court of California, County of San Bernardino shall serve as Chair of
the Advisory Redistricting Commission. Should one or more of the two members
appointed by the Presiding Judge of the Superior Court of California, County of
San Bernardino be unable to serve on the Advisory Redistricting Commission, the
Presiding Judge shall appoint an alternate member.
(Ord. 4399, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4803 Term of Office.
   (a)   The term of office for a member of the Advisory Redistricting
Commission shall end when the Board of Supervisors adopts a final redistricting
plan and any legal or administrative challenges to the Board of Supervisors
adopted final redistricting plan are resolved.
   (b)   A new Advisory Redistricting Commission shall be appointed whenever
the Supervisorial District boundaries must be redrawn by the Board of
Supervisors.
(Ord. 4399, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4804 Qualifications of Members.
   (a)   A person shall not be appointed to serve on the Advisory Redistricting
Commission if the person is an elected County official or a family member,
staff member, or paid campaign staff of an elected County official. Family
member means a spouse, parent, sibling, child, or in-law. Spouse means a spouse
or registered domestic partner.
   (b)   Except for the retired judges, a member of the Advisory Redistricting
Commission must be a registered voter of the County.
   (c)   Except for the retired judges, a person shall not be appointed to
serve on the Advisory Redistricting Commission if any of the following applies:
      (1)   The person has served as a staff member of an elected official in
the past four years.
      (2)   The person has served in an elected office or been a candidate for
an elected office in the past four years.
      (3)   The person has served as a member of a political party central
committee in the past four years.
      (4)   The person has contributed over $500.00 per year to any candidate
for elected office in the past four years.
   (d)   For the purposes of this Section, ELECTED OFFICIAL or ELECTED OFFICE
is defined as an official of or elected office of any district within the
County or is an office of the County, or a city, school district, community
college district or special district within the County.
(Ord. 4399, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4805 Officers.
   The officers of the Advisory Redistricting Commission shall be a Chairperson
and Vice-Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be one of the two individuals on
the Advisory Redistricting Commission selected by the Presiding Judge of the
Superior Court of California, County of San Bernardino. The Vice-Chairperson
shall be elected by the members of the Advisory Redistricting Commission.
(Ord. 4399, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4806 Stipend and Expenses.
   (a)   Members and alternates of the Advisory Redistricting Commission shall
receive a stipend of $100.00 per meeting attended.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided by Federal, State or local regulations,
Advisory Redistricting Commission members and alternates shall be reimbursed
for private automobile mileage incurred in attending all meetings at the
Internal Revenue Service allowable mileage reimbursement rate. All travel that
is 20 miles or less round trip from a member's home shall not be reimbursed. If
the round trip exceeds 20 miles, then all mileage is reimbursable as provided
herein.
(Ord. 4399, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4807 Meetings.
   (a)   The Advisory Redistricting Commission shall hold its first meeting in
May 2021. The meetings of the Advisory Redistricting Commission shall be public
meetings. The meetings may be held in a virtual format, in person, or a
combination of virtual and in person, as allowed by the Ralph M. Brown Act and
State law.
   (b)   Alternate members of the Advisory Redistricting Commission shall
attend all meetings of the Advisory Redistricting Commission unless excused for
good cause.
(Ord. 4399, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4808 Requirements of the Redistricting Advisory Commission.
   (a)   Each member of the Advisory Redistricting Commission shall be a
designated individual in the County's Conflict of Interest Code for the
Advisory Redistricting Commission pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with §
87300) of Chapter 7 of Title 9 of the Government Code.
   (b)   The Advisory Redistricting Commission is subject to the Ralph M. Brown
Act (Government Code §§ 54950, et seq.) and the California Public Records Act
(Government Code §§ 6250, et seq.).
(Ord. 4399, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4809 Duty and Authority of the Advisory Redistricting Commission.
   (a)   The Advisory Redistricting Commission shall complete all of its duties
in compliance with all State deadlines and in sufficient time for the Board of
Supervisors to meet all State deadlines.
   (b)   The Advisory Redistricting Commission shall recommend to the Board of
Supervisors a minimum of two possible maps containing the boundaries for all of
the Supervisorial Districts.
   (c)   The Advisory Redistricting Commission shall follow all criteria set
forth in State law.
   (d)   The recommended Supervisorial District boundaries shall comply with
the United States Constitution, the California Constitution, the Federal Voting
Rights Act of 1965 and California law.
   (e)   The recommended Supervisorial District boundaries shall use the
Supervisorial District boundaries criteria set forth in State law, including
Elections Code § 21500, Subdivision (c).
   (f)   The Advisory Redistricting Commission shall not adopt a recommendation
for the purpose of favoring or discriminating against a political party or an
incumbent or political candidate.
(Ord. 4399, passed - -2021)
§ 12.4810 Removal from Office.
   The Board of Supervisors may remove a member of the Advisory Redistricting
Commission for good cause. Good cause is defined as a violation of any of the
requirements of this Chapter or failure to attend two meetings of the Advisory
Redistricting Commission without good cause.
(Ord. 4399, passed - -2021)
DIVISION 3: PERSONNEL
CHAPTER 1: CIVIL SERVICE
Section
   
13.0101   Establishment.
   
13.0102   Division of County Employment into Classified and Unclassified
Services.
   
13.0103   Offices, Officers, Positions and Employees in the Unclassified
Service.
   
13.0104   Protection of Incumbent Employee Status.
   
13.0105   Scope of Classified Service.
   
13.0106   Personnel Rules.
   
13.0107   Authorization to Grant Civil Service Status to Transferred Employees.
   
13.0108   Provision to Adopt State Civil Service Laws.
   
13.0109   Adoption of Federal and State Cooperative Employment Program.
§ 13.0101   Establishment.
   There shall be a Civil Service Commission consisting of five members who
shall be qualified electors of the County. Commissioners shall not hold any
salaried County office or employment. All appointments to the Civil Service
Commission shall be made by the Board of Supervisors and shall continue in
effect until a successor is appointed. Each Supervisor shall appoint one member
of the Civil Service Commission. Members of the Civil Service Commission shall
be selected on the basis of interest in upholding high standards of public
service employment, County productivity, and the fair treatment of County
employees, as well as knowledge of merit system principles and personnel
administration. Civil Service Commission members serve a term of four years
with terms of office which shall be staggered. Terms of office shall begin on
February 1 of the appropriate year and end on the last day of January. No
Commission member shall serve more than two consecutive four-year terms unless
specifically permitted by the Board of Supervisors. Commission members shall
serve at the pleasure of a majority of the Board of Supervisors. Within the
authority of the County Charter, the Civil Service Commission responsibilities
shall consist of hearing and deciding appeals and conducting investigations as
provided in the personnel rules. The Commission shall review and make
recommendations on personnel rules and amendments thereto.
(Ord. 2498, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2803, passed - -1983)
§ 13.0102   Division of County Employment into Classified and Unclassified
Services.
   Employment by the County shall be divided into the Classified Service and
the Unclassified Service.
(Ord. 2498, passed - -1980)
§ 13.0103   Offices, Officers, Positions and Employees in the Unclassified
Service.
   The Unclassified Service shall be comprised of the following:
   (a)   Any position of fixed term temporary employment, recurrent employment,
extra-help employment or employment in services or positions demonstrably
special;
   (b)   Any elective County officer;
   (c)   The County Administrative Officer;
   (d)   Any public member of a Board or Commission;
   (e)   Any person serving without compensation;
   (f)   Any person employed to conduct a special inquiry or render
professional, scientific, technical, or expert service of a temporary nature;
   (g)   Any person employed on contract or other limited tenure assignment;
   (h)   Any field representative of a member of the Board of Supervisors;
   (i)   Legislative advocate;
   (j)   Any position placed in the Unclassified Service by the Board of
Supervisors in accordance with the San Bernardino County Charter.
(Ord. 2498, passed - -1980)
§ 13.0104   Protection of Incumbent Employee Status.
   An employee holding a regular position in the Classified Service shall
retain Classified status in such regular position while holding the position
even if such position is placed in the Unclassified Service by action of the
Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 2498, passed - -1980)
§ 13.0105   Scope of Classified Service.
   The Classified Service shall include any office, officer, position or
employee not included in the Unclassified Service.
(Ord. 2498, passed - -1980)
§ 13.0106   Personnel Rules.
   The Board of Supervisors shall adopt personnel rules to implement a merit
system for County employment. Personnel rules approved by the Board of
Supervisors shall have the force and effect of law and shall provide for the
following:
   (a)   For appointments and promotions to be made on the basis of merit and
fitness for County employment; for the use of and public notice of
examinations; for the maintaining and use of eligible lists; certification of
qualified applicants and appointment from established lists;
   (b)   For a period of probation before regular status in a classification is
achieved. Probation periods may be extended for a reasonable period consistent
with provisions set forth in the rules;
   (c)   For waiver by the Commission of examinations for employees in
positions which have been upgraded, where such upgrading has resulted from an
incremental change of duties, and the incumbent has been in the position at
least 12 months and during that time has performed the new grade-determining
duties for the length of the probationary period of the new class;
   (d)   For grouping of County positions into classifications based on
analysis of departmental organization and the duties and responsibilities of
the positions;
   (e)   For a code of ethics; for regulations governing political or other
activities of County employees consistent with law;
   (f)   For the right of employees with regular status to written notice of
the reasons for any suspension, demotion, reduction in step or dismissal action
and to an appeal and hearing, pursuant to the Personnel Rules and the
applicable provisions of the Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) for represented
employees, or pursuant to the Personnel Rules and §
13.0613(t) for exempt employees. The rules shall contain procedures for
disciplinary actions and hearings. The Commission may modify the degree and the
type of disciplinary action imposed, but, in no event shall it impose more
severe disciplinary action than that imposed by the appointing authority.
(Ord. 2498, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 3749, passed - -1999)
§ 13.0107   Authorization to Grant Civil Service Status to Transferred
Employees.
   The Board of Supervisors may provide for the granting of Civil Service
status and employee benefits to employees of any governmental agency whose
functions and employees are transferred to and absorbed by the County; permit
employees to transfer between County and any district governed by the Board;
permit employees working in County government but paid from non-County funds to
transfer to County positions on an equitable basis.
(Ord. 2498, passed - -1980)
§ 13.0108   Provision to Adopt State Civil Service Laws.
   The Board of Supervisors may adopt or elect to put in effect any provision
of the laws of this State granting to counties permissive authority regarding
employment, labor relations or Civil Service.
(Ord. 2498, passed - -1980)
§ 13.0109   Adoption of Federal and State Cooperative Employment Program.
   The Board of Supervisors may enter into agreements or cooperative programs
with other public agencies regarding employment of personnel and comply with
State or Federal requirements relating to programs financed in whole or in part
from State or Federal funds.
(Ord. 2498, passed - -1980)
CHAPTER 2: EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
Section
   
13.0201   Purpose.
   
13.0202   Definitions.
   
13.0203   County Management Rights.
   
13.0204   Employee’s Rights.
   
13.0205   Authorized Employee Representation Units.
   
13.0206   Bargaining Unit Composition.
   
13.0207   Representation Proceedings.
   
13.0208   Scope of Representation.
   
13.0209   Exclusive Recognized Employee Organizations' Rights.
   
13.0210   Collective Bargaining.
   
13.0211   Unfair Labor Practices.
   
13.0212   Strikes and Other Concerted Activities.
   
13.0213   Administration.
   
13.0214   Severability.
§ 13.0201   Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this Chapter:
   (a)   To establish an orderly system for conducting employer-employee
relations within the County.
   (b)   To establish a system to facilitate communications between management
and employees and to provide for the exchange of information and ideas.
   (c)   To clarify in writing the rights and obligations of employees,
employee organizations, and County management in the conduct of employer-
employee relations activities.
(Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210,
passed - - 2013; Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0202   Definitions.
   As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
   AGENCY SHOP. An arrangement that requires an employee, as a condition of
continued employment, either to join the exclusive recognized employee
organization or to pay the organization a service fee in an amount not to
exceed the standard initiation fee, periodic dues, and general assessments of
the organization.
   AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEE REPRESENTATION UNIT. A unit of employee job classes and/
or positions established pursuant to §
13.0205 herein, or hereafter created pursuant to provisions of §
13.0206 herein.
   CERTIFY. The process by which the County formally acknowledges an employee
organization as the exclusive recognized employee organization that represents
County employees in an authorized representation unit.
   CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE. An employee who, in the regular course of his or her
duties, has access to, or possesses information relating to, the County’s
employer-employee relations program.
   CONSULT/CONSULTATION IN GOOD FAITH. To communicate orally or in writing for
the purpose of presenting and obtaining views or advising of intended actions
on matters outside the scope of representation; and does not involve the
exchange of proposals and counterproposals in an endeavor to reach agreement.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino, and, where appropriate herein, refers
to the Board of Supervisors or any duly authorized County representative.
   DAY. Calendar day unless expressly stated otherwise.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen circumstance requiring immediate action, a sudden
unexpected happening, an unforeseen occurrence or condition.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person employed by the County, excepting those persons elected
by popular vote or appointed to office by the Governor of the State of
California.
   EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION. Any organization which includes employees of the
County and which has as one of its primary purposes representing such employees
in their relations with the County, or any organization that seeks to represent
employees in their relations with the County.
   EXCLUSIVE RECOGNIZED EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION or EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE. An
employee organization that has been certified by the County as the employee
organization, which received the majority of votes in a valid representation
election for an authorized employee representation unit.
   IMPASSE. The representatives of the County and an exclusive recognized
employee organization have reached a point in collective bargaining, conferring
in good faith, where their differences on those matters intended to be included
in a memorandum of understanding, and concerning which they are required to
meet and confer, remains so substantial and prolonged that further meeting and
conferring would be futile.
   INTEREST DISPUTE. A disagreement between County management and an exclusive
recognized employee organization concerning matters within the scope of
representation.
   MEET AND CONFER IN GOOD FAITH. A public agency, or such representatives as
it may designate, and representatives of exclusive recognized employee
organizations, shall have the mutual obligation personally to meet and confer
promptly upon request by either party and continue for a reasonable period of
time in order to exchange freely information, opinions, and proposals, and to
endeavor to reach agreement on matters within the scope of representation prior
to the adoption by the public agency of its budget for the ensuing year. The
process should include adequate time for the resolution of impasses where
specific procedures for such resolution are contained in local rule,
regulation, or ordinance, or when such procedures are utilized by mutual
consent.
   MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING. A written document prepared by the County and
the exclusive recognized employee organization, which sets forth those matters
within the scope of representation upon which both parties have agreed. Such
document shall not be binding on the County until such time that it has been
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
   RIGHTS DISPUTE. A disagreement between County management and an exclusive
recognized employee organization or employees who are not members of an
exclusive recognized employee organization, concerning the interpretation,
application, or violation of any memorandum of understanding.
   SERVICE or SERVE. Notification by mail or by personal service, and shall be
deemed complete upon mailing, hand delivery or leaving a copy at the principal
office of the party or representative.
(Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210,
passed - - 2013; Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0203   County Management Rights.
   Subject to the provisions of any current memorandum of understanding, which
is in full force and effect, all management rights and functions shall remain
vested exclusively with the County except those, which are clearly and
expressly limited in this Chapter. It is recognized merely by way of
illustration that such management rights and functions include but are not
limited to:
   (a)   The right to determine the mission of each of its groups, agencies,
departments, institutions, boards, and commissions.
   (b)   The right of full and exclusive control of the management of the
County; supervision of all operations; determination of the methods and means
of performing any and all work; and composition, assignment, direction,
location, and determination of the size and mission of the work force.
   (c)   The right to determine the work to be done by the employees, including
establishment of levels of service and staffing patterns.
   (d)   The right to change or introduce new or improved operations, methods,
means or facilities; or, to contract for work to be done.
   (e)   Subject to the Personnel Rules, the right to hire, schedule, set and
enforce performance standards, promote, transfer, release and lay off
employees; to suspend, demote, reduce in step or grade, discipline and
discharge employees for cause; to prescribe qualifications for employment and
determine whether they are met; and to otherwise maintain orderly, effective,
and efficient operations.
(Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210,
passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0204   Employee’s Rights.
   (a)   All employees shall have the following rights which may be exercised
in accordance with State law, the County Charter, and applicable ordinances,
rules and regulations or as provided in a current memorandum of understanding
that is in full force and effect.
      (1)   The right to form, join, and participate in the activities of
employee organizations of their own choosing for the purpose of representation
on all matters of employer-employee relations.
      (2)   The right to refuse to join or participate in the activities of
employee organizations and the right to represent themselves individually in
their employment relations with the County.
      (3)   The right to be free from interference, intimidation, restraint,
coercion, discrimination, or reprisal on the part of an appointing authority,
supervisor, other employees, or employee organizations as a result of their
exercise of rights granted in §
13.0204(a)(1) and (2).
   (b)   Employees who are full-time peace officers as that term is defined in
Chapter 4.5 of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code shall have the right to join
or participate in employee organizations which are composed solely of such
peace officers and which concern themselves solely and exclusively with the
wages, hours, working conditions, welfare programs, and advancement of the
academic and vocational training and furtherance of the police profession, and
which are not subordinate to any other organization.
(Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210,
passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0205   Authorized Employee Representation Units.
   (a)   The following representation units are established for employer-
employee relations purposes. Definitions are general in nature and serve as an
illustration and guide in the unit placement of classifications.
      (1)   MANAGEMENT UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications or positions which under
administrative direction of a group or department head have departmental
responsibility for implementing program requirements through supervisors;
formulating, administering, and managing County policies and programs; and, are
responsible for employee relations at the department level, including adherence
to labor contracts, grievance procedures, employee relations provisions of the
County Code, and the training of supervisory employees.
      (2)   SAFETY MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISORY UNIT.   
         Definition: Shall include classifications of employees qualifying as a
“County peace officer” as defined in § 31469.1 of the County Employees’
Retirement Law of the California Government Code or are full-time “peace
officers” as that term is defined in §§ 830.1 and 830.3(b) of the California
Penal Code and are so assigned to the unit by the Board of Supervisors; and,
having responsibility for implementing program requirements; formulating,
administering, and managing County policies and programs; or, having authority
to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign,
reward, evaluate, or discipline other employees, or responsibility to direct
them, or to adjust their grievances, or to effectively recommend such action if
in connection with the foregoing the exercise of such authority is not of a
merely routine or clerical nature, but requires the use of independent
judgment.
      (3)   SUPERVISORY UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications or positions having
authority to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge,
assign, reward, evaluate, or discipline other employees; or responsibility to
direct them; or, to adjust their grievances; or, to effectively recommend such
action if in connection with the foregoing the exercise of such authority is
not of a merely routine or clerical nature, but requires the use of independent
judgment.
      (4)   PROFESSIONAL UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications requiring the performance of
work that is either predominantly intellectual, philosophical, largely governed
by conceptual understandings, and varied in character, involving continuing
exercise of independent discretion and judgment in work performance and
requiring specialized knowledge and skills equivalent to that attained by a
prolonged course of intellectual instruction in an institution of higher
learning, or hospital, as distinguished from general academic training or from
apprenticeship training; or, any employee who is performing in a training
capacity under the direction of a professional person in preparation to qualify
as a professional employee as defined above.
      (5)   SAFETY UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications of employees qualifying as a
“County peace officer” as defined in § 31469.1 of the County Employees’
Retirement Law of the California Government Code or are fulltime “peace
officers” as that term is defined in §§ 830.1 and 830.3(b) of the California
Penal Code and are so assigned to the unit by the Board of Supervisors due to
the nature of the work being directly related to the law enforcement function,
which work does not involve work of a supervisory or management nature as
described herein.
      (6)   TECHNICAL AND INSPECTION UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications requiring the use of
specific skills, knowledge and abilities in the inspection of facilities and/or
conditions to determine compliance with appropriate rules, laws, codes, and
regulations; or requiring use of specific knowledge or techniques as opposed to
a broad, philosophical, or a theoretical field of knowledge; employs practical
knowledge marked by characteristics of specialized experience related to the
performance of specifically delineated techniques entailing a particular
subject or subjects.
      (7)   CRAFT, LABOR AND TRADES UNIT.   
         Definition: Shall include classifications requiring competence in one
or more crafts or trades; thorough knowledge and skill in the use of manual or
equipment operations; use of machines, tools, or other special equipment for
the repetitive production of single purpose jobs, which may include
responsibility for a product or maintenance of equipment; or, use of manual or
physical dexterity necessary to complete a specific work objective, which
requires minimal exercise of independent judgment and is normally learned
through on-the-job training. Usually includes all jobs that are apprenticeable.
      (8)   CLERICAL UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications performing work concerned
with preparing, recording, transcribing, transferring, systematizing, and
preserving written and oral communications and records; operating business,
office, accounting, and routine electronic data processing equipment;
collecting and recording of fees; or collecting, recording, compiling, and
tabulating financial, statistical or other data. Personal, telephonic and
routine written contact with the public on procedural and information matters
is normally characteristic of clerical unit positions.
      (9)   ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications characterized by work
consisting of that which inherently includes the regular exercise of
independent discretion and judgment, in support of the management and operation
of an organization, requiring general academic degree work, rather than a
specific, job related professional degree.
      (10)   EXEMPT UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications that have been determined to
formulate and administer significant executive responsibilities under the
direction of an Assistant Executive Officer, an elected official, a department
head or on behalf of the Chief Executive Officer, as well as positions that
have significant involvement in the County’s employer-employee relations
program or, those with access to highly confidential information and
involvement with matters of significant impact to County operations.
      (11)   SPECIALIZED PEACE OFFICER UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications of employees qualifying as
“peace officers” as that term is defined in the California Penal Code who are
entitled to a separate “peace officer” only unit pursuant to Government Code §
3508, excepting therefrom those “peace officers” as defined in §§ 830.1 and
830.3(b) of the California Penal Code who qualify as a “County peace officer”
as defined in § 31469.1 of the County Employees’ Retirement Law of the
California Government Code and excluding the classifications of Probation
Officer I, Probation Officer II and Probation Officer III. Such classifications
are so assigned to the unit by the Board of Supervisors due to the nature of
the work being directly related to the limited law enforcement function which
work does not involve work of a supervisory or management nature as described
herein.
      (12)   SPECIALIZED PEACE OFFICER SUPERVISORY UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications of employees qualifying as
“peace officers” as that term is defined in the California Penal Code who are
entitled to a separate “peace officer” only unit pursuant to Government Code §
3508, excepting there from those “peace officers” as defined in §§ 830.1 and
830.3(b) of the California Penal Code who qualify as “County peace officer” as
defined in § 31469.1 of the County’s Employees’ Retirement Law of the
California Government Code; and, having responsibility for implementing program
requirements; formulating, administering, and managing County policies and
programs; or, having authority, to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall,
promote, discharge, assign, reward, evaluate, or discipline other employees, or
responsibility to direct them, or to adjust their grievances, or to effectively
recommend such action, if in connection with the foregoing the exercise of such
authority is not of a merely routine or clerical in nature, but requires the
use of independent judgment.
      (13)   ATTORNEY UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include classifications in the District Attorney,
Public Defender and Child Support Departments, excluding classifications in the
Supervisory Unit and Exempt Group, requiring admission to the State Bar of
California, and requiring the performance of legal work that is either
predominantly intellectual, philosophical, or largely governed by conceptual
understandings, and varied in character, involving continuing exercise of
independent discretion and judgment and work performance, and requiring
specialized knowledge and skills equivalent to that obtained by a prolonged
course of intellectual instruction in a law school.
      (14)   NURSES UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include all classifications of employees defined as
being in the classified service pursuant to the Personnel Rules for the County
of San Bernardino, excluding classifications in the Supervisory Nurses Unit and
Exempt Group, requiring licensure by the Board of Registered Nursing as a
registered nurse, and are so assigned to the unit by the Board of Supervisors
due to the nature of work being directly related to the practice of nursing as
defined in Business and Professions Code § 2725 which work does not involve
work of a supervisory or management nature as described herein.
      (15)   SUPERVISORY NURSES UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include all classifications of employees, excluding
classifications in the Nurses Unit and Exempt Group, requiring licensure by the
Board of Registered Nursing as a registered nurse and: having responsibility
for implementing program requirements, formulating, administering, and managing
County policies and programs; or, having authority to hire, transfer, suspend,
lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward, evaluate, or discipline
other employees, or responsibility to direct them, or to adjust their
grievances, or to effectively recommend such action if, in connection with the
foregoing, the exercise of such authority is not of a merely routine or
clerical nature, but requires the use of independent judgment.
      (16)   PER DIEM NURSES UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include the classifications of Interim Permit Nurse
- Per Diem, Registered Nurse I – Per Diem, Registered Nurse II – Per Diem, ARMC
Float Pool Nurse – Per Diem and employees who are authorized to work as an
Interim Permit Nurse, excluding classifications in the Supervisory Nurses Unit,
Nurses Unit, Exempt Group, and those employees working pursuant to an
individual contract.
      (17)   PROBATION UNIT.
         Definition: Shall include the classifications of Probation Officer I,
Probation Officer II and Probation Officer III. Such classifications are
assigned to the unit by the Board of Supervisors due to the nature of the work
and does not involve work of a supervisory or management nature as described
herein.
   (b)   The County shall have the exclusive right to allocate any
classification established subsequent to the assignments herein to an
authorized employee representation unit(s). The right to determine units and
assign classifications to such units is the exclusive right of the County
subject to the provisions of this Chapter of the County Code.
   (c)   The foregoing units are determined to be authorized employee
representation units based upon relationships within the classification
structure and treatment unique to these units as to similar type of grievances,
common application of benefits and working conditions, factors used in rating
performance; impact of achieving an effective level of employee representation,
historical employer-employee relationships; the numerical size of the unit,
desires of employees, the relationship of the unit to organizational structure
of the County, and the effect on the existing classification structure of
dividing a single class among two or more units; the effect of the proposed
unit on the efficient operations of the County and the compatibility of the
unit with the responsibilities of the County and its employees to serve the
public; and, the effect that the unit will have on employer-employee relations
emphasizing the availability and authority of County representatives to bargain
effectively with the exclusive recognized employee organization. The relevant
and overriding consideration in establishing the units is to establish units
composed of the largest number of employees that have a community of interest
regardless of precise preparatory qualifications, common supervision or
interchangeability of skills, and any other relevant factors; provided,
however, that sworn peace officers have the right to be included in a unit of
representation comprised exclusively of sworn peace officers as provided by
State law.
   (d)   Employees working on a seasonal, temporary or casual basis or students
whose primary purpose is educational training shall not be included in any
authorized employee representation unit.
(Am. Ord. 3150, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3773,
passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3827, passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 3877, passed - -2003;
Am. Ord. 3916, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 3945, passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 3980,
passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210, passed - -2013;
Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0206   Bargaining Unit Composition.
   The Board of Supervisors shall decide the bargaining unit appropriate for
the purposes of collective bargaining. In determining the appropriateness of
each bargaining unit, the Board shall consider the factors specified in §
13.0205(c). A representation unit does not have to be the most appropriate
unit, only an appropriate unit.
   (a)   Modification of Existing Units. The unit modification process is used
to consolidate existing bargaining units or to sever classifications from an
existing unit to create a new separate unit or to expand the existing unit by
adding new classifications. An existing authorized employee representation unit
may be modified upon petition of the Employee Relations Division of the Human
Resources Department or an employee organization. Unit modification is used
when all or a substantial number of the total positions are removed from an
existing authorized employee representation unit and placed in a new or
existing authorized employee representation unit. The existing unit proposed to
be modified and/or the proposed new unit must be appropriate standing alone.
      (1)   Unit Modification Proposed by Employee Relations Division.
         (A)   Content and Timing of Statement. The Employee Relations Division
may, at any time, propose that an existing authorized employee representation
unit be modified by filing a statement with the Director of Human Resources
containing the following:
            (I)   The basis for the proposed modification; and
            (II)   A description of the bargaining unit proposed specifying the
classifications to be removed from the existing authorized employee
representation unit(s) and placed in a separate authorized employee
representation unit.
         (B)   Notice of Proposed Unit Modification. Upon receipt of the
statement from the Employee Relations Division, the Director of Human Resources
shall:
            (I)   Advise all employees in the proposed new authorized employee
representation unit of such proposed unit modification by posting notice at
appropriate work locations for 30 days; and
            (II)   Shall serve notice of the filing to all exclusive recognized
employee organizations.
         (C)   No Challenges to Appropriateness of Proposed Unit. If no
challenge is filed by an employee organization within 30 days after service of
the notice of the filing of the petition, the Director of Human Resources shall
submit the proposed bargaining unit modification to the Board of Supervisors.
         (D)   Challenges to the Appropriateness of Proposed Unit. Within 30
days after service of the notice of the filing of the petition, a challenge may
be filed, in writing, with the Director of Human Resources by an employee
organization. A challenge by an employee organization shall state the grounds
upon which such employee organization has an interest. In addition, the
challenge shall clearly indicate the reasons why the proposed unit modification
is not appropriate. Any challenge shall be accompanied by proof of support of
ten percent or more of the employees proposed to be removed from an existing
authorized employee representation unit, provided, however, that the incumbent
exclusive representative shall not be required to provide proof of support in
order to file a challenge. “Proof of support”, for purposes of this section,
shall mean individually signed employee authorization cards dated within the 30
day challenge period setting forth the intent of the employees with respect to
representation by the employee organization.
         (E)   Hearing on Challenges. Upon receipt of a challenge to the
appropriateness of the unit, a hearing officer shall be selected by the County
from the hearing officer panel established pursuant to §
13.0206(e) to conduct a hearing. Following the hearing, the hearing officer
shall issue an advisory opinion and award that:
            (I)   Grants or denies the challenge; or
            (II)   Recommends modification of the authorized employee
representation unit proposed by the Employee Relations Division. If the hearing
officer recommends modification, consolidation and/or the creation of a new
authorized employee representation unit, as applicable, the Director of Human
Resources shall submit the recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.
         (F)   Creation of New Employee Representation Unit. A newly authorized
employee representation unit shall be created upon approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
      (2)   Unit Modification Proposed by Employee Organization.
         (A)   Content and Timing of Petition.
            An employee organization may propose that an existing authorized
employee representation unit be modified by filing a petition with the Director
of Human Resources. Such petition shall be filed during the 30 day period
beginning not earlier than 360 days and ending not later than 330 days before
the expiration date of any memorandum of understanding covering classifications
in the authorized employee representation unit proposed to be modified or at
any time after expiration of such memorandum of understanding.
            A petition for modification shall contain:
            (I)   The name and street address of the employee organization.
            (II)   The name, title, mailing address and business telephone
numbers of the employee organization’s principal representative.
            (III)   A statement of the reasons why the unit modification is
appropriate.
            (IV)   A statement that the employee organization has no
restriction on membership based on race, color, creed, national origin, sex,
age, physical handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or political
affiliation.
            (V)   A statement that the primary purpose of the employee
organization is to represent employees on matters concerning wages, hours, and
other terms and conditions of employment.
            (VI)   A statement as to whether the employee organization is a
chapter of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner, with a local,
regional, state, national or international organization, and, if so, the name
and address of each such organization.
            (VII)   Certified copies of the employee organization's
constitution and by-laws.
            (VIII)   The date of expiration of any memorandum of understanding
or extension of such memorandum.
            (IX)   A description of the unit proposed by the employee
organization specifying the classifications to be removed from the existing
authorized employee representation unit(s) and placed in a separate authorized
employee representation unit.
            (X)   Individually signed employee authorization cards dated within
30 days prior to the filing of the petition which show proof of support of 40
percent or more of the employees within the proposed new authorized employee
representation unit, including 40 percent of the employees proposed to be
removed from an existing unit and placed in the proposed new unit. Such signed
employee authorization cards shall clearly set forth the intent of the employee
with respect to representation by the employee organization and support for the
proposed unit modification.
         (B)   Response and Notice of Filing of Petition.
            (I)    Upon receipt of the petition, the Director of Human
Resources shall expeditiously determine whether or not there has been
compliance with the requirements of §
13.0206(a)(2)(A).
            (II)   If after the initial determination the proof of support is
insufficient, the Director of Human Resources may allow up to ten days to
perfect the proof of support. Upon completion of the review of support, the
Director of Human Resources shall inform the parties in writing of the final
determination as to the sufficiency or lack thereof regarding the proof of
support.
            (III)   If an affirmative determination is made by the Director or
Human Resources, it shall:
               (1)   Advise all employee in the proposed new authorized
employee representation unit of such proposed unit modification by posting
notice at appropriate work locations for 30 days; and shall
               (2)   Serve notice of the filing to the Employee Relations
Division, the petitioner(s) and all exclusive recognized employee
organizations.
         (C)   Contest to the Determination that the Petition is not in
Compliance. If the Director of Human Resources determines that the petition is
not in compliance with the requirements of §
13.0206(a)(2)(A), the Director of Human Resources shall so notify the
petitioning employee organization. If the petitioning employee organization
disputes the finding that the petition was not in compliance, it may file a
contest, in writing, with the Director of Human Resources within 30 days after
service of notice that the petition was not in compliance. If the contest is
not granted by the Director of Human Resources, a hearing officer shall be
selected by the County from the hearing officer panel established pursuant to §
13.0206(e) to conduct a hearing to determine compliance with the process
provided for in this section. Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall
grant or deny the contest. If the hearing officer finds the petition was not in
compliance with the requirements of §
13.0206(a)(2)(A), the petition shall be dismissed. If the hearing officer finds
that the petition was in compliance, the petition shall be processed in
accordance with this Section.
         (D)   Amendment of Petition.
            (I)   A petition may be amended to correct technical errors or to
add or delete job classifications from the proposed unit at any time prior to
the issuance of a notice of hearing pursuant to §
13.0206(a)(2)(G). The amendment shall be filed with the Director of Human
Resources and provide the information required in §
13.0206(a)(2)(A).
            (II)   In addition, amendments to add new job classifications to a
proposed unit shall be subject to the following: additional proof of support,
if needed to maintain standing as a petitioner, shall be filed with the
Director of Human Resources concurrently with the amendment. The Director of
Human Resources shall expeditiously determine the adequacy of the proof
submitted.
            (III)   Amendments to correct technical errors or to add or delete
job classifications from the petitioner’s proposed unit which are requested
after the issuance of a notice of hearing pursuant to §
13.0206(a)(2)(G) are subject to approval by the hearing officer. The hearing
officer may grant the requested amendment, so long as it will not serve to
unduly impede the hearing and provided that sufficient proof of support is
evidenced to support any request for addition of job classifications.
         (E)   No Challenges to Appropriateness of Proposed Unit. If no
challenge is filed within 30 days after service of the notice of the filing of
the petition, the Director of Human Resources shall submit the proposed
bargaining unit modifications to the Board of Supervisors.
         (F)   Challenges to the Appropriateness of Proposed Unit. Within 30
days after service of the notice of the filing of the petition, a challenge may
be filed, in writing, with the Director of Human Resources by an employee
organization or the Employee Relations Division. A challenge by an employee
organization or the Employee Relations Division shall state the grounds for the
challenge clearly indicating the reasons why the proposed unit modification is
not appropriate. Any challenge filed by an employee organization must also be
accompanied by proof of support of ten percent or more of the employees
proposed to be removed from an existing authorized employee representation
unit, provided, however, that the incumbent exclusive representative shall not
be required to provide proof of support in order to file a challenge. “Proof of
support,” for purposes of this Section, shall mean individually signed employee
authorization cards dated within the 30 day challenge period setting forth the
intent of employees with respect to representation by the employee
organization.
         (G)   Hearing on Challenges. Upon receipt of a challenge to the
appropriateness of the unit, a hearing officer shall be selected by the County
from the hearing officer panel established pursuant to §
13.0206(e) to conduct a hearing and notice of the hearing shall be provided to
all parties by the Employees Relations Division. Following the hearing, the
hearing officer shall:
            (1)   Grant or deny the challenge; or
            (2)   Recommend modification of the authorized employee
representation unit proposed by the employee organization. If the hearing
officer recommends modification, consolidation and/or the creation of new
authorized employee representation unit, as applicable, the Director of Human
Resources shall submit such recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.
         (H)   Creation of New Employee Representation Unit. The recommendation
of the hearing officer regarding modification, consolidation and/or the
creation of new representation units are subject to and effective upon approval
of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Clarification of Existing Authorized Employee Representation Units.
The unit clarification process is used to determine whether a particular
classification is included or excluded (i.e., should be added to or deleted)
from an existing authorized employee representation unit based upon the
existing unit description and the duties of the classification in question.
Unit clarification is only appropriate if the number of positions to be added
or removed is substantially smaller than the number of employees in an existing
unit so as to not create a question as to the majority status of the incumbent
exclusive representative. In the absence of a question of majority
representation, a petition for clarification of an existing unit may be filed
by the Employee Relations Division or by an exclusive representative.
      (1)   Content and Timing of Petition. An exclusive recognized employee
organization or the Employee Relations Division, at any time, may file a
petition, with the Director of Human Resources, to clarify whether a particular
classification is placed in the appropriate bargaining unit based on the
existing unit description specified in §
13.0205(a).
         (A)   A petition for clarification filed by an exclusive
representative must contain:
            (I)   he name and street address of the exclusive representative.
            (II)   The name, title, mailing address and business telephone
number of the exclusive representative’s principal representative.
            (III)   A listing of the classifications and the number of
employees to be added to and/or removed from an existing authorized
representation unit.
            (IV)   A statement that the petitioning employee organization is an
exclusive recognized employee organization.
            (V)   The reasons why the petitioning exclusive representative
seeks clarification.
         (B)   A petition for clarification filed by the Employee Relations
Division must contain:
            (I)   A listing of the classifications and the number of employees
to be added to and/or removed from an existing authorized employee
representation unit.
            (II)   The reasons why the Employee Relations Division seeks
clarification.
      (2)   Response and Notice of Filing of Petition. Upon receipt of a
petition for clarification, the Director of Human Resources shall determine (1)
whether or not the proposed clarification is appropriate and (2) whether there
has been compliance with the requirements of §
13.0206(b)(1). If both criteria are met, the Director of Human Resources shall
then (1) advise all employees in the classifications proposed to be assigned to
a different representation unit by posting notice at appropriate work locations
for 30 days; and (2) serve notice of the filing to all exclusive
representatives of petitioned-for employees if different from the petitioning
exclusive representative and the Employee Relations Division unless the
petition was filed by the Employee Relations Division. The provisions regarding
amending petitions in §
13.0206(a) are applicable to petitions filed under §
13.0206(b).
      (3)   No Contest to Petition or Challenges to the Proposed Unit
Clarification. If the Director of Human Resources determines that the proposed
clarification is appropriate and the petition is in compliance and there has
been no challenge filed by any exclusive representative of the petitioned-for
employees or the Employee Relations Division within 30 days after service of
the notice of the filing of the petition, the Director of Human Resources shall
submit the proposed unit clarification to the Board of Supervisors.
      (4)   Contest to Director of Human Resources Determination and Challenges
to the Proposed Unit Clarification. Within 30 days after service of the notice
of filing of the petition, a challenge or contest may be filed, in writing,
with the Director of Human Resources by any exclusive representative of the
petitioned-for employees or the Employee Relations Division. A challenge or
contest shall clearly indicate the reasons or basis for the challenge or
contest.
      (5)   Hearing on Challenges. Upon receipt of a challenge to the
appropriateness of the clarification or contest to the determination of the
Director of Human Resources, a hearing officer shall be selected by the County
from the hearing officer panel established pursuant to §
13.0206(e) to conduct a hearing. Following the hearing, the hearing officer
shall grant or deny the challenge and/or contest. If the hearing officer
recommends that a classification be added to an existing authorized employee
representation unit or be removed from one authorized employee representation
unit and placed in another, the Director of Human Resources shall submit such
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.
   (c)   Establishment of New Units. A newly authorized employee representation
unit, comprised of unrepresented classifications not assigned to an authorized
employee representation unit, may be created upon petition of an employee
organization in instances where accretion of the unrepresented classifications
into an existing unit is not appropriate pursuant to the unit clarification
process. A newly created unit established under this section shall be subject
to and consistent with the requirements of §
13.0205.
      (1)   Content and Timing of Petition.
         An employee organization may, at any time, propose that a newly
authorized employee representation unit, comprised of unrepresented
classifications, be created by filing a petition with the Director of Human
Resources.
         A petition for unit creation shall contain:
         (A)   The name and street address of the employee organization.
         (B)   The name, title, mailing address and business telephone numbers
of the employee organization’s principal representative.
         (C)   A statement of the reasons why a new unit is appropriate.
         (D)   A statement that the organization has no restriction on
membership based on race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, physical
handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or political affiliation.
         (E)   A statement that the primary purpose of the employee
organization is to represent employees on matters concerning wages, hours, and
other terms and conditions of employment.
         (F)   A statement as to whether the employee organization is a chapter
of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner, with a local, regional,
state, national or international organization, and, if so, the name and address
of each such organization.
         (G)   Certified copies of the employee organization's constitution and
by-laws.
         (H)   A description of the unit proposed by the employee organization
specifying the classifications to be included.
         (I)   Individually signed employee authorization cards dated within 30
days prior to the filing of the petition, which show proof of support of 40
percent, or more of the employees within the proposed new authorized employee
representation unit. Such signed employee authorization cards shall clearly set
forth the intent of the employee with respect to representation by the employee
organization and the proposed unit composition.
      (2)   Response and Notice of Filing of Petition. Upon receipt of the
petition, the Director of Human Resources shall expeditiously determine whether
or not there has been compliance with the requirements of §
13.0206(c)(1). If an affirmative determination is made by the Director of Human
Resources, it shall:
         (A)   Advise all employees in the proposed new authorized employee
representation unit by posting notice at appropriate work locations for 30
days; and
         (B)   Serve notice of the filing on the Employee Relations Division
and all exclusive recognized employee organizations. The provisions regarding
perfecting proof of support and amending petitions in §
13.0206(a) are applicable to petitions filed under §
13.0206(c).
      (3)   Contest to the Determination that the Petition is not in
Compliance. If the Director of Human Resources determines that the petition is
not in compliance with the requirements of §
13.0206(c), the Director of Human Resources shall so notify the petitioning
employee organization. If the petitioning employee organization contests the
finding that the petition was not in compliance, it may file a contest, in
writing, with the Director of Human Resources within 30 days after service of
notice that the petition was not in compliance. If the contest is not granted
by the Director of Human Resources, a hearing officer shall be selected by the
County from the hearing officer panel established pursuant to §
13.0206(e) to conduct a hearing to determine compliance with the process
provided for in this Section. Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall
grant or deny the contest. If the hearing officer finds that the petition was
not in compliance with the requirements of §
13.0206(c), the petition shall be dismissed. If the hearing officer finds that
the petition was in compliance, the petition shall be processed in accordance
with this Section.
      (4)   No Challenges to Appropriateness of Proposed Unit. If no challenge
is filed by any employee organization or the Employee Relations Division within
30 days after service of the notice of the filing of the petition, the Director
of Human Resources shall submit the proposed new authorized employee
representation unit to the Board of Supervisors.
      (5)   Challenges to the Appropriateness of Proposed Unit. Within 30 days
after mailing notice of the filing of the petition, a challenge may be filed,
in writing, with the Director of Human Resources by an employee organization or
the Employee Relations Division. A challenge by an employee organization or the
Employee Relations Division shall state the grounds for the challenge, clearly
indicating the reasons why the proposed new unit is not appropriate. Any
challenge filed by an employee organization shall be accompanied by proof of
support of ten percent or more of the employees in the newly proposed
authorized employee representation unit unless the challenging employee
organization is the incumbent representative of employees in the proposed unit.
“Proof of support” for purposes of this Section shall mean individually signed
employee authorization cards dated within the 30 day challenge period setting
forth the intent of employees with respect to representation by the employee
organization.
      (6)   Hearing on Challenges. Upon receipt of a challenge to the
appropriateness of the unit, a hearing officer shall be selected by the County
from the hearing officer panel established pursuant to §
13.0206(e) to conduct a hearing. Following the hearing, the hearing officer
shall:
         (1)   Grant or deny the challenge; or
         (2)   Recommend modification of the proposed new authorized employee
representation unit. If the hearing officer recommends the creation of new
authorized employee representation unit, the Director of Human Resources shall
submit such recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.
      (7)   Creation of New Authorized Employee Representation Unit. The
recommendation of the hearing officer regarding modification, consolidation
and/or the creation of new representation units is subject to and effective
upon approval of the Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   Assignment of New Classifications to Representation Units. The unit
assignment process is used to determine the placement of a newly created
classification in an authorized employee representation unit based upon the
existing unit descriptions and duties of the new classification.
      (1)   Placement of New Classification in Appropriate Representation Unit.
Human Resources shall review the duties of any proposed new job classifications
in relation to the existing unit descriptions contained in §
13.0205(a) and shall recommend placement of all new job classifications in an
appropriate authorized employee representation unit. A newly created job
classification shall be assigned to an authorized employee representation unit
upon approval by the Board of Supervisors.
   (e)   Hearing Officer Panel. The County will establish and maintain a
Hearing Officer Panel that will contain the names of five hearing officers.
Employee organizations may make recommendations for hearing officers. In order
to be on the panel, the Hearing Officer must be a third party neutral who is
not employed by either a public entity or an employee organization; must have
experience as a hearing officer or arbitrator in disputes regarding the
composition and determination of bargaining units; and must agree to be on the
panel. The hearing officer shall preside at the hearing, rule on the admission
and exclusion of evidence and on procedural matters, and shall exercise all
other powers relating to the administration of the hearing, unless expressly
provided otherwise in this Chapter. The costs of the hearing officer shall be
shared equally by the County and any participating employee organizations. Such
costs do not include the costs incurred in the use of any employees, agents, or
attorneys.
(Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290,
passed - -2015)
§ 13.0207   Representation Proceedings.
   Representation proceedings are administered by the Director of Human
Resources to resolve questions concerning representation and determine the
exclusive recognized employee organization for authorized employee
representation units.
   (a)   Recognition Requests and Petitions. An employee organization may seek
to become the exclusive recognized employee organization of an authorized
employee representation unit by filing a voluntary recognition request or
petition for certification or decertification, as applicable. A voluntary
recognition request is appropriate where an employee organization desires to
become the exclusive recognized employee organization of an unrepresented
authorized employee representation unit, without an election, based on a
showing that a majority of the employees in the unit desire representation by
such employee organization. Voluntary recognition is not appropriate where
another employee organization has previously been recognized as the exclusive
representative of all or part of the same unit. A petition for certification
and/or decertification is appropriate where an election is required to
determine the exclusive representative, if any, of an authorized employee
representation unit comprised of currently represented employees.
      (1)   Voluntary Recognition Requests.
         (A)   Content and Timing of Voluntary Recognition Requests. An
employee organization may file a petition at any time seeking voluntary
recognition to become the exclusive representative of an existing unrepresented
unit. An employee organization that has not filed a petition for unit creation
may, within 30 days after the creation of the new authorized employee
representation unit by the Board of Supervisors, file a voluntary recognition
request with the Director of Human Resources which shall contain the following
information:
            (I)   The name and street address of the employee organization.
            (II)   The name, title, mailing address and business telephone
numbers of the employee organization’s principal representative.
            (III)   A statement that the organization has no restriction on
membership based on race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, physical
handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or political affiliation.
            (IV)   A statement that the primary purpose of the employee
organization is to represent employees on matters concerning wages, hours, and
other terms and conditions of employment.
            (V)   A statement as to whether the employee organization is a
chapter of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner, with a local,
regional, state, national or international organization, and, if so, the name
and address of each such organization.
            (VI)   Certified copies of the employee organization's constitution
and by-laws.
            (VII)   Individually signed employee authorization cards dated
within 30 days prior to the filing of the petition, which show proof of support
of more than 50 percent of the employees within the proposed new authorized
employee representation unit. Such signed employee authorization cards shall
clearly set forth the intent of the employee with respect to representation by
the employee organization.
            An employee organization that has filed a valid petition for unit
creation shall not be required to also submit a voluntary recognition request,
if it provided individually signed employee authorization cards dated within 30
days after the creation of the unit which showed proof of support of a majority
of employees in the new authorized employee representation unit. An employee
organization that has filed a valid petition for unit creation but has not
provided authorization cards from a majority of employees in the new authorized
employee representation unit shall not be required to file a voluntary
recognition request but must provide additional individually signed employee
authorization cards, within 30 days of the creation of the new unit, which show
proof of majority support.
         (B)   Response to Voluntary Recognition Request.
            (I)   If after the initial determination the proof of support is
insufficient, the Director of Human Resources may allow up to ten days to
perfect the proof of support.
            (II)   A petition may be amended to correct technical errors or to
add or delete job classifications from the proposed unit at any time prior to
the certification of the results. The amendment shall be filed with the
Director of Human Resources and provide the information required in §
13.0207(a)(1)(A). In addition, amendments to add new job classifications to a
proposed unit shall be subject to the following: additional proof of support,
if needed to maintain standing as a petitioner, shall be filed with the
Director of Human Resources concurrently with the amendment.
            (III)   Upon receipt of a voluntary recognition request, a neutral
third party shall be selected by the Director of Human Resources and the
employee organization to review the signed petition and authorization cards to
verify whether the employee organization has majority support, defined as more
than 50 percent of the employees of the designated unit. In the event the
Director of Human Resources and the employee organization cannot agree on a
neutral third party, the State Mediation and Conciliation Service, or its
successor, shall be the neutral third party and shall verify the majority
status of the employee organization.
         (C)   Certification of Results. In the event that the neutral third
party determines, based on the signed petition and authorization cards, that an
employee organization has the support of a majority of the employees in the new
representation unit, it shall be certified as the exclusive recognized employee
organization of that representation unit.
         (D)   Absence of Support of a Majority of Employees. In the event that
the neutral third party determines, based on the signed petition and
authorization cards, that (1) the petitioning employee organization does not
have majority support, but has support of at least 40 percent or (2) a second
employee organization has the support of at least 30 percent of the employees
in the unit in which recognition is sought, the neutral third party shall order
an election to establish whether an employee organization, if any, has majority
status.
      (2)   Petition for Certification or Decertification.
         (A)   Content and Timing of Petition for Certification and/or
Decertification. An employee organization may file a petition for certification
and/or decertification seeking to decertify an existing employee organization
and/or become the exclusive recognized employee organization of an existing or
newly created representation unit, as applicable. An employee or group of
employees may file a decertification petition seeking to decertify the
incumbent exclusive recognized employee organization of an existing
representation unit. Such petitions for certification or decertification may
only be filed during the 30 day period beginning not earlier than 360 days and
ending not later than 330 days before the expiration of any existing memorandum
of understanding or at any time when a valid memorandum of understanding is no
longer in effect.
            (I)   A petition for certification and/or decertification filed by
an employee organization shall contain:
               (i)   The name and street address of the employee organization.
               (ii)   The name, title, mailing address and business telephone
numbers of the employee organization’s principal representative.
               (iii)   A statement that the organization has no restriction on
membership based on race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, physical
handicap, marital status, sexual orientation or political affiliation.
               (iv)   A statement that the primary purpose of the employee
organization is to represent employees on matters concerning wages, hours, and
other terms and conditions of employment.
               (v)   The date of expiration of any memorandum of understanding
or extension of such memorandum.
               (vi)   A statement as to whether the employee organization is a
chapter of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner, with a local,
regional, state, national or international organization, and, if so, the name
and address of each such organization.
               (vii)   Certified copies of the employee organization's
constitution and by-laws.
               (viii)   Individually signed employee authorization cards dated
within 30 days prior to the filing of the petition which show proof of support
of 40 percent or more of the employees within the representation unit. Such
signed employee authorization cards shall clearly set forth the intent of the
employee with respect to representation by the employee organization.
            (II)   A petition for decertification filed by an employee or group
of employees shall contain:
               (i)   The name, address and telephone number of the individual
authorized to act as their agent in filing a petition for decertification.
               (ii)   The date of expiration of any memorandum of understanding
or extension of such memorandum.
               (iii)   Individually signed employee statements dated within 30
days prior to the filing of the petition, which show proof of support of 40
percent, or more of the employees within the representation unit. Such signed
employee statements shall clearly set forth the intent of the employee to no
longer be represented by the exclusive recognized employee organization.
         (B)   Response to Petition.
            (I)   Upon receipt of the petition for certification or
decertification, the Director of Human Resources shall determine whether or not
there has been compliance with the requirements of §
13.0207(a)(2)(A).
            (II)   If after the initial determination the proof of support is
insufficient, the Director of Human Resources may allow up to ten days to
perfect the proof of support. Upon completion of the review of the proof of
support, the Director of Human Resources shall inform the parties in writing of
the final determination as to sufficiency or lack thereof regarding the proof
of support.
            (III)   If an affirmative decision is made by the Director of Human
Resources, it shall direct a secret ballot election to be held to resolve the
question of representation. A second employee organization can be placed on the
ballot if it can provide a showing of interest of not less than 30 percent of
the employees in the bargaining unit. Sufficient showing of interest shall be
evidenced by individually signed employee authorization cards dated within 30
days prior to the filing of the petition, which shall clearly set forth the
intent of the employee with respect to representation by the employee
organization. If the Director of Human Resources determines that the petition
for certification or decertification is not in compliance, it shall be
dismissed.
         (C)   Amendment of Petition.
            (I)   A petition may be amended to correct technical errors or add
or delete job classifications from the proposed unit at any time prior to the
election. The amendment shall be filed with the Director of Human Resources and
provide the information required in §
13.0207(a)(2)(A).
            (II)   In addition, amendments to add new job classifications to a
proposed unit shall be subject to the following: additional proof of support,
if needed to maintain standing as a petitioner, shall be filed with the
Director of Human Resources concurrently with the amendment. The Director of
Human Resources shall expeditiously determine the adequacy of the proof
submitted.
   (b)   Election Procedures. Elections shall be conducted to determine which,
if any, employee organization shall be chosen by eligible employees as the
exclusive recognized employee organization of an authorized employee
representation unit. The State Mediation and Conciliation Service shall conduct
secret ballot elections in accordance with standard procedures and regulations
established by the State Mediation and Conciliation Service consistent with the
provisions of this Chapter.
      (1)   Consent Election Agreement. Upon directing an election, the
Director of Human Resources, any employee organizations that will appear on the
ballot, and other involved parties shall, with the assistance of the State
Mediation and Conciliation Service, attempt to agree on procedural matters
related to the conduct of the election. Such procedural matters may include the
method of the election, dates, hours, locations, and the order and wording of
ballots.
      (2)   Ballot. Provided that the employee organizations have established
proof of support as required in this Chapter, there shall be on the ballot:
         (A)   The name of the incumbent organization;
         (B)   The name of the petitioning employee organization;
         (C)   The name of any challenging employee organizations; and
         (D)   A provision for “no representation.” An incumbent exclusive
representative of employees shall not be required to provide proof of support
to be placed on the ballot.
      (3)   Eligible Voters. Shall be defined as those employees in the
authorized employee representation unit whose names appear on the payroll
immediately prior to the date of the election, including those on vacation,
short-term layoff, or authorized leave of absence, and who remain employed by
the County in the same unit on the date of the election.
      (4)   Voting Results. The State Mediation and Conciliation Service shall
declare the results of an election. The State Mediation and Conciliation
Service shall:
         (A)   Certify, as the exclusive recognized employee organization of
the authorized employee representation unit, the employee organization
receiving a majority of the valid votes cast; or
         (B)   Declare that no employee organization is the exclusive
recognized employee organization of the unit if the choice “no representation”
received a majority of valid votes cast.
      (5)   Runoff Election. If the ballot included three or more choices and
no choice received a majority of the valid votes cast, a runoff election shall
be held, as soon as practicable, between the two choices receiving the largest
number of valid votes. Only employees who were eligible to vote in the first
election and who remain eligible on the date of the runoff election shall be
eligible to vote in the runoff election.
      (6)   Costs of Election. Any costs incurred in conducting an election
shall be borne equally by the County and the employee organizations appearing
on the ballot. Such costs do not include the costs incurred in the use of any
employees, agents, or attorneys.
      (7)   Certification/Election Bar. For a period of one year after an
employee organization is certified as the exclusive recognized employee
organization or for a one year period following the date of an election that
did not result in the certification of an exclusive representative, an employee
organization may not file a modification or representation petition for that
unit or any subdivisions thereof.
(Am. Ord. 3304, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991,
passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0208   Scope of Representation.
   The scope of representation shall include all matters relating to employment
conditions and employer-employee relations, including but not limited to,
wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment; except, however,
that the scope of representation shall not include consideration of the merits,
necessity, or organization of any service or activity provided by law or
executive order.
(Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210,
passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0209   Exclusive Recognized Employee Organizations' Rights.
   (a)   Exclusive Recognized Employee Organization. An employee organization
shall be certified as the exclusive recognized employee organization pursuant
to the provisions of §
13.0207. An employee organization so certified must represent all employees
within the unit to which it has been certified regardless of membership status
in the employee organization.
   (b)   Meet and Confer. An exclusive recognized employee organization shall
have the right to meet and confer in good faith with authorized representatives
of the County regarding wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of
employment within the scope of representation. The County is under no
obligation to meet and confer in good faith with any employee organization,
unless it has been certified as an exclusive recognized employee organization
and continues to maintain majority status; provided, however, that an exclusive
recognized employee organization may choose to coordinate bargaining, on an
advisory basis, with another employee organization if such coordinated
bargaining is acceptable to all parties.
   (c)   Representation. Exclusive recognized employee organizations shall have
the right to represent their members in their employment relations with the
County. Employee organizations may establish reasonable restrictions regarding
who may join and may make reasonable provisions for dismissal of individuals
from membership. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit any employee from
appearing on his/her own behalf in his/her employment relations with the
County.
   (d)   Employee's Appearance for Employee Organization. Appointing
authorities shall grant reasonable time off without loss of compensation or
other benefits to a reasonable number of designated County employees serving as
representatives of an exclusive recognized employee organization when formally
meeting and conferring with the County on matters within the scope of
representation.
(Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210,
passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0210   Collective Bargaining.
   The County and the exclusive recognized employee organization for each
authorized employee representation unit shall meet and confer in good faith in
an attempt to reach agreement on all matters within the scope of representation
that are brought forward for consideration. Where agreement is not reached
through the meet and confer process, dispute settlement procedures have been
established to facilitate resolution of unresolved negotiation items.
   (a)   Negotiation Procedure for Initial and Successor Memoranda of
Understanding. The collective bargaining process between the County and an
exclusive recognized employee organization shall consist of (1) meeting and
conferring in good faith; (2) mediation of unresolved issues by a mediator,
upon mutual agreement by both parties, who acts in the role of an impartial
third party; and/or (3) fact-finding of issues at impasse. Any costs associated
with mediation and/or fact-finding shall be divided equally between the
parties.
      (1)   Meet and Confer.
         In the event the County or an exclusive representative intends to
initiate negotiations for a successor memorandum of understanding, it shall
serve written notice of that intent upon the other party during the time period
specified in the existing memorandum of understanding. Where no time period is
established, a party to a memorandum of understanding who intends to initiate
negotiations for a successor agreement must serve written notice of that intent
upon the other party at least five months prior to the expiration date of any
existing or continued memorandum of understanding. Written notice of intent to
initiate negotiations shall also include that party's written bargaining
proposals.
         Upon receipt of timely notice of intent to initiate negotiations, the
exclusive representative and County shall promptly commence the collective
bargaining process and shall continue to meet and confer in good faith for a
reasonable period in an attempt to reach agreement on all matters within the
scope of representation proposed to be incorporated into the memorandum of
understanding.
      (2)   Mediation and Fact-Finding. Mediation, upon mutual agreement by
both parties, and fact-finding shall be available to the County and the
exclusive recognized employee organization in accordance with the procedures
set forth in Government Code §§ 3505.2, 3505.4, 3505.5, and 3505.7, as amended,
and applicable Public Employment Relations Board (PERB) Regulation sections.
      (3)   Implementation of Last, Best, Final Offer. Any implementation by
the County of its last, best, and final offer shall comply with the procedures
set forth in Government Code § 3505.7, as amended. The County may, after
holding a public hearing regarding the impasse, implement its last, best, and
final offer, but shall not implement a memorandum of understanding.
      (4)   Adoption of Executed Agreement. Once tentative agreement has been
reached on all items of negotiation, the exclusive recognized employee
organization and Employee Relations Division shall prepare a written memorandum
of understanding incorporating all negotiated agreements. After the Employee
Relations Division has been notified by the exclusive representative that it
has ratified the proposed written memorandum of understanding, the exclusive
recognized employee organization and Employee Relations Division shall execute
such written memorandum of understanding which shall be submitted to the Board
of Supervisors. If the Board of Supervisors adopts the executed written
memorandum of understanding, it shall become binding on the County and
exclusive representative.
   (b)   Meet and Confer Obligations During Term of Memorandum of
Understanding.
      (1)   Advanced Notice of Proposed Changes. Subject to the provisions of
any current memorandum of understanding in full force and effect, and except in
cases of emergency, each exclusive recognized employee organization affected
shall be given a reasonable advance notice of change(s) to any ordinance, rule,
regulation, or proposal relating to matters within the scope of representation
proposed to be adopted by the County and shall be given the opportunity to meet
with the County regarding such matters. In cases of emergency, when the County
determines that an ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation must be adopted
immediately without prior notice or meeting with an exclusive recognized
employee organization, the County shall provide such notice and opportunity to
meet at the earliest time following adoption of such emergency ordinance, rule,
resolution, or regulation.
      (2)   Process. The parties shall meet in good faith regarding the
proposed changes. If, after a reasonable period, the Employee Relations
Division and the exclusive representative are unable to resolve matters within
the scope of representation, then mediation, upon mutual agreement by both
parties, and any other dispute resolution procedures required under applicable
law, shall be available to the parties.
   (c)   Other Considerations.
      (1)   Salary Considerations. In consideration of setting salary rates,
the parties shall include, but not be limited to the following factors:
retention, recruitment, internal relationships, prevailing wages, and
comparable public and/or private sector.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall preclude any of the parties to the negotiation
procedure from making a presentation to the Board of Supervisors at a public
meeting, subject to any mutually agreed upon ground rules.
      (3)   Mediation and fact-finding proceedings shall be treated as
confidential.
      (4)   Furnishing Information and Documents Pertaining to Employment
Relations. The County and employee organizations will provide requested
information and/or documents that are necessary and relevant to negotiating or
enforcing a collective bargaining agreement except as otherwise provided by
applicable law.
(Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210,
passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0211   Unfair Labor Practices.
   The Public Employee Relations Board (PERB) has original jurisdiction over
charges alleging unfair labor practices, which involve County employees, other
than peace officers who are exempted by Government Code § 3511 and management
employees, and is solely responsible for the adjudication of such charges.
   (a)   It shall be an unfair labor practice for the County:
      (1)   To impose or threaten to impose reprisals on employees, to
discriminate or threaten to discriminate against employees, or otherwise to
interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees because of their exercise of
rights guaranteed by this Chapter.
      (2)   To dominate or interfere with the formation of any employee
organization or contribute financial support to it, provided the rights
recognized or granted to employee organizations in this Chapter shall not be
construed as financial support.
      (3)   To refuse, or fail to meet and confer in good faith with
representatives of an exclusive recognized employee organization on matters
within the scope of representation.
      (4)   To fail to exercise good faith while participating in any impasse
procedure authorized under §
13.0210.
      (5)   To deny exclusive recognized employee organizations rights
guaranteed to them by this Chapter.
      (6)   To violate any negotiations ground rule agreed to by the parties.
      (7)   To lock out employees of the County.
      (8)   To cause or attempt to cause any exclusive recognized employee
organization to violate §
13.0211(b).
      (9)   To violate any provision of this Chapter.
   (b)   It shall be an unfair labor practice for an employee organization or
its representatives or members:
      (1)   To cause or attempt to cause the County to violate §
13.0211(a).
      (2)   To impose or threaten to impose reprisals on employees, to
discriminate or threaten to discriminate against employees, or otherwise to
interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees because of their exercise of
rights guaranteed by this Chapter, or failure to represent all employees in the
appropriate unit fairly and impartially in good faith.
      (3)   To refuse, or fail to meet and confer in good faith with County
officials on matters within the scope of representation, when the employee
organization involved is an exclusive recognized employee organization.
      (4)   To fail to exercise good faith while participating in any impasse
procedure authorized under §
13.0210.
      (5)   To violate any negotiations ground rule agreed to by the parties.
      (6)   To call for or conduct a boycott or induce or encourage any person
or entity to cease performing services or doing business with the County on
account of any jurisdictional work dispute.
        (7)   To violate any provision of this Chapter.
   (c)   Charges of an unfair labor practice may be initiated by the County, by
a representative of any employee organization, or by an individual employee or
unrepresented group of employees.
      (1)   For those employees under the jurisdiction of the PERB, such
charges shall be filed with the PERB within six months of the occurrence of the
conduct alleged to be an unfair labor practice. Such charge shall contain:
         (A)   The “charging party’s” name, address and telephone number;
         (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the party alleged to
have committed the unfair labor practice (the “respondent”);
         (C)   The section(s) of the Government Code the charging party
believes have been violated;
         (D)   The section(s) of this Chapter alleged to have been violated.
         (E)   A clear and concise statement (including dates, names, places,
etc.) of the conduct, which the charging party asserts, constitutes an unfair
practice.
      (2)   For those employees who are peace officers and not subject to the
jurisdiction of the PERB pursuant to Government Code § 3511 and for those
charges for which PERB denies jurisdiction, such charges shall be processed
consistent with the procedure in the applicable memorandum of understanding.
Such charges shall be submitted in writing to the Employee Relations Division
within six months of the occurrence of the conduct alleged to be an unfair
labor practice and shall contain:
         (A)   The charging party’s name, address and telephone number;
         (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the party alleged to
have committed the unfair labor practice (the “respondent”);
         (C)   The section(s) of the Government Code the charging party
believes have been violated;
         (D)   The section(s) of this Chapter alleged to have been violated.
         (E)   A clear and concise statement (including dates, names, places,
etc.) of the conduct, which the charging party asserts, constitutes an unfair
labor practice.
   (d)   For charges filed under §
13.0211(c)(2), a hearing officer/arbitrator, selected jointly by the County and
the affected parties shall conduct a hearing to determine whether a party has
engaged in an unfair labor practice and shall advise the parties of his/her
decision and, if appropriate, shall recommend corrective action, and/or the
imposition of penalties, subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
Costs for the arbitrator shall be shared equally by the parties. Such costs do
not include the costs incurred in the use of any employees, agents or
attorneys.
(Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210,
passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0212   Strikes and Other Concerted Activities.
   The County is committed to conducting its employer-employee relations in a
manner, which seeks to minimize the potential for interruption of public
services to its citizens. A “strike” includes any concerted stoppage, slowdown
or abstinence, in whole or in part, by employees from the full performance of
their duties, including a refusal by employees to perform their usual duties,
or other concerted interruption of operations or services, for purpose of
inducing, influencing, or coercing a change in the conditions, compensation,
rights, or obligations of public employment; and except in the case of absences
authorized by the County, includes such stoppage, slowdown, interruption,
refusal, absence or abstinence by any public employee out of sympathy or
support for any other person who is on strike or because of the presence of any
picket line maintained by any other person; provided that, nothing herein shall
limit or impair the right of any public employee to express or communicate a
complaint or opinion on any matter related to the conditions of employment or
engage in peaceful, informational picketing in non-work locations on non-work
time.
   (a)   Legal and Protected Strikes.
      (1)   Strikes Permitted. Public employees, except those prohibited by
law, may engage in legal and protected strikes only under the following
circumstances:
         (A)   The memorandum of understanding between the exclusive
representative and the County has expired and impasse procedures under §
13.0210(a) have been exhausted and either the exclusive representative or the
Board of Supervisors has rejected the recommendations of the mediator/fact-
finder pursuant to §
13.0210; or
         (B)   The Board of Supervisors have failed to approve a written
tentative memorandum of understanding that has been ratified by the exclusive
representative within 30 days after the parties have finalized such memorandum
of understanding.
      (2)   Notice. No employee may participate in a legal and protected strike
unless written notification of intent to strike is served on the Employee
Relations Division at least 15 days prior to commencement of the strike. The
notice must contain the following:
         (A)   The date and time at which the intended strike will commence;
         (B)   The name and address of the exclusive representative who is
involved in the strike;
         (C)   The general description of the unit and classification of
employees intending to strike;
         (D)   Proof of service on the County and Employee Relations Division.
      If the strike does not commence on the date specified in the original
notice a new 15 day written notice is required.
   (b)   Illegal and Unprotected Strikes. Illegal and unprotected strikes are
not permitted by public employees and include partial or intermittent strikes,
strikes that do not meet the requirements as specified in § 13.0212(a)(1) and
(2), or strikes that create a substantial and imminent threat to public health
and safety. The County would be entitled to any remedies allowed under the law
for participation in any illegal and unprotected strikes.
(Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290,
passed - -2015)
§ 13.0213   Administration.
   (a)   Submission of Current Information by Exclusive Recognized Employee
Organization. An exclusive recognized employee organization must submit to the
Employee Relations Division revised information whenever there has been a
change in any of the following items:
      (1)   The name and street address of the organization.
      (2)   The names, titles, mailing address, and home and business telephone
numbers of its officers.
      (3)   The names of employee organization representatives who are
authorized to speak on behalf of the organization.
      (4)   A designation of two persons and their addresses to whom notice
sent by regular United States mail shall be deemed full and sufficient notice
on the organization for any purpose.
      (5)   A statement whether the exclusive recognized employee organization
is a chapter of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner, with a
local, regional, state, national or international organization, and, if so, the
name and address of each such organization.
      (6)   Certified copies of any changes to the exclusive recognized
employee organization’s constitution and by-laws.
   (b)   Payroll Deductions. Exclusive recognized employee organizations may be
authorized payroll deduction privileges for membership dues and insurance
premiums for plans sponsored by such organizations upon the written
authorization of employees in an authorized employee representation unit for
which said organization has been certified. The providing of such a privilege
to an exclusive recognized employee organization by the County shall be
contingent upon and in accordance with the provisions of a memorandum of
understanding and/or applicable administrative procedures.
   (c)   Agency shop. An agency shop arrangement may be put into effect by
negotiation between the County and an exclusive recognized employee
organization, or such an arrangement may be placed into effect or rescinded,
without negotiation, upon approval of a majority of employees who vote in a
secret ballot election in accordance with § 3502.5 of the Government Code. An
agency shop arrangement shall not apply to management employees.
      (1)   Any employee who is a member of a bona fide religion, body, or sect
that has historically held conscientious objections to joining or financially
supporting employee organizations shall not be required to join or financially
support any employee organization as a condition of employment. The employee
may be required, in lieu of periodic dues, initiation fees, or agency shop
fees, to pay sums equal to the dues, initiation fees, or agency shop fees to a
nonreligious, non-labor charitable fund exempt from taxation under § 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code, chosen by the employee from a list of at least
three of these funds, designated in a memorandum of understanding between the
County and the employee organization, or if the memorandum of understanding
fails to designate the funds, then to any such fund chosen by the employee.
      (2)   Every exclusive recognized employee organization that has agreed to
an agency shop provision or is a party to an agency shop arrangement shall keep
an adequate itemized record of its financial transactions and shall make
available annually, to the County, and to the employees who are members of the
organization, within 60 days after the end of its fiscal year, a detailed
written financial report thereof in the form of a balance sheet and an
operating statement, certified as to accuracy by its president and treasurer or
corresponding principal officer, or by a certified public accountant. An
employee organization required to file financial reports under the federal
Labor-Management Disclosure Act of 1959 (29 U.S.C. §§ 401 et seq.) covering
employees governed by this Chapter, or required to file financial reports under
§ 3546.5 of the Government Code, may satisfy the financial reporting
requirement of this Section by providing the County with a copy of the
financial reports.
   (d)   Use of County Resources. Access to County work locations and the use
of County paid-time, facilities, equipment, hardware or software and other
resources by exclusive recognized employee organizations shall be authorized
only to the extent provided for in a memorandum of understanding and/or
applicable administrative procedures and shall be limited to activities
pertaining directly to the employer-employee relationship and shall not
interfere with the efficiency, safety and security of County employees or
County operations. Access to and use of County paid time, facilities, equipment
and other resources shall not be authorized for such activities as: any that
violates County policy, soliciting membership, soliciting business by or for
any non-County sponsored/sanctioned company, campaigning for office, selling
insurance plans, organizing elections, or other similar activities.
   (e)   Administrative Rules and Procedures. The Employee Relations Division
is hereby authorized to establish such rules and procedures as appropriate to
implement and administer the provisions of this Chapter after consultation with
affected employee organizations and County management.
(Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210,
passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0214   Severability.
   It is understood and agreed that this Chapter is subject to all current and
future applicable Federal and State laws and regulations and the current
provisions of the Charter of the County of San Bernardino. If any part or
provision of this Chapter is in conflict or inconsistent with such applicable
provisions of those Federal or State laws and regulations or the County Charter
or is otherwise held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such part or provisions shall be suspended and superseded by such
applicable law or regulations or County Charter provision, and the remainder of
this Chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(Am. Ord. 3707, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3991, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4210,
passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4290)
CHAPTER 3: SALARY REVIEW PROCEDURE (REPEALED BY ORD. 3707, PASSED - -1998)
CHAPTER 4: STANDARDS OF CONDUCT FOR COUNTY OFFICIALS
Section
   
13.0401   Introduction.
   
13.0402   Standards of Conduct.
   
13.0403   Responsibility for Operation of Department.
   
13.0404   Supervision/Removal of County Officers.
§ 13.0401   Introduction.
   All County officials should be held to high standards of conduct as provided
in Rule I of the County Personnel Rules. These standards should strengthen
public service and maintain and promote the faith and confidence of citizens in
County government. The purpose of this Chapter is to reiterate the standards of
conduct that are contained in Rule I of the County Personnel Rules and to make
it clear that the standards of conduct apply to elected County officials as
well as non-elected County officials. This Chapter also addresses the
responsibility of department heads for the operation of their departments.
Finally, this Chapter addresses the supervision of County officers and their
removal.
(Am. Ord. 3875, passed - -2002)
§ 13.0402   Standards of Conduct.
   All County officials shall adhere to the following standards of conduct:
   (a)   Responsibilities of Public Office. Public officials and employees are
agents of the public purpose and serve for the benefit of the public. They
shall uphold and adhere to the Constitution of the United States, the
Constitution of the State of California, the Charter of the County of San
Bernardino, rules, regulations and policies of the County, and shall carry out
impartially the laws of the Nation, State, and County. In their official acts,
they shall discharge faithfully their duties, recognizing that the public
interest is paramount. All Public officials and employees must demonstrate the
highest standards of morality and ethics consistent with the requirements of
their position and consistent with the law.
   (b)   Dedicated Service. In the performance of their duties, all officials
and employees shall support governmental objectives expressed by the electorate
and the County programs developed to attain these objectives. Officials and
employees shall adhere to work rules and performance standards established for
their positions by the County. The County requires all officials and employees
to use good manners, to be considerate, to be accurate and truthful in
statement and to exercise sound judgment in the performance of their work.
During the hours covered by active County employment, no official or employee
shall work for any other employer or agency, and neither conduct nor pursue any
unauthorized activity for remuneration. Officials and employees shall neither
exceed their authority nor breach the law nor ask others to do so. They shall
work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless
prohibited from so doing by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of
the work.
   (c)   Nondiscrimination. No official shall grant any special consideration,
treatment, or advantage to any person beyond that which is available to every
other person in similar circumstance. No person shall be favored or
discriminated against with respect to any appointment in the County service
because of family or social relationships, sex, race, religion, national
origin, marital status, age, physical handicap, political opinion or political
affiliation.
   (d)   Confidential Information. As appropriate, every official shall make
known to subordinates which information is regarded as confidential. No
official or employee shall neither disclose such confidential information
except as authorized or required by law or office nor otherwise use such
information for personal gain or benefit. All personnel records shall be
confidential except when disclosure is required by law.
   (e)   Use of Public Property. Officials are prohibited from using County-
owned equipment, materials, or property for personal benefit or profit unless
specifically authorized by the Board of Supervisors as an element of
compensation. Officials are prohibited from using public resources or their
public office in any manner that would be a violation of Government Code §
8314.
(Am. Ord. 4096, passed - - 2009)
§ 13.0403   Responsibility for Operation of Department.
   All department heads, elected or appointed, are responsible for the
operation of their respective departments. Department heads will be held
accountable for the actions of their department personnel including actions
which expose the County to risk of loss or actual losses by way of injury to
third parties. The Board may determine with respect to a specific incident or
loss, that the responsibility for payment of that loss lies with the department
and such loss will be paid out of the responsible department’s budget rather
than paid out of general County contingency reserves. The purpose of this
Section is to hold departments responsible for losses which should have been
prevented through sound management practices.
   This Section shall not be applied to interfere with the independent and
constitutionally and statutorily designated investigative and prosecutorial
functions of the Sheriff and the District Attorney.
(Am. Ord. 3875, passed - -2002)
§ 13.0404   Supervision/Removal of County Officers.
   (a)   General Supervisory Authority. Government Code § 25303 provides that
the Board of Supervisors shall supervise the official conduct of all County
officers. The Charter of the County of San Bernardino provides that the Board
of Supervisors may remove any County officer other than a Supervisor by a four-
fifths vote, for cause. The Board of Supervisors’ responsibility in this regard
is to insure that all County officers faithfully perform their duties and that
the conduct of these officers meets the high standards required by State law,
County ordinance, and County policies.
   (b)   Removal of Elected County Officers other than County Supervisors. The
removal of an elected County officer is an extraordinary act and should occur
in only the most egregious of circumstances and only when the interests of the
citizens of the County cannot be reasonably served by any other means. These
circumstances include the exposure of the County, or its employees, to
irreparable harm.
   (c)   Removal/Definition of Cause. Section 6, Article II, of the San
Bernardino County Charter provides as follows: “Any County officer other than
supervisor may be removed from office in the manner provided by law; also any
such officer may be removed by a four-fifths vote of the Board of Supervisors,
for cause, after first serving upon such officer a written statement of alleged
grounds for such removal, and giving him a reasonable opportunity to be heard
in the way of explanation or defense.”
   For purposes of Section 6, Article II, CAUSE shall be defined as:
      (1)   Flagrant or repeated neglect of duties;
      (2)   Misappropriation of public property;
      (3)   Violation of any law related to the performance of the officer’s
duties;
      (4)   Willful falsification of a relevant official statement or document.
(Repealed by Ord. 2498, passed - -1980; Ord. 3863, passed - -2002; Am. Ord.
3875, passed - -2002)
CHAPTER 5: WORKERS’ COMPENSATION
Section
   
13.0501   Volunteers Workers’ Compensation.
   
13.0502   Juveniles Doing Rehabilitative Work.
§ 13.0501   Volunteers Workers’ Compensation.
   The provisions of Labor Code § 3363.5 are hereby adopted. A person who
performs voluntary service without pay as designated and authorized by the
Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County and Adult Work Sentence
participants from the Municipal or Superior Court doing rehabilitative work
under County supervision shall be deemed to be employees of the County for the
purposes of Workers’ Compensation coverage while performing such service. This
Section does not make a volunteer an employee of the County for any purposes
other than such coverage, nor grant nor enlarge upon any other right, duty or
responsibility of a volunteer.
(Ord. 1918, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2042, passed - -1975; Am. Ord. 2696,
passed - -1982)
§ 13.0502   Juveniles Doing Rehabilitative Work.
   The amended provisions of Labor Code §§ 3364.55 and 3364.6 are hereby
adopted. A ward of the Juvenile Court, a juvenile traffic offender under
Welfare and Institutions Code § 258 (formerly § 564), or a juvenile probationer
pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 725 and 654 engaged in
rehabilitative work without pay under an assignment by order of the Juvenile
Court or Probation Officer to a work project on public property within the
jurisdiction of any governmental entity, including the Federal government and
under supervision of the County for purposes of Labor Code Division 4 (Workers’
Compensation and Insurance), and such wards of the Juvenile Court, juvenile
traffic offenders, or juvenile probationers shall be entitled to the Workers’
Compensation benefits provided in Labor Code Division 4 for injury sustained
while in the performance of such assigned work project, provided (a) such
juvenile persons shall not be entitled to any temporary disability indemnity
benefits, and (b) in determining permanent disability benefits, average weekly
earnings shall be taken at the minimum provided therefor in Labor Code § 4453.
Such juvenile persons shall not be deemed to be employees of the County for any
purpose other than such Workers’ Compensation coverage.
(Ord. 2042, passed - -1975; Am. Ord. 2696, passed - -1982)
CHAPTER 6: COMPENSATION AND TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF COUNTY OFFICIALS,
EMPLOYEES, AND OTHERS
Section
   
13.0601   Purpose.
   
13.0602   (Repealed by Ord. 4357, passed - -2019).
   
13.0603   (Repealed).
   
13.0604   (Repealed by Ord. 4357, passed - -2019).
   
13.0605   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Administrative Services;
Clerical; Craft, Labor and Trades; Management; Supervisory; Nurses Supervisory
and Management; and Technical and Inspection Units.
   
13.0606   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Attorney Unit.
   
13.0607   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Nurses and Per Diem Nurses
Units.
   
13.0608   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Probation Unit.
   
13.0609   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Specialized Peace Officer and
Specialized Peace Officer—Supervisory Units.
   
13.0610   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Preschool Services
Department—Non-Supervisory and Preschool Services Department—Supervisory Units.
   
13.0611   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Safety Unit.
   
13.0612   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Safety Management and
Supervisory Unit.
   
13.0613   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Exempt Group.
   
13.0614   Salaries and Working Conditions of the County-Wide Elected Officials.
   
13.0615   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Professional Unit.
   
13.0616   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Sheriff's Station Officer.
   
13.0617   County Employee Election Worker Program.
   
13.0617a   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Sheriff’s Trainees.
   
13.0617b   (Repealed by Ord. 3599, passed - -1995).
   
13.0617c   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Student Intern.
   
13.0617d   (Repealed by Ord. 3749, passed - -1999).
   
13.0617e   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed -- 2015).
   
13.0617f   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Student Nurses.
   
13.0617g   (Repealed by Ord. 3749, passed -- 1999).
   
13.0617h   (Repealed by Ord. 4347, passed -- 2018).
   
13.0617i   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed -- 2015).
   
13.0617j   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed -- 2015).
   
13.0617k   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed -- 2015).
   
13.0617l   (Repealed by Ord. 4315, passed -- 2017).
   
13.0617m   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Law Clerk.
   
13.0617n   Salaries and Working Conditions of the Pool Manager.
   
13.0618   Boards, Commissions, and Committees.
   
13.0619   Special Service Fees.
   
13.0620   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0621   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0622   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0623   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0624   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0625   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0626   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0627   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0628   Extra-Help Employment.
   
13.0629   Recurrent Employment.
   
13.0630   Per Diem Classifications.
   
13.0631   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0632   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0633   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0634   (Repealed by Ord. 3679, passed - -1996).
   
13.0635   (Repealed by Ord. 3679, passed - -1996).
   
13.0636   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0637   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0638   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0639   (Repealed by Ord. 2860, passed - -1984).
   
13.0640   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0641   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0642   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0643   (Repealed by Ord. 2860, passed - -1984).
   
13.0644   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0645   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0646   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0647   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0648   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0649   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0650   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0651   (Repealed by Ord. 2860, passed - -1984).
   
13.0652   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0653   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0654   (Repealed by Ord. 2860, passed - -1984).
   
13.0655   Salary and Step Adjustments.
   
13.0656   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0658   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0659   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   
13.0660   Public Service Employees.
§ 13.0601 Purpose.
   This chapter shall provide for the salaries and other compensation to be
provided to employees and officers of the County of San Bernardino. All County
officers and their deputies, assistants, and attaches, and employees of the
County, provided for by the County Charter or by general law or by this
chapter, who are paid or to be paid a fixed annual salary, shall be paid by the
County in equal bi-weekly installments at the time and in the manner and out of
the same fund as County officers are paid and all other persons and employees
of the County shall be paid on claims presented as other claims against the
County.
(Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0602 (Repealed by Ord. 4357, passed - -2019).
§ 13.0603 (Reserved).
§ 13.0604 (Repealed by Ord. 4357, passed - -2019).
§ 13.0605 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Administrative Services;
Clerical; Craft, Labor and Trades; Management; Supervisory; Nurses Supervisory
and Management; and Technical and Inspection Units.
   The salaries and working conditions applicable to employees in the
Administrative Services, Clerical, Craft, Labor and Trades, Management,
Supervisory, Nurses Supervisory and Management, and Technical and Inspection
Units are as set forth in a Memorandum of Understanding between the County and
the Teamsters Local 1932, approved by the Board of Supervisors on December 15,
2015, as on file with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, and as set forth
in any amendments thereto approved by the Board of Supervisors, or as provided
by law if the Memorandum of Understanding expires.
(Am. Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0606 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Attorney Unit.
   The salaries and working conditions applicable to employees in the Attorney
Unit are as set forth in a Memorandum of Understanding between the County and
the San Bernardino County Public Attorneys Association, approved by the Board
of Supervisors on December 5, 2017, as on file with the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors, and as set forth in any amendments thereto approved by the Board
of Supervisors, or as provided by law if the Memorandum of Understanding
expires.
(Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0607 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Nurses and Per Diem Nurses
Units.
   The salaries and working conditions applicable to employees in the Nurses
Unit and the Per Diem Nurses Unit are as set forth in a Memorandum of
Understanding between the County and the California Nurses Association,
approved by the Board of Supervisors on February 13, 2018, as on file with the
Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, and as set forth in any amendments thereto
approved by the Board of Supervisors, or as provided by law if the Memorandum
of Understanding expires.
(Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0608 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Probation Unit.
   The salaries and working conditions applicable to employees in the Probation
Unit are as set forth in a Memorandum of Understanding between the County and
the San Bernardino County Probation Officers Association, approved by the Board
of Supervisors on January 8, 2019, as on file with the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors, and as set forth in any amendments thereto approved by the Board
of Supervisors, or as provided by law if the Memorandum of Understanding
expires.
(Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0609 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Specialized Peace Officer and
Specialized Peace Officer—Supervisory Units.
   The salaries and working conditions applicable to employees in the
Specialized Peace Officer and Specialized Peace Officer—Supervisory Units are
as set forth in a Memorandum of Understanding between the County and the
Sheriff’s Employees’ Benefit Association, approved by the Board of Supervisors
on December 20, 2016, as on file with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors,
and as set forth in any amendments thereto approved by the Board of
Supervisors, or as provided by law if the Memorandum of Understanding expires.
(Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0610 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Preschool Services
Department—Non-Supervisory and Preschool Services Department—Supervisory Units.
   The salaries and working conditions applicable to employees in the Preschool
Services Department—Non-Supervisory and Preschool Services
Department—Supervisory Units are as set forth in a Memorandum of Understanding
between the County and the Teamsters Local 1932, approved by the Board of
Supervisors on March 20, 2018, as on file with the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors, and as set forth in any amendments thereto approved by the Board
of Supervisors, or as provided by law if the Memorandum of Understanding
expires.
(Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0611 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Safety Unit.
   The salaries and working conditions applicable to employees in the Safety
Unit are as set forth in a Memorandum of Understanding between the County and
the Sheriff’s Employees’ Benefit Association, approved by the Board of
Supervisors on August 9, 2016, as on file with the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors, and as set forth in any amendments thereto approved by the Board
of Supervisors, or as provided by law if the Memorandum of Understanding
expires.
(Am. Ord. 3898, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357,
passed - -2019)
§ 13.0612 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Safety Management and
Supervisory Unit.
   The salaries and working conditions applicable to employees in the Safety
Management and Supervisory Unit are as set forth in a Memorandum of
Understanding between the County and the Sheriff's Employees' Benefit
Association, approved by the Board of Supervisors on August 9, 2016, as on file
with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, and as set forth in any amendments
thereto approved by the Board of Supervisors, or as provided by law if the
Memorandum of Understanding expires.
(Am. Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0613 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Exempt Group.
   (a)   Exempt Group. The Exempt Group consists of employees who formulate and
administer significant executive policy, employee relations responsibilities,
and/or County confidential proprietary information. Positions are placed in the
Exempt Group only by specific approval of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Definitions. The following definitions apply to the terms used in §
13.0613 unless another definition is specified.
      (1)   APPOINTING AUTHORITY refers to the department head of the
employee's department as specified in Section 10 of Article II of the County
Charter and County Code § 12.2400. It also includes any person who is
designated as acting department head, employees acting for the department head
during the absence of the department head, and/or employees delegated all
authority to act on behalf of the appointing authority on a regular basis.
      (2)   BASE RATE OF PAY or BASE HOURLY RATE means the employee's base
hourly wage, excluding differentials and other pay above the base hourly wage.
      (3)   BASE BIWEEKLY SALARY or BIWEEKLY BASE SALARY means an employee's
base hourly rate, excluding any differentials or other pay above the base
hourly rate, multiplied by the base hours paid (e.g., REG, SCK, VAC, etc.) each
pay period. Base hours paid does not include time without pay or disability
payments such as short-term disability or workers' compensation.
      (4)   CALENDAR YEAR refers to pay period 1 through 26, or 27 when
applicable, of the same year.
      (5)   COUNTY SERVICE or CONTINUOUS SERVICE refers to the total length of
service from an employee's most recent beginning (hire) date in a regular
position with no separation from County employment.
      (6)   COUNTY-WIDE ELECTED OFFICIAL refers to a County officer who is
elected to a County-wide office pursuant to the law. County-wide elected
officials consist of the Assessor/Recorder; Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax
Collector; Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator; and the District Attorney.
      (7)   DATE OF HIRE or HIRE DATE refers to the effective date of the most
recent date of hire in a regular position.
      (8)   DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES refers to the incumbent in the Director
of Human Resources position. It also includes any person who has been
designated as acting Director of Human Resources, employees acting for the
Director during the absence of the Director of Human Resources, and/or
employees delegated authority approval on a regular basis by the Director of
Human Resources.
      (9)   FISCAL YEAR ordinarily refers to pay period 15 of one year through
pay period 14 of the following year.
      (10)   PAID HOURS refers to hours actually worked or the use of accrued
leave time such as vacation, paid time off, sick, holiday, or compensatory
time. It does not include unpaid hours or disability payments (excluding Labor
Code § 4850 time) such as short-term disability or workers' compensation.
      (11)   PAID STATUS refers to any pay period in which an employee codes
paid hours.
      (12)   REGULAR POSITION refers to a position authorized by the Board of
Supervisors that may be budgeted at either a full-time or part-time level, and
that may be in either the classified or unclassified service. It does not
include recurrent, extra-help, ordinance, contract and other contingent
positions.
      (13)   REGULAR STATUS refers to the completion of a required probationary
and/or trainee period in a regular classified position in the employee's
current or prior position, as applicable.
      (14)   SERVICE HOURS refers to paid hours from an employee's most recent
date of hire in a regular position and during an employee's regular tour of
duty, up to 80 hours per pay period. Time without pay, disability payments
(excluding Labor Code § 4850 time), medical emergency leave and overtime hours
do not count as service hours.
   (c)   Salary Schedules, Wage Increases, Classifications, and Salary Rates,
and Step Advancements.
      (1)   Salary Schedules. The salary schedules for Exempt Group and all
non-represented employees are as on file with the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors.
      (2)   Wage Increases. The following wage increases shall be included in
the salary schedules for Exempt Group employees and all non-represented
employees, as are on file with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors:
         Effective February 24, 2024, the County shall provide all
classifications in the Exempt Group with a three percent across the board
salary increase.
         Effective February 22, 2025, the County shall provide all
classifications in the Exempt Group with a three percent across the board
salary increase, subject to the following:
         If the County's Discretionary "Property Related Revenue", as defined
in the "Discretionary General Funding and Restricted Funds" section of the
County's Budget Book, are less than a two percent increase in 2023-24 compared
to 2022-23 and/or if statewide 2011 Realignment Sales Tax Collections from
Fiscal Year 2023-24, representing collections from September 2023 through
August 2024, decline by more than four percent compared to 2022-23, then the
County may, upon approval of the Board of Supervisors, defer this three percent
increase until August 23, 2025.
         Effective February 21, 2026, the County shall provide all
classifications in the Exempt Group with a three percent across the board
salary increase, subject to the following:
         If the County's Discretionary "Property Related Revenue", as defined
in the "Discretionary General Funding and Restricted Funds" section of the
County's Budget Book, are less than a two percent increase in 2024-25 compared
to 2023-24 and/or if statewide 2011 Realignment Sales Tax Collections from
Fiscal Year 2024-25, representing collections from September 2024 through
August 2025, decline by more than four percent compared to 2023-24, then the
County may, upon approval of the Board of Supervisors, defer this three percent
increase until August 22, 2026.
      (3)   Revenue Sharing.  For every one percent (1.00%) in "Property
Related Revenue" growth received in Fiscal Year 2023-24 above four percent
(4.00%), as defined in the "Discretionary General Funding and Restricted Funds"
section of the County's Budget Book, the County will provide a one-half percent
(0.50%) equity adjustment on February 22, 2025, up to a maximum equity of one
percent (1.00%).
         If Statewide 2011 Realignment Sales Tax Collections from Fiscal Year
2024-25, representing collections from September 2024 through August 2025, are
greater than a zero percent (0.00%) increase, then for every one percent
(1.00%) in Property Related Revenue growth received in 2024-25 above four
percent (4.00%), the County will provide a one-half percent (0.50%) equity
adjustment on February 21, 2026, up to a maximum equity of one percent (1.00%).
      (4)   List of Exempt Group Classifications.
         (A)   Exempt-Executive County Administrators.
 
EXECUTIVE COUNTY ADMINISTRATORS
                                 Annual    Annual    Annual       Annual
Job Code Classifications Benefit Salary    Salary    Salary       Salary
                         Group   Effective Effective Effective 2/ Effective 2/
                                 2/25/23   2/24/24   22/25        21/26
04237    Director of     B       $185,185  $190,741  $196,463     $202,357
         Airports
 
EXECUTIVE COUNTY ADMINISTRATORS
Job Code Classifications Benefit Group Salary Grade
EXECUTIVE COUNTY ADMINISTRATORS
Job Code Classifications                             Benefit Group Salary Grade
01115    Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer            B             85B
03489    Assistant Executive Officer                 B             101B
10030    Assistant Executive Officer - Human         B             101B
         Services
13111    Behavioral Health Medical Director          C             119C
03485    Chief Executive Officer                     B             116B
01246    Chief Information Officer                   B             97B
03515    Chief Probation Officer                     B             93B
03310    Clerk of the Board of Supervisors           B             84B
03488    County Chief Financial Officer              B             100B
03487    County Clerk1                               N/A           N/A
03495    County Counsel                              B             107B
03500    County Librarian                            B             86B
04228    Director of Aging and Adult Services        B             88B
04237    Director of Airports                        B             83B
04383    Director of Arrowhead Regional Medical      B             118B
         Center
04300    Director of Behavioral Health               B             97B
04255    Director of Child Support                   B             92B
04260    Director of County Museum                   B             81B
04273    Director of Economic Development            B             83B
04276    Director of Fleet Management                B             81B
03482    Director of Government Relations            B             83B
10004    Director of Human Resources                 B             98B
04320    Director of Land Use Services               B             91B
18200    Director of Preschool Services              B             87B
04340    Director of Public Works                    B             97B
04356    Director of Purchasing                      B             82B
04365    Director of Real Estate Services            B             86B
18143    Director of Risk Management                 B             84B
04386    Director of Transitional Assistance         B             92B
04390    Director of Veterans' Affairs               B             81B
04250    Director, Children and Family Services      B             97B
04280    Director, Community Development and Housing B             86B
18160    Director, Regional Parks                    B             89B
04278    Director, Workforce Development             B             83B
04272    Economic Development Administrator          B             92B
16345    Public Defender                             B             101B
08048    Public Health Director                      B             97B
18080    Registrar of Voters                         B             87B
        1Salary for this position is set at $1, not a salary grade.
 
      (B)   Exempt—Associate Administrators.
ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATORS
Job Code Classification Benefit Group Salary Grade
ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATORS
Job Code Classification                              Benefit Group Salary Grade
01061    Administrative Analyst I                    D             56D
01066    Administrative Analyst II                   C             66C
01068    Administrative Analyst III                  C             73C
01060    Administrative Analyst Trainee              D             45T_D
01289    ARC Administrative and Financial Manager    C             73C
01292    ARC Project Administrator                   C             57C
01288    ARC Public and Legislative Affairs Officer  C             62C
19173    ARMC Associate Chief Financial Officer      C             83C
19160    ARMC Chief Financial Officer                B             100B
01621    ARMC Chief Operating Officer                B             102B
19145    ARMC Finance and Budget Officer             C             77C
03098    Assistant Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer  C             75C
01280    Assistant Assessor                          B             82B
01286    Assistant Auditor-Controller/Treas urer/Tax B             84B
         Collector
01380    Assistant Chief Information Officer         C             92C
01297    Assistant Chief Probation Officer           C             85C
12149    Assistant County Librarian                  C             73C
04229    Assistant Director of Aging and Adult       C             78C
         Services
04238    Assistant Director of Airports              C             73C
01373    Assistant Director of Behavioral Health     C             86C
04254    Assistant Director of Child Support         C             85C
04257    Assistant Director of Children and Family   C             85C
         Services
10019    Assistant Director of Human Resources       C             87C
04321    Assistant Director of Land Use Services     C             84C
18219    Assistant Director of Preschool Services    C             78C
04331    Assistant Director of Public Health         C             86C
04342    Assistant Director of Public Works          C             92C
04355    Assistant Director of Purchasing            C             77C
04393    Assistant Director of Real Estate Services  C             81C
18144    Assistant Director of Risk Management       C             77C
04391    Assistant Director of Transitional          C             84C
         Assistance
04286    Assistant Director of Workforce Development C             78C
01410    Assistant District Attorney                 B             97B
01622    Assistant Hospital Administrator -          C             74C
         Ambulatory Services
03024    Assistant Investment Officer                D             66D
03114    Assistant Public Defender                   B             97B
01294    Assistant Recorder                          B             82B
18079    Assistant Registrar of Voters               C             78C
01532    Assistant Sheriff                           C             93C - SAF
19172    Associate Chief Nursing Officer             C             86C
01625    Associate Hospital Administrator            C             86C
         Professional Services
01599    ATC Project Administrator                   C             57C
01666    Auditor-Controller/Treas urer/Tax Collector C             78C
         Division Chief
01668    Auditor-Controller/Treas urer/Tax Collector C             71C
         Manager
15054    Banking & Settlement Compliance Manager     D             62D
01067    Board of Supervisor's Administrative        B             73B
         Analyst
10000    BOS Chief of Staff                          B             84B
02027    Building Official                           C             82C
19957    Business Solutions Division Chief           C             82C
01076    Chief Administrative Analyst                C             80C
03070    Chief Appraiser                             C             78C
01340    Chief Assistant County Counsel              B             100B
03107    Chief Assistant District Attorney           B             100B
03512    Chief Communications Officer                B             89B
04302    Chief Compliance Officer-Behavioral Health  C             80C
03099    Chief Deputy Clerk of Board of Supervisors  C             73C
01264    Chief Deputy County Museum                  C             65C
19522    Chief Deputy Director of Sheriff's          C             91C
         Administration
03105    Chief Deputy District Attorney              C             94C
03115    Chief Deputy Public Defender                C             94C
03116    Chief Deputy Recorder                       C             78C
03120    Chief Deputy Registrar of Voters            C             65C
03021    Chief Deputy Treasurer                      C             80C
05177    Chief Engineering Geologist                 C             74C
04393    Chief of Facilities Management              C             81C
15025    Chief Information Security Officer          C             92C
03111    Chief Learning Officer                      C             81B
19165    Chief Medical Information Officer           C             107C
19166    Chief Medical Officer                       C             114C
19164    Chief Nursing Officer                       C             93C
16382    Chief of Animal Care and Control            C             81C
03175    Chief of Assessment Services                C             78C
03083    Chief of Clinical Operations                C             73C
03499    Chief of County Counsel's Administration    C             70C
03106    Chief of District Attorney's Administration C             73C
10002    Chief of Environmental Health Services      C             81C
13138    Chief of Homeless Services                  B             81B
04290    Chief of Operations Community               C             80C
         Revitalization
01077    Chief of Project Management                 C             81C
03195    Chief of Public Defender's Administration   C             70C
03221    Chief Public Works Engineer                 C             88C
03078    Child Support Chief Attorney                C             91C
03278    Children's Network Officer                  C             69C
10025    Code Enforcement Chief                      C             82C
12151    Community Services Finance and Operations   C             73C
         Chief
03503    County Chief Operating Officer              B             102B
01062    County Compliance, Ethics and Privacy       C             76C
         Officer
03496    County Counsel Research Attorney I          C             62T_C
03497    County Counsel Research Attorney II         C             71C
01078    County HIPAA Security Officer/Assistant     C             72C
         Privacy Officer
03504    County Labor Relations Chief                B             92B
13274    County Marketing, Media & Communications    D             59D
         Coordinator
19863    County Surveyor                             C             84C
03150    Departmental IS Administrator               C             80C
19961    Deputy Chief of Business Solutions          C             77C
         Development
16401    Deputy Chief of Community Health Services   C             76C
16275    Deputy Chief Probation Officer              C             81C
04085    Deputy County Counsel I                     C             64T_C
04095    Deputy County Counsel II                    C             73T_C
04100    Deputy County Counsel III                   C             80T_C
04105    Deputy County Counsel IV                    C             86C_C
04107    Deputy County Counsel V                     C             89C_C
13124    Deputy Director Behavioral Health           C             83C
         Administrative Services
03153    Deputy Director of Behavioral Health        C             83C
         Program Services
04292    Deputy Director of Fleet Management         C             74C
12121    Deputy Director of Governmental &           B             73B
         Legislative Affairs
18182    Deputy Director of Regional Parks           C             77C
04287    Deputy Director of RES Facilities           C             74C
         Management
04394    Deputy Director of RES Leasing &            C             76C
         Acquisition
01074    Deputy Director of RES Project Management   C             77C
18146    Deputy Director of Risk Management          C             71C
04124    Deputy Director, Administrative Services    C             75C
04299    Deputy Director, Behavioral Health Quality  C             83C
         Management
04256    Deputy Director, Child Support              C             74C
18162    Deputy Director, Children and Family        C             74C
         Services
04119    Deputy Director, Community Development and  C             74C
         Housing
04118    Deputy Director, Department of Aging and    C             74C
         Adult Services
04282    Deputy Director, Economic Development       C             74C
18201    Deputy Director, Preschool Services         C             74C
18167    Deputy Director, Program Development        C             74C
04288    Deputy Director, Public Works               C             88C
01331    Deputy Director, Sheriff's Coroner Division C             75C - SAF
18163    Deputy Director, Transitional Assistance    C             74C
04397    Deputy Director, Veterans Affairs           C             74C
04275    Deputy Director, Workforce Development      C             74C
04060    Deputy Executive Officer                    B             91B
16411    Deputy Public Information Officer           C             66C
03493    Director of Legislative Affairs             B             83B
16278    Director of Probation Administration        C             80C
04289    Director of Project and Facilities          B             87B
         Management
19162    Director of Public Relations and Marketing  C             68C
04402    District Attorney Assistant Chief           C             83C - SAF
         Investigator
04395    District Attorney Chief Investigator        C             89C - SAF
04406    District Attorney, Public Affairs Officer   C             73C
06041    Economic Development Manager                C             69C
16111    EMACS Manager                               C             71C
05145    Emergency Medical Services Assistant        C             70C
         Administrator
01615    EPIC Systems Administrator                  C             82C
06035    Field Representative                        B             63B
03506    Finance and Administration Projects         D             58D
         Coordinator
03502    Government Relations Analyst                C             66C
08040    Health Officer                              C             101C
08050    Healthcare Program Administrator            D             70D
13126    Homeless Services Officer                   C             72C
06062    Housing Agency Finance Officer              C             66C
04291    Housing Development Manager                 C             68C
16087    Human Capital Management Analyst Trainee    D             53T_D
16088    Human Capital Management Analyst            D             61D
16103    Human Capital Management Project Manager    D             68D
16119    Human Resources Administrative Manager      C             73C
16095    Human Resources Analyst I                   D             60D
16098    Human Resources Analyst II                  D             68D
16100    Human Resources Analyst III                 C             71C
16094    Human Resources Analyst Trainee             D             47T_D
16091    Human Resources Assistant                   D             33D
10027    Human Resources Deputy Director             C             84C
16110    Human Resources Division Chief              C             80C
16115    Human Resources Business Partner I          D             65T_D
16116    Human Resources Business Partner II         C             72C
16101    Human Resources Investigator                D             68D
16109    Human Resources Manager                     C             75C
16093    Human Resources Specialist                  D             41D
16092    Human Resources Technician                  D             35D
05108    Human Services Administrative Manager       D             60D
04414    Human Services Auditing Chief               C             75C
05101    Human Services Program Integrity Division   C             74C
         Chief
03023    Indigent Defense Analyst                    D             56D
15024    IT Chief Finance Officer                    C             80C
01302    IT Deputy Chief                             C             77C
15022    IT Division Chief                           C             82C
15023    IT Finance Officer                          C             71C
15020    Information Services Security Officer       C             78C
15033    Investment Analyst                          D             64D
15032    Investment Analyst Trainee                  D             51T_D
01667    Investment Officer                          C             73C
05092    Labor Negotiator                            C             80C
03511    Labor Relations Analyst                     D             60D
01251    Land Development Chief                      C             82C
03112    Learning and Organizational Development     C             73C
         Division Chief
12102    Legislative Analyst                         C             70C
04267    Marketing and Events Manager                C             62C
03176    Network Services Division Chief             C             82C
19656    Organizational Development Business Partner C             63C
01250    Planning Director                           C             82C
09999    Principal Administrative Analyst            C             77C
16220    Principal Appraiser                         C             69C
03100    Principal Assistant County Counsel          B             94B
10024    Principal Management Analyst                B             84B
19856    Probation Health Services Manager           C             81C
16360    Public Health Chief Financial Officer       C             80C
16358    Public Health Division Chief                C             80C
16385    Public Health Medical Director              C             97C
16410    Public Information Officer                  B             83B
04341    Public Works Chief Financial Officer        C             80C
01638    Quality and Accreditation Administrator     C             88C
16389    Quality and Compliance Officer              C             75C
18031    Real Estate Services Manager                C             67C
18141    Risk Assessment Officer                     C             70C
01600    SAP Chief                                   C             80C
16102    Senior Human Resources Investigator         C             72C
03509    Senior Labor Relations Analyst              C             72C
03510    Senior Labor Relations Officer              C             75C
16089    Senior Human Capital Management Analyst     D             65D
04207    Sheriff's Deputy Director of Administrative C             84C
         Services
19521    Sheriff's Administrative Manager            C             73C
19465    Sheriff's Captain                           C             83C - SAF
19460    Sheriff's Deputy Chief                      C             88C - SAF
19518    Sheriff's Executive Officer of Corrections  C             88C
         and Support Services
19520    Sheriff's Financial Manager                 C             80C
19517    Sheriff’s Finance Officer                 C             75C
19507    Sheriff's Health Services Administrator     C             84C
04123    Special Assistant Deputy District Attorney  C             88C
04126    Special Assistant to the District Attorney  B             97B
03505    Strategic Initiatives Chief                 C             80C
19196    Strategy and Business Development Officer   C             77C
19822    Supervising Deputy County Counsel           C             92C
16120    Supervising Human Resources Business        C             75C
         Partner
16096    Supervising Human Resources Technician      D             43D
21005    Undersheriff                                B             98B - SAF
17351    Victim Services Chief                       C             71C
 
 
         (C)   Exempt—Executive Assistants.
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANTS
Job Code Classification Benefit Group Salary Grade
EXECUTIVE ASSISTANTS
Job Code Classification                            Benefit Group Salary Grade
01059    Administrative Aide (K)                   C             57C
03101    Administrative Aide to the County Counsel C             57C
01598    Auditor- Controller/Treasurer/Tax         C             57C
         Collector Executive Assistant
05282    CEO Executive Assistant                   C             62C
05281    CEO Executive Assistant - Unclassified    C             60C
16019    County Counsel Law Clerk                  C             58C
19046    County Counsel Lead Secretary             D             48D
03498    County Counsel Paralegal                  D             50D
03507    County Counsel Senior Paralegal           D             54D
05320    Executive Assistant                       D             57D
05292    Executive Administrative Assistant I      D             46D
05291    Executive Administrative Assistant  II    D             49D
05293    Executive Administrative Assistant III    D             53D
05256    Executive Secretary, Board of Supervisors C             52C
03280    Secretary, Civil Service Commission       D             45D
05290    Senior Executive Administrative Assistant C             56C
19540    Sheriff's Special Assistant               C             57C
 
         (D)   Notwithstanding the salary as established by this chapter, the
Board of Supervisors may establish salary, benefits, and other terms and
conditions of employment by contract for the classifications listed in this
section.
      (5)   Salary Rates and Step Advancements.
         (A)   Eligibility for Step Advancement. Employees shall be hired at
Step 1 of the established base salary range, except as otherwise provided in
this subdivision. Variable entrance steps may be established if justified by
recruitment needs through Step 8 with the approval of the appointing authority
and through the top step with the approval of the Director of Human Resources
or designee.
            Within the base salary range, all step advancements will be made at
the beginning of the pay period in which the employee completes the required
number of service hours. However, when an employee reaches the required number
of service hours with 80 hours in each pay period, the step advancement will be
made at the beginning of the next pay period. Approval for advancement shall be
based upon completion of the required length of service hours in the
classification, satisfactory work performance, and appointing authority
recommendation.
            Completed service hours shall be defined as regularly scheduled
hours in a paid status, up to 80 hours per pay period. Overtime hours,
disability payments, medical emergency leave, and time without pay shall not
count toward step advancements. Unless otherwise approved by the Board of
Supervisors, step advancements within a base salary range shall be based upon a
one-step increment, approximately two and one-half percent. The employee shall
be eligible for step advancements after completion of increments of 1,040 hours
until the top step of the range is reached.
            An appointing authority may request, in limited exceptional
circumstances and with adequate justification, the adjustment of the salary
step or salary rate of an employee to maintain salary equity within the system,
to prevent undue hardship or unfairness due to the application of any rule or
policy, or to correct any salary inequity, subject to the recommendation of the
Director of Human Resources and the final approval of the Chief Executive
Officer or his/her designee. The Director of Human Resources may authorize the
adjustment of the salary step or salary rate of an employee to correct any
payroll error or omission, including any such action which may have arisen in
any prior fiscal year.
         (B)   Implementation of Classification Study Results.
            (I)   Upgrading. An upgrading is the reclassification of a position
from one classification to another classification having a higher base salary
range. Whenever an incumbent employee is upgraded as a result of such
reclassification, pursuant to the Personnel Rules, such employee's step
placement in the new salary range shall be governed by the subdivision on
"Promotions."
            (II)   Downgrading. A downgrading is the reclassification of a
position from one classification to another classification having a lower base
salary range. When a position is downgraded, the incumbent employee may
continue at the same salary rate where the salary rate is within the new base
salary range. Where an incumbent receives a salary rate greater than the
maximum of the new base salary range, the Director of Human Resources may
authorize continuation of the same salary rate to the incumbent employee that
the employee received prior to the downgrading of the position by placing the
employee on an "X" step, provided that the employee shall receive no future
salary rate increases until the salary range maximum of the new classification
exceeds the "X" step.
         (C)   Salary Rate Adjustment. A salary rate (equity) adjustment is a
change in the salary range assignment of an existing classification as a result
of a compensation study. Step placement for incumbent employees whose
classification is assigned to a higher base salary range shall be determined as
follows, unless this process is waived by the Chief Executive Officer:
            (I)   If the employee's original base rate of pay is less than Step
1 of the newly designated pay range, the employee shall be placed on Step 1 of
the new range. The employee shall be eligible to advance to the next step upon
receiving a satisfactory rating after completion of 1,040 hours, in accordance
with the requirements of §
13.0613 (c)(4)(A). Subsequent step advances shall be administered in accordance
with §
13.0613 (c)(4)(A).
            (II)   If the employee's original base rate of pay falls within the
newly designated pay range, and the salary adjustment granted is at least two
salary ranges, the employee shall be placed upon the step in the new range that
is approximately a five percent salary increase, not to exceed the maximum step
of the new range. If the employee's original base rate of pay falls within the
newly designated pay range, and the salary adjustment granted is less than two
salary ranges, the employee shall be placed upon the step in the new range that
is approximately a two and one-half percent salary increase, not to exceed the
maximum step of the new range. The employee shall be eligible to advance to the
next step upon receiving a satisfactory rating after completion of 1,040 hours,
in accordance with the requirements of §
13.0613 (c)(4)(A). Subsequent step advances shall be administered in accordance
with §
13.0613 (c)(4)(A).
         (D)   Demotion.  A demotion is the appointment of an employee from an
incumbent position to a position in a different classification for which the
maximum rate of pay is lower. An employee demoted for disciplinary reasons
shall be placed on the step within the base salary range of the class to which
the employee demoted as provided in the order of demotion.
            An employee demoted for non-disciplinary reasons who returns to
their former classification during the probationary period or within 2,080
service hours of promotion, shall be returned to the same salary step within
the base salary range for the former classification that the employee was on
prior to promotion. No credit shall be granted for hours worked at the promoted
level for the next step advance due date.
            An employee demoted for non-disciplinary reasons shall be placed on
a step closest to, but not less than, their current base rate of pay on the
salary range of the classification to which the employee demotes, not to exceed
the top step of the applicable range, with the approval of the appointing
authority and the Director of Human Resources.
            An employee who demotes for non-disciplinary reasons to a trainee
classification for which the journey level classification is higher than the
classification they demoted from, shall be placed on a step closest to, but not
less than, their current base rate of pay on the salary range of the
classification to which the employee demoted. Employees whose current base rate
of pay exceeds the top step of the salary range to which the employee demoted
shall be placed on the "X" step and retain their current base rate of pay.
Provided that the "X" step continues to be above the top step of the demoted
classification range, the employee shall receive no future salary rate
increases until the employee has promoted to the journey level classification.
            An employee who demotes for non-disciplinary reasons to a trainee
classification for which the journey level classification is lower than the
classification they demoted from shall retain the same salary rate, provided
that the salary rate does not exceed the top step of the journey level
classification. If the salary rate is higher than the top step of the journey
level classification, the employee shall be placed at the top step of the base
salary range of the lower journey level classification.
         (E)   Promotion. A promotion is the appointment of an employee from
one classification to a classification having a higher base salary range. A
promoted employee shall receive at least the entrance rate of the new range or
a two-step or five percent salary increase, (i.e., mathematically closest to
five percent) whichever is greater, provided that no employee is thereby
advanced in step nor advanced above the top step of the higher base salary
range. At the discretion of the appointing authority and with the approval of
the Director of Human Resources, an employee may be placed at any step within
the higher base salary range. Promotions shall be effective only at the
beginning of a pay period unless the Director of Human Resources approves an
exception.
   (d)   Job Sharing and Part-time Employment.  The County will make reasonable
accommodation for employees who desire to share their positions with other
qualified employees or eligible persons or to work on a part-time basis. Jobs
may be shared on an hourly or daily basis. All benefits for job sharing and
part-time employees shall be pro-rated on regularly scheduled hours except as
may otherwise be provided. Benefits not subject to proration include the
following leaves: blood donation, examination time, and bereavement. Further,
where a specific benefit provides a minimum hour requirement (e.g., must be
full-time, or scheduled hours) job sharing and part-time employees shall be
required to meet the minimum hour requirement in order to receive the benefit.
   (e)   Hours of Work.
      (1)   Employees shall be required to work during such hours as necessary
to carry out the duties of their position as designated by the appointing
authority, and such hours may be varied so long as the work requirements and
efficient operations of the County are assured.
      (2)   The nature of Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) exempt employment for
certain affected Exempt Group classifications is such that intermittent,
occasional overtime is needed to fulfill the responsibilities and requirements
of the position. Usually, additional time and effort are proportionate to the
importance and level of the responsible position. These factors of time and
effort are incorporated when the compensation level of FLSA-exempt positions is
established. In those instances in which a position's work extends well beyond
the normal hours of employment, the Chief Executive Officer may authorize
additional compensation in the form of cash payment or compensating time off,
generally on a pre-approved and prescheduled basis. Circumstances for such
compensation would include implementation of the intent of a Board of
Supervisors approved program or emergency response.
      (3)   For FLSA-covered employees in the Exempt Group classifications,
overtime is determined by the legal requirements of the FLSA. For FLSA-covered
employees, the following overtime provisions apply.
         (A)   Definition. OVERTIME shall be defined as all hours actually
worked in excess of 40 hours a work period. For purposes of defining overtime,
paid leave time, excluding sick leave as provided in §
13.0613(e)(3)(B), shall be considered as time actually worked. Overtime shall
be reported in increments of full 15 minutes and is non-accumulative and non-
payable when incurred in units of less than 15 minutes. Overtime shall not
affect leave accruals.
         (B)   Sick leave that is not pre-approved and sick leave used by
employees on leave restriction shall not be considered as time actually worked
for the purpose of calculating overtime. PRE-APPROVED shall mean notice to
management at least 48 hours prior to the beginning of the leave.
         (C)   Overtime Compensation.  Any employee authorized by the
appointing authority or authorized representative to work overtime shall be
compensated at premium rates, i.e., one and one-half times the employee's
regular rate of pay. Payment for overtime compensation shall be made on the
first payday following the pay period in which such overtime is worked, unless
overtime compensation cannot be computed until some later date, in which case,
overtime compensation will be paid on the next regular payday after such
computation can be made.
            In lieu of cash payment, upon request of the employee and approval
of the appointing authority, an employee may accrue compensating time off at
premium hours. Cash payment at the employee's regular rate of pay shall
automatically be paid for any compensating time which exceeds 80 hours, for any
such time which has not been taken within 26 pay periods after being accrued,
or for any hours on record immediately prior to promotion, demotion or
termination of employment.
         (D)   Variable Work Schedule.  An appointing authority, with agreement
of an affected employee, may arrange for that individual to take such time off
as necessary to ensure that an employee's actual time worked does not exceed 40
hours within a given work period.
         (E)   Work Period.  The work period for purposes of overtime commences
at 12:01 a.m. Saturday and ends at 12:00 midnight the following Friday of each
week. The pay period and workweek may be adjusted in accordance with FLSA
requirements.
   (f)   Insurance Programs.
      (1)   Medical and Dental Coverage Insurance.
         (A)   All eligible employees scheduled to work 40 hours or more per
pay period in a regular position must enroll in a medical and dental plan
offered by the County. Employees who fail to elect medical and dental plan
coverage will be automatically enrolled in the medical broad network HMO plan
and dental HMO plan with the lowest biweekly premium rates available in the
geographical location of the employee's primary residence. Medical and dental
plan coverage will become effective on the first day of the pay period
following the first pay period in which the employee is scheduled to work 40
hours or more and be in paid status.
         (B)   To continue enrollment in County-sponsored medical and dental
plan coverage, an employee must remain in a regular position scheduled to work
for a minimum of 40 hours per pay period and be in paid status or be on an
approved leave for which continuation of medical and dental coverage is
expressly provided under this subdivision, or be eligible for and have timely
paid the premium for COBRA continuation coverage.
         (C)   Eligible employees may elect to enroll their dependents upon
initial eligibility for medical and dental insurance. Thereafter, newly
eligible dependents may be enrolled within 60 days of obtaining dependent
status, such as birth, adoption, marriage, or registration of domestic
partnership.
         (D)   Notification of a mid-year qualifying event must be submitted to
Human Resources in accordance with procedures adopted by Human Resources.
Employees are responsible for notifying the County within 60 days of
dependent's change in eligibility for the County plans.
         (E)   Dependent(s) must be removed mid-plan year when a dependent(s)
becomes ineligible for coverage under the insurance plan eligibility rules, for
example, divorce, over-age dependent, or termination of domestic partnership.
         (F)   Enrollment elections must remain in effect for the remainder of
the plan year unless an employee experiences an IRS qualifying event.
         (G)   Premiums for coverage will be automatically deducted from the
employee's pay warrant. Failure to pay premiums will result in loss of coverage
for the employee and/or the dependents. If the employee does not have
sufficient earnings to cover the deduction for premiums, the employee must make
alternative payment arrangements that are acceptable to Human Resources.
         (H)   Employees eligible for medical plan coverage who are also
enrolled in a comparable group medical plan sponsored by another employer or
are covered by a spouse, domestic partner, or parent who is also employed with
the County may elect to discontinue enrollment in County-sponsored medical plan
(opt-out or waive).
            (I)   Employees who, prior to July 9, 2005, elected to opt-out of
County-sponsored medical plan coverage and continue to opt-out will receive the
following biweekly amount: Employees scheduled for 61 to 80 hours per pay
period shall receive $161.54 per pay period. Employees scheduled for 40 to 60
hours per pay period shall receive $80.77 per pay period. To receive these
amounts, the employee must be in paid status.
            (II)   Employees scheduled to work 61 to 80 hours who, prior to
July 9, 2005, elected to waive medical plan coverage to a spouse, domestic
partner, or parent employed by the County and continue to waive will receive
$230.00 per pay period; employees scheduled for 40 to 60 hours who continue to
waive shall receive $115.00 per pay period.
            (III)   New opt-outs or waives (i.e., new employees and current
employees who opted-out or waived effective July 9, 2005, and any time
thereafter) scheduled for 61 to 80 hours per pay period will receive $40.00 per
pay period; new opt-outs or waives scheduled for 40 to 60 hours shall receive
$20.00 per pay period.
         (I)   Employees eligible for County-sponsored dental plan coverage who
are also enrolled in a comparable group dental plan sponsored by another
employer or are covered by a spouse, domestic partner, or parent who is also
employed with the County may elect to discontinue enrollment in their County-
sponsored dental plan.
         (J)   The rules and procedures for electing to opt-out of or waive
County-sponsored medical and dental plan coverage are established and
administered by Human Resources.
            (I)   Employees may elect to opt-out of or waive County medical
and/or dental plan coverage(s) within 60 calendar days of the effective date of
gaining other employer group coverage. Proof of initial gain of other employer
group coverage is required at the time that opt-out or waive is elected.
            (II)   Employees may also elect to opt-out of or waive County
medical and/or dental plan coverage during an annual open enrollment period.
All employees who are newly opting-out or waiving during an open enrollment
period must provide verification of other group coverage.
            (III)   Except as required at the initial opt-out/waive election,
employees are not required to provide verification of continued coverage unless
requested by the plan administrator.
            (IV)   Employees who voluntarily or involuntarily lose their other
employer group medical and/or dental plan coverage must enroll in a County-
sponsored medical and/or dental plan within 60 calendar days. Enrollment in the
County-sponsored plan will be provided in accordance with the requirements of
the applicable plan.
            (V)   There must be no break in the employee's medical and/or
dental plan coverage between the termination date of the other employer group
coverage and enrollment in a County sponsored medical and/or dental plan. Terms
and conditions of the applicable plan will determine the required retroactive
enrollment period and premiums required to implement coverage. Failure to
notify the County of loss of group coverage within 60 calendar days will
require the employee to pay their insurance premiums retroactively on an after-
tax basis.
         (K)   For employees assigned to work in the Needles, Trona, and Baker
work locations, the County will establish a Needles Subsidy. To be eligible for
the Needles Subsidy the employee must be enrolled in a medical plan and receive
the MPS. The Needles Subsidy will be paid by the employee's department and will
be equal to the amount of the premium difference between the indemnity medical
plan offered in these specific work locations and the HMO medical plan with the
most comparable benefit design (e.g., similar copayment amounts, out-of-pocket
maximums, etc.) provided by the County. The applicable subsidy amount shall be
paid directly to the provider of the County-sponsored medical plan in which the
eligible employee has enrolled. This Needles Subsidy will be established each
year when premiums change for the County-sponsored medical plans. The subsidy
will be discontinued when the HMO plan used in the comparison above in this
paragraph becomes available to the employees.
      (2)   Term Life Insurance.
         (A)   County Paid Life Insurance. The County will pay the premium for
a term life policy, the amount of which is based on the eligible employee's
scheduled hours. Employees scheduled from 40 to 60 hours per pay period shall
receive $25,000.00 in coverage. An employee scheduled from 61 to 80 hours shall
receive $50,000.00 in coverage. Life insurance will become effective on the
first day of the pay period following the employee's first pay period in which
the employee is in paid status. For pay periods in which the employee is not in
paid status, the employee shall have the option of continuing life insurance
coverage at the employee's expense.
         (B)   Voluntary Life Insurance.  In accordance with the procedures
established by Human Resources, eligible employees may purchase, through
payroll deductions, term life insurance subject to carrier requirements. New
employees shall become initially eligible to participate in this program on the
first day of the pay period following the pay period in which the employee is
in paid status. Participation will continue as long as premiums are paid
timely. If the employee does not have sufficient earnings to cover the
deduction for premiums, the employee must make alternative payment arrangements
that are acceptable to Human Resources.
      (3)   Group Universal Life. Eligible employees may purchase, through
payroll deductions, group universal life insurance subject to carrier
requirements and approval. The benefit levels for such insurance shall be
equivalent to no more than three times the employee's annual base earnings.
Employees who purchase group universal life insurance shall be provided a
County contribution towards the biweekly premium based on the following
schedule:
 
Benefit Group   County Contribution
Benefit Group A 100 percent of the premium of the annual base salary
                50 percent of the premium of the annual base salary or 100
Benefit Group B percent of the premium equal to one-half of the annual base
                salary
Benefit Group C 25 percent of the premium of the annual base salary
Benefit Group D 25 percent of the premium of the annual base salary
 
         If the employee does not have sufficient earnings to cover the
deduction for premiums, the employee must make alternative payment arrangements
that are acceptable to Human Resources.
      (4)   Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance.  Exempt Group
employees may purchase amounts of accidental death and dismemberment insurance
coverage for themselves and dependents through payroll deduction. New employees
shall become initially eligible to participate in these programs on the first
day of the pay period following the first pay period in which the employee is
in paid status. Participation will continue as long as premiums are paid
timely. If the employee does not have sufficient earnings to cover the
deduction for premiums, the employee must make alternative payment arrangements
that are acceptable to Human Resources. The benefits will be provided subject
to carrier requirements and will be administered by Human Resources.
      (5)   Long-Term Disability Insurance.  The County will provide Exempt
Group employees with long-term disability insurance subject to carrier
requirements and approval. The benefit levels are subject to carrier
requirements. Integration of leave balances (e.g., sick, vacation, etc.),
either partially or fully, are allowed in conjunction with long-term disability
benefits.
      (6)   Short-Term Disability Insurance. The County will provide an
employer paid short-term disability insurance plan for Exempt Group employees.
This benefit shall apply to Exempt Group employees in regular positions who are
regularly scheduled to work 40 hours or more per pay period. The short-term
disability insurance plan benefit coverage shall be governed by the plan
document that has been approved and adopted by the Board of Supervisors for
Exempt Group employees and is subject to carrier requirements and approval. The
short-term disability insurance plan benefit coverage shall include a provision
for a seven consecutive calendar day waiting period from the first day of
disability before benefits begin. Benefits shall be 55 percent of base salary
up to a weekly maximum established by a formula that incorporates the State of
California for the State Disability Insurance fund maximum. Benefit payments
terminate when the employee is no longer disabled or after receiving 180 days
of benefits at which time the employee would be eligible for long-term
disability benefits if still medically disabled.
      (7)   Vision Care Insurance. Subject to carrier requirements, the County
will pay the premiums for vision care insurance for employees who are in paid
status and their eligible dependents.
   (g)   Leave Provisions.
      (1)   Sick Leave.  Sick leave with pay is an insurance or protection
provided by the County to be granted in circumstances of adversity to promote
the health of the individual employee. It is not an earned right to time off
from work. SICK LEAVE is defined to mean the authorized absence from duty of an
employee because of physical or mental illness, injury, pregnancy, confirmed
exposure to a serious contagious disease, for a medical, optical, or dental
appointment, for certain purposes related to being a victim of domestic
violence, sexual assault or stalking, or other purpose authorized herein.
         (A)   Definition.
            (I)   FAMILY MEMBER. A FAMILY MEMBER, as defined by Labor Code §
245.5, is a parent, child, spouse, registered domestic partner, grandparent,
grandchild, sibling, or any person designated by the employee at the time the
employee requests paid sick days. An employee shall not identify more than one
"designated person" as a family member in a 12-month period from the first date
of designation. PARENT means a biological, foster, adoptive, or stepparent, a
legal guardian, or a person who stood in loco parentis when the employee was a
minor child of the employee, or the employee's spouse or registered domestic
partner. CHILD means a biological, foster, or adopted child, a stepchild, a
legal ward, a child of a domestic partner, or a child to whom the employee
stands in loco parentis. DOMESTIC PARTNER is defined by Family Code § 297.
            (II)   EXTENDED FAMILY. EXTENDED FAMILY is defined as, parent/
sibling-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, or any step relations as defined
herein.
         (B)   Accumulation. Employees in regular positions shall accrue sick
leave for each payroll period completed, prorated on the basis of 3.69 hours
per pay period, except as provided in § 13.0613(g)(14). Earned sick leave shall
be available for use the first day following the payroll period in which it is
earned. Employees in regular positions paid less than 80 hours per pay period
or job-shared positions shall receive sick leave accumulation on a pro rata
basis. There shall be no limit on sick leave accumulation.
         (C)   Compensation. Approved sick leave with pay shall be compensated
at the employee's base rate of pay. The minimum charge against accumulated sick
leave shall be 15 minutes.
         (D)   Administration.
            (I)   Investigation.  It shall be the responsibility and duty of
each appointing authority to investigate each request for sick leave and to
allow sick leave with pay where the application is determined to be proper and
fitting, subject to approval of the Director of Human Resources.
            (II)   Notice of Sickness.  In 24-hour departments, the appointing
authority or designee should be notified at least two hours prior to the start
of the employee's scheduled tour of duty of a sickness on the first day of
absence and must be notified at least one hour prior to the start of the
employee's scheduled tour of duty. In other departments, the appointing
authority or designee must be notified within one-half hour after the start of
the employee's scheduled tour of duty of a sickness on the first day of
absence.
               It is the responsibility of the employee to keep the appointing
authority informed as to continued absence beyond the first day for reasons due
to sickness or occupational disability. Failure to make such notification shall
result in denial of sick leave with pay. If the employee receives a doctor's
off-work order and provides notice of same to the appointing authority, the
employee is not required to contact the department daily. If the employee does
not have an off-work order or has not notified the appointing authority that
one has been issued, the employee shall be required to contact the department
daily in accordance with the timeframe above.
            (III)   Review.  The Director of Human Resources may review and
determine the justification of any request for sick leave with pay and may, in
the interest of the County, require information from a doctor to support a
claim for sick leave pay.
            (IV)   Proof. A doctor's certificate or other adequate proof shall
be provided by the employee in all cases of absence due to illness if requested
by the appointing authority. All requests for proof of illness shall be made in
compliance with the Labor Code and other law.
            (V)   Improper Use.  Evidence substantiating the use of sick leave
for willful injury, gross negligence, intemperance, trivial indispositions,
instances of misrepresentation, or violation of the rules defined herein will
result in denial of sick leave with pay and shall be construed as grounds for
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
         (E)   Sick Leave for Other than Personal Illness/Injury.
            (I)   Family Sick Leave.  A maximum of one-half of the employee's
annual accrual of earned sick leave per calendar year may be used for
attendance upon family members who require the attention of the employee. Upon
approval of the appointing authority, the employee may use part of this annual
allowance for attendance upon members of the employee's extended family
residing in the employee's household who require the attention of the employee.
            (II)   Bereavement. A maximum of three days earned sick leave may
be used per occurrence for bereavement due to the death of an employee's family
member as defined in §
13.0613 (g)(1)(A)(I), except for a person "designated" by the employee for sick
leave purposes, and for any member of the employee's extended family as defined
in §
13.0613 (g)(1)(A)(II) or any relative who resided with the employee.
            (III)   Birth/Adoption. A maximum of 40 hours earned sick leave may
be used per occurrence for arrival of an adoptive child at the employee's home.
An employee may utilize on an annual basis no more than 40 hours of accumulated
sick leave per calendar year for the birth of his or her child.
            (IV)   Medical, Optical or Dental Appointments.  The employee may
use sick leave for medical, dental or optical appointments; however, every
effort should be made to schedule the appointments at a time of day that will
minimize the employee's time off work.
         (F)   Return-to-Work Medical Clearance.
            (I)   Under any of the following circumstances, all employees who
have been off work due to an illness or injury will report to the San
Bernardino County Center for Employee Health and Wellness for a medical
evaluation of condition and authorization to return to work before returning to
work.
               (i)   Employees whose treating physician or other qualified
medical provider has ordered job modification(s) as a condition for either
continuing to work or for returning to work after an illness or injury. This
applies to both occupational and non-occupational illness or injury.
               (ii)   Employees who have been off work due to communicable
diseases such as, but not limited to, chicken pox and measles.
               (iii)   Employees who have been absent on account of serious
medical condition, when so directed by appointing authority.
            (II)   Employees are required to attend return-to-work medical
appointments at the Center for Employee Health and Wellness on their own time;
however, mileage for attending such appointments are eligible for reimbursement
pursuant to the expense reimbursement provision, §
13.0613(j).
            (III)   It is the responsibility of the employee to obtain written
notice from the medical provider of authorization to return to work with or
without job modification. To ensure all necessary and relevant medical
information is provided, the County shall make available forms to be completed
by the medical provider. It is the responsibility of the employee to provide
verbal notice to his or her appointing authority immediately upon receipt of
the medical provider's authorization to return to work, and no later than 24
hours after receipt of the notice. The appointing authority or designee will
schedule an appropriate medical evaluation for the employee with the Center for
Employee Health and Wellness prior to the employee's return to work. The
employee shall provide the medical provider's written notice of authorization
to return to work to the Center at or prior to the employee's scheduled
appointment time.
            (IV)   Exceptions to the above requirements may be made on a case-
by-case basis by the Center for Employee Health and Wellness.
            (V)   The employee is obligated to attend the appointment as
scheduled under the conditions outlined above. If the employee fails to adhere
to the procedure, the employee is required to use sick leave or leave without
pay for any work hours missed. If required notice has been provided, and there
is a delay between the employee's appointment with the Center and the start of
his or her scheduled tour of duty on the day that he or she was released to
return to work, the County will pay for work hours missed, without charge to
the employee's leave balances.
            (VI)   The final decision on the employee's ability to return to
work rests with the medical provider at the Center. In the event the employee
is not released to return to work by the medical provider at the Center, the
employee's status would continue on sick leave or, where there is no balance,
leave without pay.
         (G)   Workers' Compensation. Employees shall receive full salary in
lieu of Workers' Compensation benefits and paid sick leave for the first 40
hours following an occupational injury or illness, if authorized off work by
order of an accepted physician under the Workers' Compensation sections of the
California Labor Code. Thereafter, accumulated paid leave may be prorated to
supplement such temporary disability compensation payments, provided that the
total amount shall not exceed the regular gross salary of the employee.
Employees eligible for salary continuation pursuant to Labor Code § 4850 are
not entitled to this paid time.
         (H)   Employees covered by Labor Code § 4850 who are injured in the
line of duty are entitled to full salary in lieu of Workers' Compensation
benefits and sick leave for a period not to exceed one year. After the employee
has used one full year of such "4850 time", said employee may use accumulated
paid leave with pay with the approval of the appointing authority to augment
temporary disability payments if said employee is still temporarily disabled by
order of an accepted physician under the Workers' Compensation sections or
until said employee is retired.
         (I)   Separation. Unused sick leave shall not be payable upon
separation of the employee, except as provided in the Retirement Medical Trust
Fund, §
13.0613 (k)(4) and as provided below.
Upon the death of an active employee with five or more years of continuous
service from the most recent date of hire in a regular position, the estate of
the deceased employee will be paid the cash value for the unused sick leave
balances according to the sick leave conversion formula below only up to 1,000
hours, and will not go into the Trust.
 
Sick Leave Balance as of Date of Cash Payment Percent of Hours of Sick Leave
Separation for Death             Balance
480 hours or less                30 percent
481 to 600 hours                 35 percent
601 to 720 hours                 40 percent
721 to 840 hours                 45 percent
841 to 1,000 hours               50 percent
 
         (J)   Sick Leave Conversion. While employed by the County, employees
who have contributed to a public sector retirement(s) for over five years and
have not withdrawn the contribution from the system(s) may exchange accrued
sick leave hours in excess of 200 hours for vacation time on the following
basis:
 
Sick Leave Balance at Time of Sick Leave to Vacation Leave Conversion
Conversion                    Ratio
201 to 599 hours              3 sick hours to 1 hour vacation
600 to 799 hours              2.5 sick hours to 1 hour vacation
800 or more hours             2 sick hours to 1 hour vacation
 
         Any such exchange must be made in ten-hour increments of accrued sick
leave under the procedures established by the Director of Human Resources.
Employees may elect this exchange once per calendar year.
      (2)   Vacation Leave.
         (A)   Definition.  VACATION is a right, earned as a condition of
employment, to a leave of absence with pay for the recreation and well-being of
the employee. If an employee has exhausted sick leave, vacation leave may be
used for sick leave purposes upon a special request of the employee and with
the approval of the appointing authority.
         (B)   Accumulation. Employees in regular positions scheduled to work
80 hours per pay period shall accrue, on a pro-rata basis, vacation leave for
completed pay periods. Such vacation leave shall be available for use on the
first day following the pay period in which it is earned, provided an employee
has worked six pay periods from the employee's hire date. Employees in regular
positions paid less than 80 hours per pay period or job shared positions shall
receive vacation leave accumulation on a pro-rata basis.
 
Length of Service from Hire Date            Annual Vacation Allowance
Hire date through 8,320 service hours       80 hours
Over 8,320 and through 18,720 service hours 120 hours
Over 18,720 service hours                   160 hours
 
            The maximum vacation leave accrual balance that may be carried over
to a future calendar year shall be 480 hours. However, the maximum vacation
leave accrual balance that may be carried over into a future calendar year for
an employee with a balance of more than 480 hours at the end of calendar year
2010 shall be such employee's vacation leave balance at the end of pay period
26 of calendar year 2010. Thereafter, the maximum vacation accrual balance for
those employees with a balance greater than 480 hours at the end of calendar
year 2010 shall be adjusted annually at the end of each calendar year and shall
never be increased. Any vacation leave accrual balance in excess of the
employee's maximum leave accrual balance at the end of the calendar year shall
be cashed out and paid in accordance with §
13.0613(g)(2)(E)(II).
         (C)   Administration.
            (I)   Vacation periods should be taken annually with the approval
of the appointing authority at such time as will not impair the work schedule
or efficiency of the department but with consideration given to the well-being
of the employee.
            (II)   The minimum charge against accumulated vacation leave shall
be 15 minutes. Vacation leave shall be compensated at the employee's base rate
of pay, except as otherwise provided in this Plan.
            (III)   When a fixed holiday falls within a vacation period, the
holiday time shall not be charged against an employee's earned vacation
benefits.
            (IV)   Employees not planning to return to County employment at the
expiration of a vacation leave, except those retiring, shall be compensated in
a lump sum payment for accrued vacation and shall not be carried on the
payroll. Retiring employees may elect to use vacation leave to enhance
retirement benefits or be compensated in a lump sum payment for accrued
vacation leave.
         (D)   Prior Service.  New employees hired into the County in regular
positions who have been employed by a public jurisdiction or private sector in
a comparable position or a position which has prepared such employees for an
assignment to a position in the Exempt Group may receive credit for such
previous experience in the former agency(s) in determining their vacation
accrual rate. Such determination as to the comparability of previous experience
and amount of credit to be granted rests solely with the Director of Human
Resources or designee. Requests for prior service credit should be made at the
time of hire or as soon as possible thereafter but in no event later than one
year from the employee's hire date.
         (E)   Conversion of Vacation Leave to Cash.
            (I)   Elective Conversion.  An employee may sell back vacation
leave at the base hourly rate of the employee as hereinafter provided, upon
approval of the appointing authority. Eligible employees may exercise these
options under procedures established by the Director of Human Resources. In
lieu of cash, the employee may designate that part or all of the value of
vacation leave be contributed to the County's 401(k) Defined Contribution Plan
or 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan. In order to sell back vacation leave
prior to termination or retirement, an employee may exercise the following
options:
               Option 1. Future Accruals.  An employee must make an irrevocable
election during the month of December, specifying the number of hours to be
sold back from the next calendar year's vacation leave accrual. Such election
must be made in increments of not less than ten hours and may not exceed 160
hours. All designated hours remaining in the last pay period of the calendar
year will automatically be converted into cash in the last pay period of the
calendar year.
               Option 2. Existing Accruals. Existing accruals may be cashed out
in whole hour increments with a minimum cash out of ten hours and will be
subject to a ten percent penalty.
            (II)   Automatic Conversion.  At the end of the last pay period of
the calendar year, an employee shall automatically have any vacation leave
accruals in excess of the employee's maximum vacation leave accrual balance
converted to cash. Such automatic vacation leave cash out shall be paid in pay
period 1 of the next calendar year.
      (3)   Holiday Leave.
         (A)   Fixed Holidays. All employees in regular positions except as
modified in Subdivision (i) shall be entitled to the following holidays:
            January 1
            Third Monday in January
            Third Monday in February
            Last Monday in May
            June 19
            July 4
            First Monday in September
            Second Monday in October
            November 11
            Thanksgiving Day
            Day after Thanksgiving
            December 24
            December 25
            December 31
         (B)   Floating Holidays.  Employees in regular positions shall be
entitled to a total of eight hours floating holiday time annually provided that
the employee is not on unpaid leave for the entire pay period and is in paid
status for the pay period where the floating holiday time is to accrue. Eight
hours floating holiday time shall be accrued during the first pay period prior
to the third Monday in January.
Floating holidays accrued shall be available for use on the first day following
the pay period in which they are accrued, with the approval of the appointing
authority. Appointing authorities have the right to schedule employees' time
off for accrued holidays to meet the needs of the service but with
consideration given to the well-being of the employee. Employees in regular
positions budgeted less than 80 hours per pay period or job-shared positions
shall receive floating holiday accruals on a pro-rata basis.
         (C)   Maximum Holiday Leave Accrual Balance.
            (I)   The maximum holiday leave accrual balance that may be carried
over to a future calendar year shall be 112 hours. However, the maximum holiday
leave accrual balance that may be carried over into a future calendar year for
an employee with a balance of more than 112 hours at the end of calendar year
2010 shall be such employee's holiday leave balance at the end of pay period 26
of calendar year 2010. Thereafter, the maximum holiday accrual balance for
those employees with a balance greater than 112 hours at the end of calendar
year 2010 shall be adjusted annually at the end of each calendar year and shall
never be increased.
            (II)   Effective pay period 14 of calendar year 2022, the maximum
holiday leave accrual balance will increase to 120 hours. The maximum holiday
leave balance that may be carried over to a future calendar year shall be 120
hours. However, employees with a grandfathered balance of more than 120 hours
shall carry over their maximum grandfathered accrual balance in accordance with
§
13.0613(g)(3)(C)(I). Any holiday leave accrual balance in excess of the
employee's maximum holiday leave accrual balance at the end of the calendar
year shall be cashed out and paid in accordance with §
13.0613(g)(3)(G)(II).
         (D)   When a fixed holiday falls within a vacation period, the holiday
time shall not be charged against an employee's earned vacation benefits.
         (E)   Whenever an employee is required to work on a fixed holiday or
the fixed holiday falls on an employee's regularly scheduled day off, the
employee shall accrue, on an hour-for-hour basis, up to a total of eight hours
floating holiday time.
         (F)   When a fixed holiday falls on a Saturday, the previous Friday
will be observed as the fixed holiday except that when the preceding Friday is
also a fixed holiday, the preceding Thursday will be observed as the fixed
holiday. When a fixed holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday will be
observed as the fixed holiday except that when the following Monday is also a
fixed holiday, the following Tuesday will be observed as the fixed holiday.
         (G)   Conversion of Holiday Leave to Cash.
            (I)   Elective Conversion.  An employee may sell back holiday time
at the base hourly rate of the employee as hereinafter provided, upon approval
of the appointing authority. Eligible employees may exercise this option under
procedures established by the Director of Human Resources. In lieu of cash, the
employee may designate that part or all of the value of holiday time to be
contributed to the County's 401(k) Defined Contribution Plan or 457(b) Deferred
Compensation Plan.
               In order to sell back holiday time prior to termination or
retirement, an employee may exercise the following options:
               Option 1. Future Accruals.  An employee must make an irrevocable
election during the month of December, specifying the number of hours to be
sold back from the next calendar year's holiday time accrual. Such election
must be made in increments of not less than eight hours and may not exceed the
annual amount to be accrued for the next calendar year. All designated hours
remaining in the last pay period of the calendar year will automatically be
converted into cash in the last pay period of the calendar year.
               Option 2. Existing Accruals.  Existing accruals may be cashed
out in whole hour increments with a minimum cash out of eight hours and will be
subject to a ten percent penalty.
            (II)   Automatic Conversion. At the end of the calendar year, an
employee shall automatically have any holiday leave accruals in excess of the
employee's maximum holiday leave accrual balance converted to cash. Such
automatic holiday leave cash out shall be paid in pay period 1 of the next
calendar year.
         (H)   Grandfathered Holiday Time. An employee promoted from the Safety
Management and Supervisory Unit to the Exempt group who has any grandfathered
holiday time at the time of promotion, will be allowed to retain such
grandfathered holiday time. Such time may be used or compensated at the time of
retirement or separation under the same terms and conditions as are applicable
to Safety Management and Supervisory Unit employees.
      (4)   Special Leaves of Absence Without Pay.
         (A)   General Provisions.  A special leave of absence without pay may
be granted to an employee who:
            (I)   Is medically incapacitated to perform the duties of the
position;
            (II)   Desires to engage in a relevant course of study which will
enhance the employee's value to the County;
            (III)   Takes a leave of absence pursuant to the Federal Family
Medical Leave Act (FMLA), the California Family Rights Act (CFRA), and/or
Pregnancy Disability Leave (PDL) provisions of the Fair Employment and Housing
Act (FEHA);
            (IV)   For any reason considered appropriate by the appointing
authority and the Director of Human Resources.
         (B)   Exempt Group employees eligible to receive the automobile
allowance, portable communication device allowance, bilingual compensation, or
special assignment compensation will have these benefits suspended while on
unpaid leave and upon exhausting short-term disability insurance benefits.
These benefits will cease the day following the end of the individual's short-
term disability insurance benefits. Employees off work without pay for
disciplinary reasons shall not receive the above listed benefits until they
return to full time status.
         (C)   Type of Leave of Absences. There are four types of leaves of
absences. All requests must be in writing and require the approval of the
appointing authority or designee and the Director of Human Resources or
designee. Upon request, the appointing authority or designee and the Director
of Human Resources or designee may grant successive leaves of absence. All
benefits shall be administered in accordance with the appropriate section of
this code.
            (I)   Leave of Absence with Right to Return.  Leaves of absence
with right to return may be granted to employees in regular positions for a
period not exceeding one year. The employee remains in his or her position.
            (II)   Family Leave. Leaves of absence will be granted in
accordance with the FMLA, the CFRA, and/or the PDL provisions of FEHA. This
leave can be concurrent with use of paid leave or leave of absence without pay
with right to return.
               An employee on an approved leave of absence without pay under
this provision will continue to receive the benefits outlined in §
13.0613(k)(1)(B)(III) for a period of six pay periods. Certification from a
health care provider is required for all instances of medical leave under this
provision. Employees are required to inform supervisors of the need for leave
at least 30 days before commencement where possible.
               In instances where the leave is for the birth or placement of a
child and both husband and wife are County employees, both employees are
limited to a total of 12 weeks between them.
            (III)   Leave of Absence without Right to Return.
               (i)   Definition. Leaves of absence without right to return may
be granted to employees with regular status for a period not exceeding one
year. Employees without right to return shall be removed from their position.
Retirement contributions shall remain in the system and cannot be requested for
distribution until the expiration of the leave. The employee shall be eligible
to purchase medical benefits pursuant to federal Consolidated Omnibus
Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA).
               (ii)   Return Process.  An employee may return to the same
department in the classification from which the employee took the leave of
absence with the approval of the appointing authority and the Director of Human
Resources. Alternatively, the employee may apply through Human Resources by the
last day of the leave of absence. The employee will be placed on the eligible
list for the classification from which he or she took the leave of absence
without examination. Placement on the eligible list will be administered in
accordance with the requalification provisions of the Personnel Rules. If the
employee does not return to a regular position within 90 calendar days of the
expiration of such a leave the employee shall be terminated from County
service. If reemployed, the employee shall be required to serve a new
probationary period. The Director of Human Resources or designee has the
discretion to waive the requirement to serve a new probationary period.
               (iii)   Benefits Upon Return.  An employee who returns to a
regular position within 90 days after the expiration of the leave of absence
without right to return shall retain his or her hire date for purposes of leave
accruals and step advances; except that the employee will not receive service
credit for the period of time the employee is on the leave of absence without
right to return. To be reemployed and retain the above benefits, the employee
must be appointed to a position no later than 90 calendar days after the date
of expiration of the leave of absence. The 90 days shall run concurrently with
the first 90 days of the one-year period provided in the reemployment
subdivision.
            (IV)   Long-Term Medical Leave of Absence.
               (i)   Definition. An employee with regular status who suffers
from a serious condition may be placed on a medical leave of absence for up to
one year, only after FMLA, CFRA and/or PDL have been exhausted. However, if an
employee meets the service requirements for eligibility for a disability
retirement, the long-term medical leave of absence may be extended. The
employee is responsible for providing documentation from a qualified health
practitioner prior to approval. The County retains the right to request medical
documentation regarding the employee's continued incapacity to return to work.
                  The employee will be removed from his or her position so that
the department may fill behind the employee. Retirement contributions shall
remain in the system and cannot be requested for distribution until the
expiration of the leave. The employee shall be eligible to purchase benefits
pursuant to the federal Consolidated Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1985
(COBRA).
                  Upon the employee's ability to return to work or the
expiration of the leave of absence, whichever comes first, the employee will
have the right to return to the classification within the department from which
he or she took a leave of absence when a funded vacancy for which the employee
meets the qualifications is available. If the employee does not return to work
by the expiration date of the leave, or the soonest date after that for which
the department has a vacancy (but in no event later than 90 days following the
expiration of the medical leave of absence), the employee relinquishes the
right to return.
               (ii)   Upon return from a medical leave of absence, the employee
shall retain hire date for purposes of leave accruals and step advances; except
that the employee will not receive service credit for the period of time the
employee is on the medical leave of absence.
      (5)   Medical Emergency Leave.  The particulars of the Medical Emergency
Leave policy are as follows:
         (A)   The employee must have regular status with the County or one
year of continuous service in a regular position with the County.
         (B)   The employee must meet all of the following criteria before he
or she becomes eligible for Medical Emergency Leave donation: (1) be on an
approved medical leave of absence for at least 30 calendar days (160 working
hours) exclusive of an absence due to a work related injury/illness; (2) submit
a doctor's off work order verifying the medical requirement to be off work for
a minimum of 30 calendar days (160 working hours); (3) have exhausted all
useable leave balances prior to initial eligibility for Medical Emergency Leave
donations-subsequent accruals will not affect eligibility; and (4) have also
recorded at least 40 hours of sick leave without pay during the current period
of disability.
         (C)   An employee is not eligible for Medical Emergency Leave if he or
she is receiving Workers' Compensation wage replacement (e.g., Coding TTD,
etc.). An employee eligible for State Disability Insurance and/or short-term
disability must agree to integrate these benefits with Medical Emergency Leave.
         (D)   Vacation, holiday, administrative leave or annual leave, as well
as compensatory time, may be donated by employees only on a voluntary and
confidential basis, in increments of eight hours (or in the case of holiday
leave four hours) not to exceed a total of 50 percent of a donor's annual
vacation, holiday, administrative leave, annual leave or compensatory time
accrual per employee. The donation may be made for a specific employee on the
time frames established by the Human Resources Department. The employee (donee)
using/coding the Medical Emergency Leave will be taxed accordingly.
         (E)   The donation is to be utilized for the employee's Medical
Emergency Leave only; the donation to one employee is limited to a total of
1,040 hours per fiscal year. The maximum of 1,040 hours shall be prorated for
those scheduled less than 40 hours per week. Example: An employee who is
regularly scheduled 20 hours per week is eligible for a maximum donation of 520
hours of Medical Emergency Leave.
         (F)   Medical emergency leave shall be administered in accordance with
procedures approved by Human Resources.
      (6)   Compulsory Leave.  If, in the opinion of the appointing authority,
employees are unable to perform the duties of their position for physical or
psychological reasons, they may be removed from duty without pay or may use
appropriate accrued paid leave for which they are eligible. In addition, such
employees may be required to submit to an examination by either a physician or
other competent authority designated by the Director of Human Resources or by
their own physician or practitioner, as appropriate. If the examination report
of the competent authority (e.g., physician, appropriate practitioner) shows
the employee to be in an unfit condition to perform the duties required of the
position, the appointing authority shall have the right to compel such employee
to take sufficient leave of absence with or without pay, to transfer to another
position without reduction in compensation, and/or follow a prescribed
treatment regimen until medically qualified to return to unrestricted duty. An
employee who has been removed from duty for physical or psychological reasons
by the appointing authority, and was required to submit to an examination, may
not return to duty until such time as medical clearance has been obtained.
         Employees shall be required to meet all qualifications for employment
(e.g., licensure, certification, etc.). Employees who become disqualified to
perform the duties of their position (e.g., fail to maintain required licenses)
shall be immediately removed from duty without pay unless permitted to use
appropriate accrued paid leave for which they are eligible and may be subject
to appropriate disciplinary action.
      (7)   Military Leave.  As provided in the California Military and
Veterans Code §§ 395 et seq., and any amendment thereto, and the Federal
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, a County
employee, regular, extra-help, per diem, or recurrent may be entitled to the
following rights concerning military leave:
         (A)   Definition. MILITARY LEAVE is defined as the performance of duty
on a voluntary or involuntary basis in a uniformed service under competent
authority and includes active duty, active duty for training, initial active
duty for training (weekend drills), full-time National Guard duty, and a period
for which an employee is absent for the purpose of an examination to determine
the fitness of the person to perform any such duty.
         (B)   Notice and Orders. All employees shall provide advance notice of
military service unless military necessity prevents the giving of notice or the
giving of notice is impossible or unreasonable. Where available, copy of
military orders must accompany the request for leave.
         (C)   Temporary Active Duty.  Any employee who is a member of the
reserve corps of the Armed Forces, National Guard, or Naval Militia shall be
entitled to temporary military leave of absence for the purpose of active
military training, encampment, naval cruises, special exercises or like
activities provided that the period of ordered duty does not exceed 180
calendar days, including time involved in going to and returning from such
duty. While on paid status, an employee on temporary military leave shall
receive the same vacation, holiday, and sick leave, step advances, and benefits
that would have been enjoyed had the employee not been absent, providing such
employee has been employed by the County for at least one year immediately
prior to the date such leave begins. In determining the one-year employment
requirement, all time spent in recognized military service, active or
temporary, shall be counted. An exception to the above is that an uncompleted
probationary period must be completed upon return to the job. Any employee
meeting the above one-year employment requirement shall be entitled to receive
his or her regular salary or compensation, pursuant to §
13.0613 (g)(7)(E).
         (D)   Full-Time Active Duty.  Employees who resign from positions to
serve in the Armed Forces for more than 180 days, shall have a right to return
to former classification upon serving written notice to the appointing
authority, no later than 90 days after completion of such service. Returning
employees are subject to a physical/psychological examination. Should such
employee's former classification have been abolished, then the employee shall
be entitled to a classification of comparable functions, duties, and
compensation if such classification exists, or to a comparable vacant position
for which the employee is qualified.
            The right to return to former classification shall include the
right to be restored to such civil service status as the employee would have if
the employee had not so resigned; and no other person shall acquire civil
service status in the same position so as to deprive such employee of this
right to restoration.
            Eligible employees are also entitled to the reemployment and
benefit rights as further described in the Uniformed Services Employment and
Reemployment Rights Act, 38 U.S.C. §§ 4301 to 4333. Specifically, a returning
employee will receive restoration of original hire and benefit date, salary
step, vacation accrual rate, sick leave balance (unless the employee has
received payment for unused sick leave in accordance with provisions contained
herein), the retirement plan contribution rate, and retirement system
contributions (provided the employee complies with any requirements established
by the Retirement Board). However, such employee will not have accrued
vacation, sick leave, or other benefit while absent from County employment,
except as provided in the temporary duty provision.
         (E)   Compensation. This provision does not include an employee's
attendance for inactive duty, commonly referred to as weekend reserve meetings,
muster duty, or drills. Employees must use their own time to attend such
meetings. Should the meetings unavoidably conflict with an employee's regular
working hours, the employee is required to use vacation or holiday leave, leave
without pay, or make up the time. Employees who are called in for a medical
examination to determine physical fitness for military duty must also use
vacation leave, leave without pay, or make up the time. Employees cannot be
required to use their accrued leave. Any employee meeting the requirements in
(C) and (D) shall be entitled to receive their regular salary or compensation
for the first 30 calendar days of any such leave. Pay for such purposes shall
not exceed 30 days in any one fiscal year and shall be paid only for the
employee's regularly scheduled workdays that fall within the 30 calendar days.
         (F)   Extension of Benefits.  The County recognizes the increased
requirements of the military due to the current threats facing the United
States of America and, as such, has established a program under which employees
may be eligible for an extension of benefits. Employees who are called to
active duty as a result of the activation of military reservists beginning in
September 2001, and who are eligible to receive the 30 calendar days military
leave compensation, and are on an involuntary order as defined by Enclosure 4
of the Department of Defense Instruction 1215.06 shall receive the difference
between their base County salary and their military salary starting on the
thirty-first calendar day of military leave. The difference in salary shall
continue for the period approved by the Board of Supervisors. During this
period, the County will continue to provide the employee the benefits and all
leave accruals as were provided prior to such active duty. Retirement
contributions and service credit will be granted if the employee had enough pay
to cover the entire retirement system contribution. If the employee does not
receive enough pay to cover the retirement system contribution, no contribution
or credit will be given. Employees should note that the accidental death and
dismemberment (AD&D) plan contains a war exclusion.
            If the employee becomes eligible for full County payment for the
first 30 days of military leave provided in (C) of this subsection, the
extended payments provided under this section shall be suspended and shall be
continued after the 30 days compensation has been completed. No compensation
shall be paid beyond the thirty days leave period, unless such compensation is
expressly approved by the Board of Supervisors. The County may unilaterally
extend the benefits of this subsection upon the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
      (8)   Political Leave. Any employee who is a declared candidate for
public office (i.e., a candidate who has filed the appropriate documents) shall
have the right to a leave of absence without pay with or without right to
return for a reasonable period to campaign for the election. Such leave is
subject to the conditions governing special leaves of absence without pay
contained herein.
      (9)   Jury Duty Leave.  Employees in regular positions who are ordered/
summoned to serve jury duty including Federal Grand Jury duty shall be entitled
to base pay for those hours of absence from work, provided the employee waives
fees for service, other than mileage. Such employees will further be required
to deliver a "Jury Duty Certification" form at the end of the required jury
duty to verify such service. When practicable, the appointing authority will
convert an employee's regular tour of duty to a day shift tour of duty during
the period of jury duty. Employees required to serve on a jury must report to
work before and after jury duty provided there is an opportunity for at least
one hour of actual work time. Employees volunteering to serve on a Grand Jury
shall be granted a leave of absence without pay to perform the duties of a
member of the Grand Jury, in the same manner as provided in §
13.0613 (g)(4).
      (10)   Examination Time. Employees having regular status in regular
positions at the time of application, or employees who do not have regular
status but have previously held regular status and continuously remained a
County employee, shall be entitled to a reasonable amount of time off with pay
for the purpose of attending all examination processes (e.g., selection
interviews, etc.) required for selection to a different County position.
Employees are responsible for notifying and obtaining approval from their
immediate supervisor prior to taking such leave. Examination time off shall not
be charged against any accumulated leave balances and shall be compensated at
the employee's base hourly rate.
      (11)   Witness Leave.  Employees in regular positions shall be entitled
to a leave of absence from work when subpoenaed to testify as a witness, such
subpoena being properly issued by a court, agency, or commission legally
empowered to subpoena witnesses. This benefit shall not apply in any case in
which the subpoenaed employee is a party to the action or the subpoena has
arisen out of the employee's scope of employment. Witness leave shall not be
charged against any accumulated leave balances and shall be compensated at the
employee's base hourly rate. This benefit will be paid only if the employee has
demanded witness fees at the time of service of the subpoena, and such fees are
turned over to the County.
      (12)   Blood Donations. Employees in regular positions who donate blood
without receiving compensation for such donation, may have up to two hours off
with pay to recover with prior approval of the immediate supervisor for each
such donation. This benefit shall not be charged to any accumulated leave;
provided, however, if the employee is unable to work, any time in excess of two
hours may be charged to accumulated sick leave or be taken as leave without
pay. Evidence of each donation must be presented to the appointing authority to
receive this benefit.
         Employees in regular positions who are apheresis donors may have up to
four hours off with pay to recover with prior approval of the immediate
supervisor for each such donation, provided no compensation is received for
such donation. This benefit shall not be charged to any accumulated leave;
provided, however, if the employee is unable to work any time in excess of four
hours may be charged to accumulated sick leave or be taken as leave without
pay. Evidence of each apheresis donation must be presented to the appointing
authority to receive this benefit.
      (13)   Bereavement Leave.  Employees in regular positions may use up to
two days paid leave, not charged to the employee's personal leave balances, per
occurrence for bereavement due to the death of an employee's family member as
defined in §
13.0613 (g)(1)(A)(I) except for a person "designated" by the employee for sick
leave purposes. One additional day shall be granted if the employee travels
over 1,000 miles from his or her residence to the bereavement service(s). This
additional day shall not be charged to the employee's personal leave balances.
The appointing authority may request verification of distance traveled. All
employees are entitled to a total of five days of unpaid bereavement leave. The
five days of leave shall include paid leave under this section, and use of sick
leave as defined in §
13.0613 (g)(1)(E)(II) above.
         An employee who has been with the County for 30 days or more may
utilize Bereavement Leave for each occurrence of reproductive loss.
Reproductive loss includes failed adoption, failed surrogacy, miscarriage,
stillbirth, and unsuccessful assisted reproduction as defined by California
Government Code § 12945.6. The leave may be non-consecutive, but must be taken
within three months of the event as defined by California Government Code §
12945.6(a)(7). If an employee experiences more than one reproductive loss event
in a 12-month period, Bereavement Leave for reproductive loss shall not exceed
20 days within a 12-month period.
      (14)   Leave Accruals While on Disability Leave.  Employees receiving the
benefits of workers' compensation or short-term disability leave receive
partial replacement of their income through these benefits. Employees on these
types of disability leaves may choose to fully integrate, partially integrate,
or not integrate personal leave time with these disability payments.
         The maximum amount the employee receives from integrating leave time
with disability payments shall not exceed 100 percent of the employee's base
salary. Paid personal leave time coded on the employee's time and labor report
will be limited to the amount of leave necessary to integrate benefits to the
level designated by the employee. When the exact amount is not known, a good
faith estimate may be made and the amount will be adjusted later as necessary.
If any overpayments are made, the employee will be required to repay that
amount. An employee who knowingly receives payment in excess of his or her
regular base salary is required to report it to his or her Departmental payroll
clerk.
         Employees who are fully integrating accrued leave time with disability
benefits and shall be eligible to receive full accruals of vacation and sick
leave. Employees who are not fully integrating shall earn pro-rated vacation
and sick leave accruals based upon paid leave time coded on the time and labor
report only.
         Employees who are fully integrating paid leave time with disability
benefit(s) will be eligible for fixed holiday pay provided that they are on the
payroll for the entire pay period and have no unapproved leave for the pay
period. Employees who are partially integrating or not integrating paid leave
time with disability benefits will be paid for holidays in accordance with the
holiday leave provisions in §
13.0613(g)(3).
   (h)   Relocation.  Employees who are required by order of their appointing
authority to change their principal place of residence because of a
reassignment to meet the needs of the service or because of layoff will be
granted time off with pay not to exceed two work days and up to $400.00
reimbursement toward the actual cost of relocating their personal furnishings
and belongings.
   (i)   Special Assignment Compensation.  Increases in pay may be granted to
recognize the temporary assignment of additional responsibilities that are
significant in nature and beyond the normal scope of the position. No award
shall be made in any situation related to a vacation, short-term illness or
other relief which is six weeks or less. The duration of such assignments is
not intended to exceed one calendar year except in unusual circumstance
approved by both the appointing authority and the Director of Human Resources.
Employees will normally not be in a probationary status. The employee shall be
required to meet standards for satisfactory performance.
      Compensation shall be awarded in pay period increments and shall be in
the form of a specified percentage of the employee's base pay. The Director of
Human Resources will determine the amount in increments of one-half percent
from a minimum of two and one-half percent up to a maximum of seven and one-
half percent. The additional compensation will be computed at the specified
percentage of the current base pay of the employee for each pay period. Such
increases in pay shall not affect an employee's step advancement in the base
range pursuant to the salary rates and step advancements subdivision.
      Requests for special assignment compensation may be initiated by the
appointing authority or an employee via the appointing authority. The
appointing authority and the employee bear mutual responsibility for initiating
the compensation request in a timely manner and adhering to the compensation
provisions defined in this provision. It is important to obtain Human Resources
Department review of the request in advance of the date the employee begins the
assignment, since there is no guarantee that the request will be approved.
Special assignment compensation is to be effective only with the Director of
Human Resources written approval, assignment of the greater level of duties,
and signed acceptance by the employee.
      This provision shall not be utilized to circumvent or provide additional
compensation over and above that which may be provided in the subsection on
assignment to vacant higher position and the Personnel Rules. These
aforementioned provisions are mutually exclusive concepts and as such there
shall be no dual or multiple requests based on the same facts.
   (j)   Expenses Incurred in Conducting County Business and Expense
Reimbursement.
      (1)   General Provisions.  Employees in the Exempt Group shall be
reimbursed for all expenses incurred in connection with the conduct of County
business, including, but not limited to, travel, lodging, meals, laundering,
gratuities, and other related costs. Payment for actual expenses is subject to
the approval of the appointing authority. The Chief Executive Officer,
Assistant Executive Officers, and County officers with department head status
may incur necessary County expenses involved with activities and functions of
their departments and arrange for the County to be billed directly for such
expenses.
         The purpose of this subdivision is to define the policy and procedures
by which employees shall report and be reimbursed for necessary expenses
incurred on behalf of San Bernardino County, except as may be otherwise
provided in this code.
      (2)   Responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of each appointing
authority or designee to investigate and approve each request for expense
reimbursement. It shall be the responsibility of each employee to obtain prior
approval from the appropriate appointing authority or designee to incur a
business expense or to exceed maximum allowable amounts provided in Section (7)
below.
         Prior approval may be in the form of standing orders issued by the
appointing authority. Failure to obtain prior approval may result in denial of
any expense claim (or excess amount) not pre-approved.
      (3)   Travel Authorization.
         (A)   Travel outside the State of California must be approved by the
Chief Executive Officer or designee. Requests for such travel shall be
submitted to the County Administrative Office on a travel request form.
         (B)   The appointing authority or designee shall initiate travel
requests. The Chief Executive Officer and Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax
Collector shall be notified in writing of all such designees.
         (C)   The appointing authority or designee is authorized to approve
necessary travel within the State of California and use of transportation mode
consistent with this subdivision.
      (4)   Authorization for Attendance at Meetings.
         (A)   Appointing authorities may authorize attendance at meetings at
County expense when the program material is directly related to an important
phase of County service and holds promise of benefit to the County as a result
of such attendance.
         (B)   Authorization for attendance at meetings without expense
reimbursement, but on County time, may be granted when the employee is engaged
on the County's behalf, but from which the gain will inure principally to the
benefit of the employee and only incidentally to the County.
      (5)   Records and Reimbursements.
         (A)   Requests for expense reimbursements should be submitted once
each month and within one year of the date that the expense was incurred.
         (B)   Receipts or vouchers which verify the claimed expenditures will
be required for all items of expense, except:
            (I)   Subsistence, except as otherwise provided in this
subdivision;
            (II)   Private mileage (e.g., mileage to the airport);
            (III)   Telephone or other communication-related charges including
Wi-Fi and internet access fees if needed to conduct County business;
            (IV)   Other authorized expenses of less than $1.00.
         (C)   Claims for expense reimbursement totaling less than $1.00 in any
fiscal year shall not be paid.
         (D)   Reimbursement shall not be made for any personal expenses such
as, but not limited to, entertainment, barbering, personal grooming, alcoholic
beverages, etc.
         (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, expense
reimbursements shall be made on an actual cost basis.
         (F)   If the receipt is unavailable, the employee may submit a signed
statement with an explanation of expenses (i.e., itemized list of expenses with
location, date, dollar amount, and reason for expenses) and an explanation as
to why the receipt is unavailable.
         (G)   Expense reimbursements may be made via electronic fund transfer
into the financial institution of the employee's choice or by pay card.
Employees who fail to make arrangements for direct deposit shall receive
reimbursements via pay card.
      (6)   Transportation Modes.
         (A)   The general rule for selection of a mode of transportation is
that mode which represents the lowest expense to the County. Where an employee
is given the choice between several means of travel (e.g., use of County
vehicle vs. own personal vehicle, flying vs. driving, etc.) and the employee
chooses the option that is more costly, the employee shall only be reimbursed
for the lesser cost option. For example, if an employee chooses to drive his or
her own vehicle when offered a County vehicle, the employee shall not be
entitled to any reimbursement. Similarly, if the cost of flying on an airplane
is less than the cost of driving, the employee shall only be reimbursed for the
amount the County would have paid for the flight.
         (B)   Travel via Private Automobile.
            (I)   Reimbursement for use of privately-owned automobiles to
conduct County business shall be at the IRS allowable rate. Reimbursement at
this rate shall be considered as full and complete payment for actual necessary
expenses for the use of the private automobile, insurance, maintenance and all
other transportation related costs. The County does not provide any insurance
for private automobiles used on County business. The owner of an automobile is
responsible for the personal liability and property damage insurance when the
vehicle is used on County business.
            (II)   When employees, traveling on official County business, leave
directly from their principal place of residence rather than from their
assigned work location, mileage allowed to the first work contact point shall
be the difference between the distance from the residence to the assigned work
location and the distance from the residence to the first work contact point.
If the first work contact point is closer than the assigned work location, no
mileage shall be allowed. If the employee departs from the last work contact
point directly to the residence, the same principle governs.
            (III)   Employees may have multiple assigned work locations.
Mileage allowed is based on the assigned work location for that day. When
employees have more than one assigned work location in a standard tour of duty,
mileage shall be allowed between assigned work locations. In no case will
mileage be allowed between the employee's residence and the assigned work
location.
         (C)   Travel via Air.
            (I)   Commercial Aircraft.  When commercial aircraft transportation
is approved, the "cost of public carrier" shall mean the cost of air coach
class rate including tax and security surcharges. Travel via charter aircraft
shall be limited to emergencies, or when other types of transportation are
impractical or more expensive. Specific prior approval for travel via charter
aircraft must be obtained from the Chief Executive Officer or designee.
            (II)   Private Aircraft. When private aircraft transportation is
approved by the Chief Executive Officer or designee, reimbursement will be as
follows:
               (i)   Reimbursement for use of aircraft owned or rented and
flown by County personnel will be for equivalent road miles at the first mile
rate of the current private automobile use reimbursement schedule. Landing or
tie-down fees will be reimbursed similar to auto parking charges.
               (ii)   Reimbursement for trips to and from the following
destinations will be limited to the cost of public carrier except when
justified by unusual circumstances as determined by the Chief Executive Officer
or designee: Sacramento, San Francisco, Oakland and San Jose.
               (iii)   Authorized charter flights with a licensed charter
service providing the aircraft and pilot will be reimbursed at actual cost.
Charter flights must be individually approved by the Chief Executive Officer or
designee prior to departure.
               (iv)   The employee or owner of the aircraft must maintain on
file, with the County's Risk Management Department, a current policy for
aviation comprehensive general liability insurance, which includes the County
as an additional insured and covers all operations performed by or on behalf of
the employee or owner of the aircraft for bodily injury and property damage
with a combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000.00, per occurrence and
$2,000,000.00, general aggregate.
         (D)   Travel via Rental Vehicles.  Reimbursement will be provided for
the cost of a rental vehicle used for business purposes if such use is approved
by the appointing authority. Rental vehicles are covered for liability and
vehicle physical damage under the County's self-insurance program.
Reimbursement will not be provided for the additional costs incurred if any
employee purchased any additional insurance or signs a collision damage waiver
(CDW) when renting a vehicle for County business. Requests for reimbursement
for gasoline for rental vehicles must be accompanied by a copy of the rental
agreement or rental receipt and gasoline receipt.
         (E)   Travel via Ride-Share Service, Taxi, or Public/Mass Transit.
Reimbursement will be provided for the cost of using a ride-share service,
(e.g., Uber or Lyft), taxi, or public/mass transit (e.g., bus, streetcar, and
ferry) if such expenses are incurred for County business and approved by the
appointing authority.
         (F)   Incidental Travel Expenses.  Reimbursement will be provided for
the cost of incidental travel expenses such as bridge tolls, road tolls and
parking fees if such expenses are incurred as part of County business and
approved by the appointing authority. Valet parking will not be reimbursed
unless self-parking is not available or security is a concern.
      (7)   Subsistence.
         (A)   Subsistence allowances for lodging and meals shall not be
allowed without prior approval of the appointing authority or designee as
necessary for the purpose of conducting County business. Meal and lodging
selections should represent a reasonable cost to the County and be generally
consistent with the rates established by the General Services Administration
(GSA). Excess charges greater than the allowances listed below in Subdivisions
(B) and (C) may be authorized under special conditions, such as a convention or
conference requirement (e.g., lodging at the hotel where the conference is
held) or if County business requires lodging and meals in an area of unusually
high cost (i.e., Non-Standard Areas as established by the GSA). Employees may
be reimbursed for expenses in high cost areas for the actual cost incurred, but
generally not to exceed the per diem amounts established by the GSA for that
area and month. Receipts are mandatory to obtain reimbursement for all lodging
expenses, and except as provided below, for all meal expenses claimed.
         (B)   An employee may be reimbursed for lodging expenses at actual
cost, generally not to exceed the standard lodging per diem rate as established
by the GSA, except as otherwise provided in Subdivision (A) above.
         (C)   Except as otherwise provided in Subdivision (A) above,
reimbursements for meal expenses for up to three separate meals per day may be
provided as follows:
            (I)   With receipts. An employee may be reimbursed for meal expense
at actual cost not to exceed eleven dollars ($11.00) for breakfast; fifteen
dollars ($15.00) for lunch; and twenty-four dollars ($24.00) for dinner, all
plus tax and up to 15 percent gratuity.
            (II)   Without receipts. An employee may be reimbursed for meal
expense at per diem rates not to exceed six dollars ($6.00) for breakfast; nine
dollars ($9.00) for lunch; and nineteen dollars ($19.00) for dinner, all plus
tax and up to 15 percent gratuity.
         (D)   Where the cost of a meal is included as part of a registration
charge for an event (e.g., continental breakfast at a conference or training
seminar) or in the cost of lodging, an employee may not claim reimbursement for
that meal.
      (8)   Expense Advances. Advancement of funds for business expenses can be
obtained from the Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector's Office through
submission of the appropriate form. Advancements shall not exceed the per diem
allowances set forth herein. The minimum amount to be advanced is $50.00.
      (9)   County Credit Cards.  The appointing authority may issue a County
credit card to an employee and require business expenses be paid for with said
card. If unauthorized charges are placed on the card, the employee shall be
required to reimburse the County.
   (k)   Medical Insurance and Retirement System Contributions.
      (1)   Medical Insurance Contributions.
         (A)   Section 125 Premium Conversion Plan.
            (I)   Eligible employees shall be provided with a Section 125
premium conversion plan. The purpose of the plan is to provide employees a
choice between paying premiums with either pre-tax salary reductions or after-
tax payroll deductions for medical insurance, dental insurance, vision
insurance, voluntary life (to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) specified
limit) and accidental death and dismemberment insurance premiums currently
maintained for Exempt Group employees or any other programs(s). The amount of
the pre-tax salary reduction or after-tax payroll deduction must be equal to
the required insurance premium.
            (II)   Medical and dental coverage elections shall not reduce
earnable compensation for purposes of calculating benefits or contributions for
the SBCERA.
            (III)   To be eligible for the Section 125 premium conversion plan,
an employee must be eligible to participate in medical, dental, vision, AD&D,
and/or life insurance and have a premium deduction for these benefit plans.
            (IV)   Election of pre-tax salary reductions and after-tax payroll
deductions shall be made within 60 days of the initial eligibility period in a
manner and on such forms designated by Human Resources. Failure to timely
submit appropriate paperwork will result in after-tax payroll deductions for
all eligible premiums for the remainder of the plan year.
            (V)   Once a salary reduction has begun, in no event will changes
in elections be permitted during the plan year except to the extent permitted
under IRS rulings and regulations, and consistent with the County's Section 125
plan document. The employee must submit request for a change due to a mid-year
qualifying event within 60 days of the qualifying event.
         (B)   Medical and Dental Subsidies.
            (I)   The County has established a medical premium subsidy (MPS) to
offset the cost of medical and dental plan premiums charged to eligible
employees. The MPS shall be applied first to medical plan premiums and then to
dental plan premiums. The applicable MPS amount shall be paid directly to the
providers of the County-sponsored medical and dental plans in which the
eligible employee has enrolled. In no case, shall the MPS exceed the total cost
of the medical and dental insurance premium for the coverage selected.
            Effective 2/10/24 the following MPS amounts apply:
 
Coverage Type Scheduled for 40 Scheduled for 61
              to 60 Hours      to 80 Hours
Employee Only $155.38          $310.75
Employee + 1  $249.94          $499.87
Employee + 2  $351.02          $702.03
 
 
               Effective July 13, 2024, the MPS amounts for employees scheduled
for 61 to 80 hours, will increase for each tier (i.e., Employee-Only, Employee
+ 1, Employee + 2) by 100% of the benefit plan year premium increase of the
County's Blue Shield Signature HMO. This new MPS amount shall be the new basis
for subsequent years. For example, if the 2024/2025 Benefit Plan Year premium
for the Employee-Only tier increases by $20 per pay period, the MPS amount will
increase by $20 per pay period (i.e., 100% of $20) and the total MPS for the
Employee-Only tier will be $330.75. Employees scheduled for 40 to 60 hours will
receive an amount equal to one-half of the MPS for employees scheduled for 61
to 80 hours.
               Effective July 12, 2025, the MPS amounts for employees scheduled
for 61 to 80 hours, will increase for each tier (i.e., Employee-Only, Employee
+ 1, Employee + 2) by 100% of the benefit plan year premium increase of the
County's Blue Shield Signature HMO. This new MPS amount shall be the new basis
for subsequent years.
               Employees scheduled for 40 to 60 hours will receive an amount
equal to one-half of the MPS for employees scheduled for 61 to 80 hours.
               Effective July 11, 2026, the MPS amounts for employees scheduled
for 61 to 80 hours, will increase for each tier (i.e., Employee-Only, Employee
+ 1, Employee + 2) by 100% of the benefit plan year premium increase of the
County's Blue Shield Signature HMO. This new MPS amount shall be the new basis
for subsequent years.
               Employees scheduled for 40 to 60 hours will receive an amount
equal to one-half of the MPS for employees scheduled for 61 to 80 hours.
            (II)   The County has established a dental premium subsidy (DPS)
for all employees who are enrolled in both County-sponsored medical and dental
coverage whose premium costs for medical and dental exceeds the MPS. The amount
of the DPS shall be up to $9.46, but not to exceed the combined total of the
employee's out-of-pocket premium expenses.
            (III)   Eligibility for MPS and DPS While on Leave.
               (i)   FMLA/CFRA.  Employees who are on approved leave, pursuant
to FMLA/CFRA law and whose paid hours in a pay period are less than the
required number of hours designated in §
13.0613 (f)(1) above will continue to be enrolled in a County-sponsored medical
plan and receive MPS and DPS in accordance with applicable law.
               (ii)   Pregnancy Disability Leave (PDL).  An employee on an
approved pregnancy disability leave is eligible for continuation of MPS and DPS
in accordance with PDL, Government Code § 12945.
               (iii)   Workers' Compensation. Employees who are on an approved
leave based on an approved workers' compensation claim shall continue to
receive the MPS and DPS for up to a total of 20 pay periods while off work due
to that work injury as long as the employee pays his or her portion of the
premiums on time. If any subsequent workers' compensation claims occur during
the initial 20 pay periods, the remaining MPS eligibility from the original
claim shall run concurrent with any additional approved workers' compensation
claims that occur during the initial claim. For example, if the employee is
receiving the MPS and DPS for 20 pay periods for an injury and after ten pay
periods another workers' compensation claim is approved and the employee is
eligible to receive the MPS and DPS for an additional 20 pay periods, ten pay
periods will run concurrent with the initial claim, for a total of 30 pay
periods. Employees who are still on workers' compensation after the expiration
of the initial 20 pay periods shall continue to receive MPS and DPS provided
the employee is in paid status.
               (iv)   Short Term Disability.  Employees who are on short-term
disability (STD) insurance provided by the County or State Disability Insurance
(SDI) shall continue to receive the MPS and DPS provided the employee is in
paid status.
               (v)   Per Episode of Illness or Injury.  Employees who are on an
approved medical leave of absence and whose paid hours in a pay period are less
than the required number of hours will continue to receive the benefits of this
Subdivision for up to six pay periods per episode of illness or injury.
      (2)   Retirement System Contributions.
         (A)   County Contributions.  The County shall pay all required
employer contributions to the San Bernardino County Employee's Retirement
Association (SBCERA).
         (B)   Employee Contributions. All employee Retirement System
contribution obligations shall be "picked up" for tax purposes only pursuant to
this section. The Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector has implemented
the pickup of such retirement system contributions under Internal Revenue Code
§ 414(h)(2).
            The County shall make member contributions under this subdivision
on behalf of the employee which shall be in lieu of the employee's
contributions and such contributions shall be treated as employer contributions
for purposes of reporting and wage withholding under the Internal Revenue Code
and the Revenue and Taxation Code. The amounts picked up under this subdivision
shall be recouped through offsets against the salary of each employee for whom
the County picks up member contributions. These offsets are akin to a reduction
in salary and shall be made solely for purposes of income tax reporting and
withholding. The member contributions picked up by the County under this
subdivision shall be treated as compensation paid to County employees for all
other purposes. County-paid employer contributions to SBCERA under this
subdivision shall be paid from the same source of funds used in paying the
salaries of the affected employees. No employee shall have the option to
receive the retirement system contribution amounts directly instead of having
them paid to SBCERA.
            Until retirement or separation, all contributions picked up under
this subdivision will be considered for tax purposes as employer-paid
contributions.
         (C)   Special Provisions.
            (I)   Except as provided below, employees who have 30 years of
service credit shall not be paid in cash seven percent of earnable
compensation. Employees with at least 25 years of service as set forth in
Government Code § 31625.3 as of June 18, 2011, and who either already have or
thereafter attain 30 years of service credit as set forth in Government Code §
31625.3 shall have one opportunity during the employee's employment to receive
cash payments of seven percent of earnable compensation for up to 26
consecutive pay periods.
            (II)   Employees who are over the age of 60 at the time of hire,
and who are in a regular position, and who choose not to be a member of SBCERA,
shall be enrolled in the County's 401(k) Salary Savings Plan. The County shall
contribute the applicable percent of the employee's biweekly salary as defined
in §
13.0613(q) to the Plan, and the employee shall contribute a minimum of three
percent of biweekly salary to the plan, not to exceed the annual limits of the
Plan as defined in the Internal Revenue Code.
         (D)   Survivor Benefits.  Survivor Benefits are payable to employed
general retirement members with at least 18 months continuous retirement
membership pursuant to Government Code § 31855.12. An equal, non-refundable
employer and employee biweekly contribution will be paid to SBCERA as provided
in the annual actuarial study.
         (E)   Special Provisions for Exempt Safety Employees.  The following
Subdivision shall apply to all members of the Exempt Group who are safety
members of SBCERA as defined in Government Code § 31469.3, on October 1, 2003.
            For Tier 1 safety members of SBCERA, the County adopted a
resolution making Government Code § 31664.1 applicable to safety members,
effective October 1, 2003. The County also adopted a resolution pursuant to
Government Code § 31678.2, applying the formula set forth in Government Code §
31664.1 applicable to all prior safety service credit for every eligible
employee under this Subdivision.
            For Tier 2 safety members, the applicable retirement formula is as
provided by applicable law.
      (3)   Flexible Spending Account (FSA) for Medical Related Expenses.
         (A)   General. The County has established a Medical Expense
Reimbursement Plan, also known as a Flexible Spending Account (FSA). This plan
has been established in accordance with the provisions of Internal Revenue Code
section 125. Human Resources will serve as the FSA Plan administrator and will
administer the FSA in accordance with the County's plan document. The FSA's
plan year will coincide with the County's benefit plan year.
         (B)   Eligible employees may contribute to the FSA, on a pre-tax
basis, an amount up to the Internal Revenue Code's annual maximum. This annual
contribution is made by the employee via equal biweekly payroll deductions. The
County will also contribute up to $40.00 per biweekly pay period, matching
Exempt employee contributions dollar for dollar. Effective February 1, 2020,
the County will contribute up to an additional $10.00 per biweekly pay period,
matching Exempt employee contribution dollar for dollar, for employees who
select the County-sponsored Blue Shield Access + HMO Plan or the Kaiser Choice
HMO Plan and elect to enroll in the FSA. FSA participants must elect to enroll
each year in order to continue participation. Upon enrolling in the FSA,
employees may not change their designated biweekly contribution amount or
discontinue making contributions for the remainder of the plan year except as
permitted by the Internal Revenue Code. Any unused amounts remaining in an
employee's FSA account at the end of the Plan year shall be forfeited except as
permitted by the Internal Revenue Code and the County's plan document.
Contributions made to the FSA may be used for receiving non-taxable
reimbursements of eligible medical expenses not covered by insurance. Eligible
reimbursable expenses are those medical expenses that qualify as determined
under Internal Revenue Code § 213.
      (4)   Retirement Medical Trust Fund. A Retirement Medical Trust Fund
(RMT) has been established. Exempt Group employees with five or more years of
participation in SBCERA are eligible to participate. The trust is a Voluntary
Employee Benefit Association (VEBA) and will comply with all the provisions of
Internal Revenue Code § 501(c)(9).
         The Retirement Medical Trust Fund will be administered by Human
Resources as the plan administrator in accordance with the plan document and
applicable law.
         (A)   Sick Leave Conversion Eligibility.  Exempt Group employees with
five or more years of participation in SBCERA are eligible to participate in
the Trust. The purchase of additional retirement credit or other retirement
service credit and/or participation in other public sector retirement systems
may be counted towards the five year service requirement provided that the
employee has not withdrawn their contributions from the system(s) and the
employee is also a member of SBCERA.
            Employees who wish to receive credit for participation in other
public retirement systems must provide the Plan Administrator written evidence
of participation and that contributions made to the system(s) have not been
withdrawn. Requests for prior service credit should be made at the time of hire
or as soon as possible thereafter but in no event later than one year from the
employee's hire date.
         (B)   Sick Leave Conversion Formula. At separation from County service
for reasons other than death, all eligible employees will be required to
contribute the cash value of their unused sick leave balances to the Trust at
the rate of 80 percent of the cash value of unused sick leave hours, up to a
maximum of 1,500 hours.
         (C)   County Contribution. The County will contribute to the RMT as
follows:
 
Years of Service          Percentage of Base Salary*
Exempt – 5-9 years      2.00%
Exempt – 10-15 years    2.75%
Exempt – 16 or more year3.75%
*For purposes of the RMT contribution, base salary is as defined in the RMT
plan document.
 
            Employees who wish to receive credit for participation in other
public retirement systems must provide the Plan Administrator written evidence
of participation and that contributions made to the system(s) have not been
withdrawn. Requests for prior service credit should be made at the time of hire
or as soon as possible thereafter but in no event later than one year from the
employee's hire date.
            (I)   Tuition Reimbursement and Membership Dues.  The County shall
establish an individual, departmental fund in the amount of $1,000.00 for each
fiscal year for each regular employee in the Exempt Group to reimburse
employees for tuition costs incurred for job-related education or career
development or to reimburse membership dues in professional organization(s),
provided each expenditure enhances furtherance of County or continuing
educational goals.
               Requests for reimbursement must be approved in advance by the
appointing authority and shall not be paid in increments less than $10.00 per
fiscal year. The individual department fund is in addition to department
budgeted and mandated training and memberships. The County shall also pay, in
addition to the individual department fund, the membership dues to the State
Bar of California for all licensed attorneys in the Exempt Group whose job
duties require admission in the State Bar.
               Employees who successfully complete job-related education or
courses may submit a request to be reimbursed beyond the limit of $1,000.00 to
their department head or appointing authority for review. The department head
or appointing authority must then request and receive approval from the County
Administrative Office to reimburse beyond the limit of $1,000.00 per fiscal
year per employee. In order to be eligible for tuition reimbursement under this
provision, the employee must take such course work outside regular work hours
and shall do no productive work for the County while attending the courses.
               If the reimbursement is approved and paid to the employee, and
the employee leaves the County prior to completing two years of County service
after completing the job-related education or coursework, the employee will
reimburse the County according to the following schedule:
 
Job-related education/course completion date Reimbursement
Within 9 months                              100%
After 9 months, through 18 months            50%
After 18 months, through 24 months           25%
After 24 months                              0%
 
 
               Benefits under the Tuition Reimbursement and Membership Dues
Subdivision shall be pro-rated for job share and part-time employees.
   (m)   Tuition Loan Repayment. The County shall establish a Tuition Loan
Repayment Program to assist the Exempt group with student loan obligations and
encourage continued County employment.
      (1)   Eligibility requirements - all requirements must be met before the
employee is deemed eligible for loan repayment assistance:
         (A)   The employee is employed in a regular full time exempt
classification.
         (B)   The employee fully completes the County's Student Loan Repayment
Application.
         (C)   The employee submits proof of the following:
            (I)   A qualifying degree.
            (II)   Current statements from an unpaid loan.
            (III)   The employee is in paid status in the pay period the
repayment is made.
            (IV)   The employee is not participating in another tuition loan
repayment program. This does not include participation in any loan forgiveness
program.
            (V)   Employee's last Work Performance Evaluation rating is a
"meets standards" or above and not on a work performance improvement plan.
            (VI)   Employee is not on a current leave restriction plan.
      (2)   Terms of Loan Repayment Assistance: Employees with 2 or more years
of continuous service with the County may apply for tuition loan repayment.
Continuous service is defined as the total length of service from an employee's
most recent beginning (hire) date in a regular position with no separation from
County employment. Employees must complete a new application and submit
supporting documentation for each disbursement for loan repayment. Any
additional annual incentive will require completion of new one-year continuous
periods of Qualifying Service on and after the date of the implementation of
this provision. In no event will the payments be combined. If the application
meets County requirements, the payment shall be as follows:
         (A)   After completion of 2 continuous years with the County: A single
payment of up to $1,000.
         (B)   After completion of 3 continuous years with the County: A single
payment of up to $1,500.
         (C)   After completion of 4 continuous years with the County: A single
payment of up to $2,000.
         (D)   After completion of 5 continuous years with the County: A single
payment of up to $2,500.
         (E)   After completion of 6 continuous years with the County: A single
payment of up to $3,000.
         Payment shall not exceed the total amount of $10,000 per employee.
Eligible employees may receive the payment within thirty days after approval of
the required documentation.
      (3)   Restrictions:
         (A)   Employee must have one or more qualifying student loans
(including private loans provided they qualify pursuant to all applicable State
and Federal laws, rules, and regulations).
         (B)   Degree must have been completed and employee must be in active
repayment of the loan.
         (C)   Loans must not be in default status. Employees must provide a
written statement from their lender(s) substantiating that the loan(s) are not
in default, dated within ten business days of the application for payment.
         (D)   Payments made on loans in the year prior to the repayment
request that are less than the maximum yearly repayment amount will be eligible
for the lesser amount paid only.
         (E)   Employees who separate from County employment are not entitled
to prorated payments.
         (F)   The lender information must be verified annually, and must not
be older than ten days prior to the application for payment.
         (G)   If loans have been consolidated, proof of consolidation must be
provided.
         (H)   Employees must show proof of loan payments for each of the prior
twelve consecutive months.
      (4)   Program Details:
         (A)   Payment will be made directly to the employee through EMACS.
Payment will be subject to all required payroll deductions, and participants
will be responsible for any and all applicable taxes resulting from the
payments they receive.
         (B)   Qualifying Student Loan shall mean a loan (or the portion of a
loan, if consolidated) taken and used to cover the cost of an eligible
qualifying degree. The determination of whether or to what extent a loan is a
Qualifying Student Loan shall be made based on guidelines established by the
Human Resources Department.
         (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, reimbursement under this Section
shall be made subject to any additional conditions approved by the appointing
authority.
   (n)   Conditions of Employment. Unless in the classified service, employees
in this group serve at the pleasure of their appointing authority.
      Should a classified employee's position be abolished, the County will
make reasonable efforts to place the employee in a comparable County position
based upon the employee's skills, knowledge and abilities, as well as
consideration for the employee's length of service with the County. If
reasonable efforts to place an exempt classified employee in a comparable
County position are unsuccessful, the employee shall be subject to lay-off by
written notification by the appointing authority or the Chief Executive
Officer, which notification shall be given at least ten working days prior to
the effective date of the layoff. An Exempt Group classified employee does not
have any bumping rights to other County positions.
   (o)   Automobiles.
      (1)   Except for members of the Board of Supervisors, all county
Employees in Benefit Groups A and B, Assistant Sheriffs and Sheriff's Deputy
Chiefs, and the District Attorney Chief Investigator in a paid status are
eligible for a Category I County vehicle under this subdivision with the
approval of the Chief Executive Officer.
         Such employees may use such vehicles for occasional personal use
provided they reimburse the County at the current motor pool variable rate per
mile for such use. All automobile users shall be taxed for such personal use in
accordance with state and federal tax law and regulation.
         Effective August 10, 2024, all county employees in Benefit Groups A
and B will no longer be eligible for a Category I County vehicle except
employees in the following classifications, Chief Probation Officer, Assistant
Chief Probation Officer, Undersheriff, Assistant Sheriff Sheriff's Deputy Chief
and District Attorney Chief Investigator.
      (2)   All County employees in Benefit Groups A and B, Assistant Sheriffs
and Sheriff's Deputy Chiefs, the District Attorney Chief Investigator, and the
Assistant Chief Probation Officer in a paid status shall receive a biweekly
automobile allowance in the amount of $461.54 with no mileage reimbursement,
provided they are not assigned a County vehicle pursuant to §
13.0613(o)(1) above. An employee who becomes eligible or ineligible for this
benefit in the middle of a pay period will receive a prorated sum of automobile
allowance. Employees selecting this allowance shall be required to have a
vehicle available at all times for use on County business. This allowance shall
be considered complete reimbursement for the acquisition, insurance,
maintenance, repair, upkeep, fuel, and all other costs for the required
vehicle. At no time shall an employee receive both a County vehicle and the
automobile allowance.
   (p)   Administrative Leave.  Effective pay period 1 of each year, an
employee in a regular position who is in paid status will be provided with 80
hours of administrative leave time for the employee's use. An eligible employee
in a regular position who is part-time or job-sharing shall be eligible for a
prorated number of administrative leave hours based on regularly scheduled
hours. Employees newly entering the Exempt Group after the beginning of pay
period 1 shall receive a prorated number of hours. Such proration shall be
based upon the remaining number of pay periods in the calendar year nearest the
employee's appointment. Employees not in paid status in pay period 1 shall
receive, upon return to paid status, a prorated number of Administrative Leave
hours based on the number of pay periods remaining in the calendar year.
      Administrative leave may be cashed out at the employee's then current
base rate of pay in increments of one hour, upon the approval of the appointing
authority, during the calendar year. Any Administrative Leave accrual balances
in effect at the end of the last pay period paid in the calendar year will
automatically be paid at the employee's then current base rate of pay.
Employees may designate that cash outs of Administrative Leave be contributed
to the County's 401(k) Plan or 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan. Upon
termination of employment, unused Administrative Leave will be paid at the
current rate of pay.
      The County-wide elected officials are not eligible to receive
administrative leave.
   (q)   Contributions to Salary Savings Plan.
      (1)   Biweekly contributions of Exempt Group employees to the County's
401(k) Defined Contribution Plan will be matched by a County contribution on
the basis of two times the employee's contribution. The biweekly contributions
of Exempt Group employees in Benefit Groups A, B, and C of up to four percent
of biweekly base salary will be matched by a County contribution of two times
the employee's contribution, not to exceed eight percent of an employee's
biweekly base salary. The biweekly contributions of Exempt Group employees in
Benefit Group D to the County's 401(k) Defined Contribution Plan of up to three
percent of biweekly base salary will be matched by a County contribution of two
times the employee's contribution. The County contribution shall not exceed six
percent of an employee's biweekly base salary.
      (2)   Biweekly contributions of Exempt Group employees in Benefit Groups
A and B to the County's 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan up to one percent of
biweekly base salary will be matched by a County contribution on the basis of
one times the employee's contribution. The County contribution shall not exceed
one percent of the employee's biweekly base salary. The County contribution
shall be deposited in the County's 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan.
      (3)   Biweekly contributions of Exempt Group employees in Benefit Groups
C and D to the County's 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan up to one percent of
biweekly base salary will be matched by a County contribution of one-half times
the employee's contribution. The County contribution shall not exceed one-half
percent of the employee's biweekly base salary. The County contribution shall
be deposited in the County's 401(a) Defined Contribution Plan.
   (r)   Employment Interview Expenses and Moving Reimbursement.
      (1)   Interview Expense Reimbursement. For employees in Benefit Group C
and above, the appointing authority may approve reimbursement of interview
expenses incurred by external candidates upon proof/receipts provided. Such
reimbursement is restricted to airfare, auto mileage, meals, overnight stay,
and airport transit. Employees must submit a request for reimbursement for
employment interview expenses within 90 days of hire date to be eligible for
the reimbursement. Requests submitted for reimbursement after 90 days from hire
date will be denied, unless waived by the appointing authority.
      (2)   Moving Expense Reimbursement.
         (A)   The Chief Executive Officer may approve moving expenses up to
but not exceeding $10,000.00 for any employee new to County employment for whom
the Chief Executive Officer or the Board of Supervisors is the appointing
authority or any department head. The Chairperson of the Board of Supervisors
may approve such moving expenses for the Chief Executive Officer. Reimbursement
of moving expenses in excess of $10,000.00 must be approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
         (B)   The appointing authority may approve moving expenses up to but
not exceeding $5,000.00 for employees new to County employment in Benefit Group
B or Benefit Group C, not covered by §
13.0613(r)(2)(A), for moving expenses authorized, incurred and documented as a
result of accepting the position.
         (C)   For employees in Benefit Group D the following provision
applies. To assist with the recruitment and appointment of qualified
individuals to hard-to-recruit positions/classifications, upon request of the
appointing authority, the Director of Human Resources may authorize
reimbursement of a new employee's relocation-related expenses incurred as a
result of accepting employment with the County, as follows:
 
Miles Relocated       Maximum Reimbursement
250*—1,000 miles    $1,000.00
1,001—2,000 miles   $2,000.00
More than 2,000 miles $2,500.00
 
            *The 250-mile distance shall only apply if the relocation is from
outside San Bernardino County.
         (D)   Reimbursement may be provided to employees covered in §§
13.0613(r)(2)(B) and
13.0613(r)(2)(C) upon initial employment with the County, provided that the
employee: (1) is appointed to a regular position; (2) submits original receipts
documenting expenses incurred; and (3) agrees to remain employed in the regular
position for at least 12 months. Such employees must submit a request for
reimbursement for moving expenses within 90 days of hire date to be eligible
for the reimbursement. Requests submitted for reimbursement after 90 days from
hire date will be denied, unless waived by the appointing authority.
            If the employee voluntarily resigns employment prior to completion
of 12 months' service, the employee shall be required to reimburse the County
for any payment made under this subdivision.
   (s)   Peace Officer Standards and Training Pay.
      (1)   General. Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) certificates
are awarded to peace offers who achieve increasingly high levels of education,
training, and experience in his or her pursuit of professional excellence. POST
base rate of pay adjustments will be uniformly maintained for all County
employees.
      (2)   Qualification. An Exempt Group law enforcement employee, in the
Sheriff's Department or District Attorney's Office who obtains an Advanced
Certificate shall have his or her base rate of pay increased in accordance with
the table and procedures set forth below. An Exempt Group law enforcement
employee, in the Sheriff's Department or District Attorney's Office who obtains
a Supervisory Certificate, or a higher POST certificate, or a master's degree
earned through attendance at an accredited university or college, shall have
his or her base rate of pay increased in accordance with the table and
procedures set forth below. If an employee obtains a Supervisory Certificate
and has his or her base rate of pay increased as set forth below, and
thereafter obtains a higher POST certificate or a master's degree, the employee
will receive no further increase in his or her base rate of pay.
      (3)   Rates.
         (A)   The rates for POST pay are as follows:
Classification POST Pay - Flat Amount
               Advanced POST (hourly) Supervisory POST (hourly)
                                                               POST Pay - Flat
                                                               Amount
Classification                                                 Advanced Supervisory
                                                               POST     POST
                                                               (hourly) (hourly)
Deputy Director, Sheriff’s Coroner                           $2.74    $4.16
District Attorney Assistant Chief Investigator and Sheriff’s $3.16    $4.79
Captain
Sheriff’s Deputy Chief                                       $3.74    $5.66
District Attorney Chief Investigator                           $3.39    $5.14
Assistant Sheriff                                              $4.12    $6.23
Undersheriff                                                   $4.53    $6.85
 
 
         (B)   Effective January 21, 2017, the County added the flat dollar
amounts in the table above to the then existing base rate of pay to establish a
higher base rate of pay for the employees described in this section who
obtained an Advanced Certificate and/or a Supervisory Certificate, or a higher
POST certificate, or a master's degree. Once the new higher base rate of pay
was established, the County established a new POST Pay of two percent.
Effective January 16, 2021, the County shall establish a new POST Pay of three
percent. The initial granting of this POST increase to three percent is subject
to the discretion of the Chief Executive Officer based on the availability of
financial resources. Effective January 29, 2022, the County shall establish a
new POST Pay of four percent. Effective January 28, 2023, the County shall
establish a new POST Pay of five percent. Effective January 27, 2024, the
County shall establish a new POST Pay of six percent. Effective January 25,
2025, the County shall establish a new POST Pay of seven percent.
         (C)   Effective July 18, 2020, the County shall establish a new POST
base pay for employees who obtain a Management POST Certificate. This POST base
pay shall be approximately $1.79 per hour above POST base pay effective July
18, 2020, for a Supervisory Certificate or a master's degree. The initial
establishment of this new POST base pay for a Management POST certificate is
subject to the discretion of the Chief Executive Officer based on the
availability of financial resources.
      (4)   Procedure. The employee shall submit a written request for POST pay
to the department with an attached copy of the appropriate POST certificate or
official transcript from the accredit university or college. This POST pay
shall start the first full pay period following receipt by the County of a
valid POST certificate or official transcript. The County shall submit to POST
in an expeditious manner, applications by affected employees for the
certificates described above.
   (t)   Dependent Care Assistance Plan. The purpose of this Section 125
Dependent Care Assistance Plan (DCAP) is to permit eligible employees to make
an election to pay for certain dependent care expenses with salary reduction
from compensation contributed to the plan before federal income or social
security taxes are paid to the IRS ("Salary Reduction") in accordance with
Internal Revenue Code sections 125 and 129 and regulations issued pursuant
thereto. The DCAP shall be construed to comply with said code sections and to
meet the requirements of any other applicable provisions of law. The DCAP will
be administered by Human Resources in accordance with the DCAP plan document
and applicable law.
      (1)   To be eligible for this benefit, an employee must be in a regular
position.
      (2)   Enrollment in the plan is required every plan year and is limited
to the annual open enrollment period or no later than 60 days following the
date of becoming eligible due to a mid-year change in status event. Failure to
submit a participation agreement within the time frame shall result in an
election to not participate in the plan.
      (3)   An employee must elect to contribute to the DCAP through salary
reduction on forms approved by Human Resources. An employee election to
participate shall be irrevocable for the remainder of the plan year. Once a
salary reduction has begun, in no event will changes in elections be permitted
during the plan year except to the extent permitted under IRS rulings and
regulations and with the plan document.
      (4)   Pursuant to Internal Revenue Code section 125, any amounts
remaining in the employee's account at the end of a plan year must be forfeited
except as permitted by the Internal Revenue Code and the plan document.
   (u)   Vacant Higher Position.  Employees directed to continuously perform
duties in a vacant higher level regular position for which funds have been
appropriated, shall be entitled to a salary rate increase to the higher level
for the time actually worked in excess of 160 hours, unless specifically waived
by the employee; provided, however:
      (1)   The appointing authority certifies to the Director of Human
Resources, in writing at the time of appointment, that the employee meets
minimum qualifications and is assigned and held responsible to fully perform
all of the duties normally associated with the higher level position without
limitation as to difficulty or complexity of assignments or consequence of
action and that the employee shall be required to meet standards for
satisfactory performance normally required at the higher level position; and
      (2)   A written request for salary rate increase to the higher level is
directed to the Director of Human Resources for approval; such increase to the
higher level shall be determined as if the assignment had been a promotion.
         It shall be the responsibility of the appointing authority to initiate
such requests and to provide a copy of such request to the employee. Written
requests may also be made by the employee through the appointing authority in
the same manner. Requests for a salary rate increase should be initiated during
the first 30 calendar days of such assignment. Requests for retroactive payment
of a salary increase must be filed as soon as possible, but not later than one
calendar year after assignment of the higher level duties and must be approved
by the Director of Human Resources. Failure to meet this time limitation shall
waiver any and all rights to retroactive pay.
         The duration of such assignments to vacant higher positions are not
intended to exceed one calendar year except in unusual circumstances approved
by both the appointing authority and the Director of Human Resources or
designee. Such assignments in all circumstances are temporary assignments and
at the conclusion of such assignments the respective employee shall be returned
to his or her previous classification. Appointments to regular positions of
trainees or underfills are exempt from the provisions of this section. Further,
this section does not apply to a situation in which there is no vacant higher-
level position for which funds have been appropriated. Addition of duties of a
higher-level classification to any employee's regular position shall be
governed by the Special Assignment Compensation section or the Personnel Rules
on Classification, as appropriate. For purposes of this section, a vacant
position is defined as an authorized regular position for which funds have been
appropriated and which may be: (1) An unoccupied position due to attrition and
for which the appointment process has been initiated; (2) A position from which
the incumbent is on extended leave of absence; or (3) A new position authorized
by the Board of Supervisors for which the appointment process has been
initiated.
   (v)   Personnel Rules. Notwithstanding any other provision in the County
Code or the Personnel Rules, those serving in classified service positions have
appeal rights under the Personnel Rules, except as otherwise provided herein.
Any such appeals shall be heard by a hearing officer selected from the Civil
Service Commission Hearing Officer list and appointed by the Civil Service
Commission or, upon mutual agreement of the appellant and the County, shall be
heard by the Civil Service Commission. If the appeal is heard by a hearing
officer, the Civil Service Commission shall either accept or reject the hearing
officer's findings and recommendations within 30 days of receipt by the
Commission.
      The only grounds for rejection of the hearing officer's decision must be
for one of the following and the rejection must include specific detail in
writing:
      (1)   The recommendation was procured by corruption, fraud, or other
undue means;
      (2)   There was corruption on the part of the hearing officer;
      (3)   The rights of a party were substantially prejudiced by the
misconduct of the neutral hearing officer;
      (4)   The hearing officer exceeded his or her powers;
      (5)   The rights of a party were substantially prejudiced by the refusal
of the hearing officer to postpone the hearing upon sufficient cause being
shown therefore, or by the refusal of the hearing officer to properly include
or exclude evidence material to the controversy.
         Should such be the case, the Commission must state in writing specific
reason(s) for the decision (1, 2, 3, 4, or 5) and subsequently conduct and
complete a full and fair evidentiary hearing on the appeal within 30 days of
rejecting the hearing officer's findings and recommendations unless the hearing
cannot for good cause be completed within 30 days.
         Those serving in unclassified positions do not have civil service
appeal rights as they serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority.
Positions in the Exempt Group shall not have rights to the classification
appeal procedures under the Personnel Rules.
   (w)   Reemployment.
      (1)   A regular employee who has separated County employment, and who is
subsequently rehired in the same classification in a regular position within
one year (i.e., beginning the first day of work by the 365th calendar day), may
receive restoration of salary step, vacation accrual rate, and sick leave
balance, unless the employee has received payment for unused sick leave in
accordance with the Retirement Medical Trust Subdivision, subject to the
approval and conditions established by the appointing authority and the
Director of Human Resources. Such employees begin accruing vacation and sick
leave and may utilize the same immediately. Restoration of retirement
contribution rate shall be in accordance with applicable State law and in
compliance with any requirements established by SBCERA. The employee shall be
required to serve a new probationary period, unless waived by the Director of
Human Resources. The employee shall be provided a new date of hire for purposes
of County seniority.
      (2)   A regular employee who has separated County employment and who is
subsequently rehired to a regular position in the same job family within one
year, (i.e., beginning the first day of work by the 365th calendar day), may
receive restoration of vacation accrual rate, sick leave, and retirement
contribution rate in the same manner as described above. Such employees begin
immediately accruing vacation and sick leave and may utilize the same
immediately. The employee shall be required to serve a new probationary period,
unless waived by the Director of Human Resources. The employee shall be
provided a new date of hire for purposes of County seniority.
      (3)   A regular employee who has separated County employment, and who is
subsequently rehired to a regular position in another job family within a 90
calendar day period, must begin the first day of work within 90 calendar days
and beginning the first day of work by the ninety-first day, may receive
restoration of salary step (in the instance of rehire in a classification at
the same pay range as the position originally held), vacation accrual rate,
sick leave and retirement contribution rate in the same manner as described
above. The employee shall be required to serve a new probationary period,
unless waived by the Director of Human Resources. The employee shall be
provided a new date of hire for purposes of County seniority.
      (4)   Reemployment from Layoff.  A regular employee who has been laid off
from County employment and is subsequently rehired to a regular position shall
be reemployed in the same manner as described in the reemployment subdivision.
Restoration of retirement contribution rate shall be in accordance with
applicable state law and in compliance with any requirements established by
SBCERA.
      (5)   For purposes of this subdivision, a regular employee shall mean an
employee in a regular position who held regular status in any classification
during the previous period of County employment.
   (x)   Recruitment and Referral Bonus Programs.
      (1)   General. The County shall make available to appointing authorities'
recruitment and referral incentive (bonus) programs to assist in the
recruitment and appointment of qualified individuals into hard-to-recruit
regular positions in the Exempt Group, in accordance with the guidelines
established herein.
      (2)   Program Applicability. Appointing authorities may request
authorization to apply the recruitment and/or referral incentive program(s) to
assist in filling regular positions in their departments. To apply, said
position/classification must have had historical/demonstrable recruitment
difficulty. The Director of Human Resources shall have the sole authority to
determine the applicability and duration of these program(s) to each requested
position/classification and shall certify applicability of the program(s) for
each position, by assignment, department, and beginning and ending dates. Such
determinations shall not be subject to any review or appeal.
      (3)   Recruitment Bonus. An employee hired into a regular position/
classification certified for participation in this program shall be eligible to
receive recruitment bonuses in accordance with the following:
         (A)   Bonus Amount and Method of Payment.
            (I)   The eligible employee hired into a position/classification
that is a department head or for whom the Chief Executive Officer or Board of
Supervisors is the appointing authority shall receive $2,500.00 upon hire and
an additional $2,500.00 upon completion of 2,080 service hours in the position/
classification for which the original bonus was granted.
            (II)   The eligible employee hired into a position/classification
in Benefit Group B or Benefit Group C, not covered by §
13.0613(x)(3)(A)(I), shall receive $1,500.00 upon hire and an additional
$1,500.00 upon completion of 2,080 service hours in the position/classification
for which the original bonus was granted.
            (III)   The eligible employee hired into a position/ classification
in Benefit Group D shall receive no less than $500.00 and no more than
$1,000.00 upon hire and an additional $1,000 upon completion of 2,080 service
hours in the position/classification for which the original bonus was granted.
            (IV)   Each bonus payment shall be considered taxable income and
subject to withholding.
         (B)   Limitations and Exclusions.
            (I)   No bonus will be paid for any candidate whose name was placed
on the eligible list for positions in the classification prior to the beginning
date certified by the Director of Human Resources for that classification to be
eligible for participation in the referral bonus program. Similarly, no bonus
will be paid for any candidate whose name was placed on the eligible list for
positions in the classification after the ending date certified by the Director
of Human Resources for that classification to be eligible for participation in
the referral bonus program.
            (II)   The bonus payment shall not be considered in determining
regular rate of pay for purposes of computing overtime compensation.
            (III)   The appointing authority shall have sole responsibility and
authority to determine eligibility for the second installment of the
recruitment bonus. Such determination shall not be subject to review or appeal.
      (4)   Referral Bonus. Any employee in a regular position who refers a
qualified candidate for a position/classification certified for participation
in this program who is subsequently hired into the regular position may receive
a referral bonus in accordance with the following:
         (A)   Method of Referral.  To be eligible for the recruitment bonus,
the County application for employment must contain the name of the referring
employee on the application.
         (B)   Bonus Amount and Method of Payment.  The referring employee
shall receive a bonus of $250.00 for each referred candidate actually hired
into an eligible regular position. An additional $500.00 shall be paid upon
that new employee's completion of 2,080 service hours. Said bonus shall be
considered taxable income and subject to withholding.
         (C)   Limitations and Exclusions.
            (I)   No bonus will be paid for any candidate whose name was placed
on the eligible list for positions in the classification prior to the beginning
date certified by the Director of Human Resources for that classification to be
eligible for participation in the referral bonus program. Similarly, no bonus
will be paid for any candidate whose name was placed on the eligible list for
positions in the classification after the ending date certified by the Director
of Human Resources for that classification to be eligible for participation in
the referral bonus program.
            (II)   Individuals assigned to employee recruitment as a primary
function of their position shall not be eligible to receive this bonus.
            (III)   In cases where more than one employee is named as a
"referring party," the referral bonus shall be equally split between the
referring employees.
            (IV)   In cases where the referred employee resigns, transfers out
of the eligible position, or is terminated prior to completion of 2,080 service
hours, the additional $500.00 shall not be paid.
            (V)   The referral bonus payment shall not be considered in
determining regular rate of pay for purposes of computing overtime
compensation.
            (VI)   The appointing authority shall have sole responsibility and
authority to determine eligibility for the second installment of the referral
bonus. Such determination shall not be subject to review or appeal.
   (y)   County Counsel Legal Service Classification.
      (1)   Application. This section shall apply to all Deputy County Counsel
classifications.
      (2)   Service. The term "service" means service which the appointing
authority finds to be good or superior in work performance and conduct.
      (3)   Hiring. With the approval of the County Counsel, experienced
attorneys may be hired in a classification and at a variable entrance rate
commensurate with demonstrated experience, ability, and the needs of the
County. Attorneys without experience may be hired as a Deputy County Counsel I
at the appropriate entrance step of the applicable salary range.
      (4)   Deputy County Counsel I.  After a period of 1,040 hours of service
and a satisfactory rating in a Deputy County Counsel I classification, the
Deputy County Counsel I shall be promoted to a Deputy County Counsel II
classification. The Deputy County Counsel I shall be terminated if it is found
that such promotion is not merited.
      (5)   Deputy County Counsel II. After a period of 1,040 hours of service
and a satisfactory rating in the Deputy County Counsel II classification, an
attorney shall be advanced one step increment. After an additional period of
1,040 hours of service and a satisfactory rating, the Deputy County Counsel II
shall be promoted to a Deputy County Counsel III classification, or the Deputy
County Counsel II shall be terminated if it is found that such promotion is not
merited. An attorney hired as a Deputy County Counsel II at some step other
than step 1 because of experience, ability, or needs of the County may, after
1,040 hours of service and a satisfactory rating, be promoted to a Deputy
County Counsel III classification upon the recommendation of the appointing
authority.
      (6)   Deputy County Counsel III. After a period of 1,040 hours of service
and a satisfactory rating in the Deputy County Counsel III classification, an
attorney shall be advanced one step increment. After an additional period of
1,040 hours of service and a satisfactory rating, the Deputy County Counsel III
shall be promoted to a Deputy County Counsel IV classification or the Deputy
County Counsel III shall be terminated if it is found that such promotion is
not merited. An attorney hired as a Deputy County Counsel III at some step
other than step 1 because of experience, ability, or needs of the County may,
after 1,040 hours of service and a satisfactory rating, be promoted to a Deputy
County Counsel IV classification upon the recommendation of the appointing
authority.
      (7)   Deputy County Counsel IV. After a period of 1,040 hours of service
and a satisfactory rating in the Deputy County Counsel IV classification, an
attorney shall be advanced one step increment. Step advancements shall be in
one step increments after completion of each additional period of 1,040 hours
of service and satisfactory ratings until the top step for the classification
is reached.
      (8)   Attorneys shall only attain regular status at the Deputy County
Counsel IV level. An attorney hired as a new employee in the Deputy County
Counsel III or Deputy County Counsel IV classification shall serve a combined
probationary and training period of 2,080 hours of service. Those promoted to
Deputy County Counsel IV from Deputy County Counsel III shall acquire regular
status in the higher classification.
      (9)   Deputy County Counsel V.  A Deputy County Counsel IV at the top
step of the Deputy County Counsel IV level may be promoted to a Deputy County
Counsel V. Eligibility for promotion to Deputy County Counsel V shall be
pursuant to criteria approved by the appointing authority. Employees promoted
to Deputy County Counsel V shall not obtain regular status as a Deputy County
Counsel V as such employee shall serve in a probationary status for the
duration of the appointment as a Deputy County Counsel V and may be removed
from a Deputy County Counsel V classification by the appointing authority at
any time without any right to review or appeal. Additionally, there shall be an
annual review by the appointing authority of the performance of each Deputy
County Counsel V, and it shall be discretionary with the appointing authority
whether to continue each employee's Deputy County Counsel V status. An employee
who is removed as a Deputy County Counsel V shall be returned to Deputy County
Counsel IV status.
      (10)   Exceptional Service. An additional two range increase or an
additional four range increase in salary may be paid to attorneys for
outstanding ability or work for a period not to exceed 2,080 hours if such
increase is: (1) jointly recommended by the appointing authority and the Chief
Executive Officer or his/her designee. Such additional compensation may be
renewed each year and shall be designated Exceptional Service Compensation.
Employees in the classification of Deputy County Counsel V shall not be
eligible for compensation under this subdivision.
      (11)   Removal from Operation of Section.  Upon request of the appointing
authority and the approval of the Civil Service Commission, an attorney may be
removed from the operation of this section.
   (z)   Bilingual Compensation. Upon the approval of the Director of Human
Resources or designee, employees in the Executive Assistant category of the
Exempt Group required by the appointing authority or designee to perform
bilingual translation involving the use of English and a second language
(including American Sign Language) as a condition of employment, shall be
eligible for bilingual compensation in the amount of $45.00 per pay period.
Such compensation shall apply regardless of the total time required per day for
such translation. Such employees must be certified as competent in translation
skills by Human Resources to be eligible for compensation.
   (aa)   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   (bb)   (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
   (cc)   Portable Communication Device Allowance.  All County employees in
Benefit Groups A and B in a paid status, shall receive a biweekly portable
communication device allowance in the amount of $92.31. An employee who becomes
eligible or ineligible for this benefit in the middle of the pay period will
receive a prorated amount.
      The employee shall purchase a portable communication device capable of
sending and receiving cellular telephone calls, and capable of sending and
receiving e-mails to and from the County e-mail system. The County shall pay
for any license and set up expense for the device if any, and the employee
shall pay for the equipment and monthly voice and data plans.
   (dd)   Probationary Period.  Unless a longer probationary period is
otherwise provided, all classified employees in the Exempt Group shall serve a
probationary period of one year or 2,080 hours.
   (ee)   (Repealed by Ord. 4306, passed - -2016).
   (ff)   Perfect Attendance.  Employees in regular, full-time positions in
Benefit Groups C and D who do not utilize any sick leave or Paid Time Off (PTO)
for sick leave purposes, any leave (e.g., vacation) in lieu of sick leave, or
benefits in lieu of sick leave (e.g., workers' compensation, short-term
disability partial/full integration, etc.), in a payroll calendar year (i.e.,
pay period one through pay period 26 or 27, when applicable, of the same year),
and who do not record any sick leave without pay or absent without pay, medical
emergency leave, or military leave as provided by law during that year, shall
accrue 16 hours of perfect attendance leave, for use in the next calendar year.
Failure to utilize perfect attendance leave within the calendar year shall
result in forfeiture of the same. Perfect attendance leave may not be cashed
out.
   (gg)   Healthy Lifestyles Program.  The healthy lifestyle program is
available to employees in the Exempt Group. Under this program, Exempt Group
employees are eligible for reimbursement for health club/fitness memberships up
to $324.00 on an annual basis. Exempt Group employees are also eligible for an
annual physical examination through the Arrowhead Regional Medical Center.
   (hh)   Voluntary Time Off. The Voluntary Time Off (VTO) Program is intended
to provide Exempt Group employees a means of taking unpaid (i.e., non-
compensated) time off work, without losing the following benefits: medical
premium subsidy, dental premium subsidy, opt-out/waive amount, vision care,
retirement medical trust employer contribution, and life insurance which depend
on the employee being in a paid status. The following conditions apply:
      (1)   VTO may be taken in the same manner as vacation time except that
VTO must be used in one-hour increments and is limited to 80 hours per calendar
year.
      (2)   When VTO is taken, leave accruals continue as if the employee was
on paid time. VTO time counts as time worked toward satisfying the minimum hour
requirement to receive benefits, such as medical premium subsidy, dental
premium subsidy, opt-out/waive amount, County-paid life insurance, and County-
paid vision care.
      (3)   VTO does not count as hours worked for purposes of computing
overtime, if applicable. County contribution to the retirement system under the
retirement system contributions subsection will only be paid if the employee is
in a paid status in any pay period in which VTO is used and the employee
receives enough earnings to pay his or her retirement contribution in that pay
period.
         Pursuant to applicable law, Tier 1 retirement system members are
eligible for full service credit for the pay period in which VTO is used and
the employer contribution would be based on the employees' normal compensation
earnable.
         Pursuant to applicable law, Tier 2 retirement system members are
eligible for a reduced service credit amount for the pay period in which VTO
was used and the employer contribution would be based on the employees' actual
earnings for that pay period.
      (4)   VTO may not be used for situations that would otherwise require
leave without pay, such as an employee on short-term disability, or in
conjunction with leave without pay.
      (5)   VTO is an entirely voluntary program. No employee may be required
to take VTO.
      (6)   VTO may be taken by request of the employee and upon approval of
the appointing authority.
   (ii)   Retirement Incentive. Eligible employees in identified
classifications that meet the requirements for a service retirement from the
San Bernardino County Employees' Retirement Association (SBCERA) and who
retired on or before June 30, 2009, are eligible to receive a retirement
incentive in the amount of $250.00 for each completed quarter of a year of
current continuous service in a regular position with the County, payable in
five annual payments after retirement. Such annual payments shall be made in
July of each year. The Chief Executive Officer may exclude from eligibility
classifications or positions assigned to organizational units that must remain
filled.
      Unless waived by the Chief Executive Officer, vacant positions created by
those employees receiving the retirement incentive shall not be filled for a
period of five years. Alternatively, departments may fill vacated positions if
other positions with an equivalent cost savings remain vacant for a period of
five years.
      Payments to an eligible employee under this program who returns to work
for the County in any capacity after retiring shall be temporarily suspended
until the employee again separates from employment with the County.
   (jj)   (Repealed by Ord. 4306, passed - -2016).
   (kk)   Retention Pay (formerly Longevity Pay).  Exempt Group employees,
except those persons who qualify for Probation Retention pay under §
13.0613 (oo), shall be eligible for retention pay above the base rate of pay,
as indicated below, based on total hours of completed continuous service with
the County. Retention pay shall be paid on all paid hours up to an employee's
standard hours and shall not be considered when determining the appropriate
rate of pay for a promotion or demotion.
 
Total Completed Service                    Compensation
20,800 continuous service hours (10 years) 1.0%
31,200 continuous service hours (15 years) 3.0%
 
      For purposes of retention pay only, a year of completed County service is
defined as 2,080 service hours with the County.
   (ll)   Certified Public Accountant Stipend.  The County shall establish a
$750.00 annual Certified Public Accountant (CPA) Stipend for employees in the
following classifications who attain and maintain a valid CPA license:
      •   Administrative Analyst I
      •   Administrative Analyst II
      •   Administrative Analyst III
      •   ARMC Chief Financial Officer
      •   Assistant Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector
      •   Assistant Executive Officer
      •   Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector Division Chief
      •   Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector Manager
      •   Chief Administrative Analyst
      •   Chief Deputy Treasurer
      •   County Chief Financial Officer
      •   Deputy Executive Officer
      •   HS Auditing Chief
      •   Principal Administrative Analyst
      •   Public Health Chief Financial Officer
      •   Public Works Chief Financial Officer
      •   Sheriff's Financial Manager
      The annual CPA stipend shall be paid in a lump sum to eligible employees
in regular positions who are licensed CPAs and are in paid status in the pay
period that includes July 1 of each year. An eligible employee in a regular
position who is part-time or job-sharing shall be eligible for a prorated lump-
sum payment based on regularly scheduled hours. An employee who is licensed as
a CPA after July 1, or who is appointed after July 1, shall receive a prorated
CPA stipend payment at the time of licensure or appointment, as applicable.
Such proration shall be based upon the remaining number of pay periods in the
fiscal year nearest his or her appointment.
      Eligible employees who are not in paid status (i.e., not coding paid
hours) in the pay period that includes July 1 shall receive a prorated CPA
stipend payment upon return to paid status. Such proration shall be based upon
the remaining number of pay periods in the fiscal year nearest their return to
paid status. However, an employee who is not in paid status during the entire
fiscal year (i.e., not in paid status from pay period 15 of one year through
pay period 14 of the following year) shall not receive the annual CPA stipend
for the fiscal year(s) during which he or she was not in paid status at all.
For example, if an employee is not in paid status from June 2016 through
September 2017, and then returns to paid status in October 2017, the employee
shall receive a prorated CPA stipend payment for FY 2017/2018 upon their return
to paid status but shall not receive the FY 2016/2017 stipend because the
employee was not in paid status for the entire 2016/2017 fiscal year. Any
employee separating from County employment at the conclusion of a leave of
absence shall not receive the CPA stipend.
   (mm)   Auditing Pay Differential.  Employees in the classifications
designated below who are required by the appointing authority to directly
oversee the auditing functions shall receive a differential of two percent
above the employee's base rate of pay for all hours actually worked, up to 80
hours per pay period:
      •   HS Auditing Chief
      •   Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector Manager
      •   Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector Division Chief
      Audits must have resulted in the preparation of reports indicating the
audits were conducted in accordance with the AICPA, IIA, IFAC, GAGAS, SSAE or
PCAOB or other comparable national or international organization or state or
federal regulation standards and/or regulations. Eligibility for this
differential is at the discretion of the appointing authority.
   (nn)   Behavioral Health Medical Director Differential.  The Behavioral
Health Medical Director shall receive a five percent differential above the
employee's base rate of pay provided such employee is certified as a Diplomate
by the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology. The differential shall be
paid for all hours actually worked up to 80 hours per pay period.
   (oo)   Probation Retention Pay.  The Chief Probation Officer, Assistant
Chief Probation Officer and Deputy Chief Probation Officers who fall within the
definition of "safety member" under Government Code § 31469.4 and have
completed 15 or more years of continuous completed service hours in a regular
position shall receive Probation Retention pay above their base rate of pay, as
indicated below, based on the total hours of continuous completed service in a
regular position with the County. Probation Retention pay shall be paid on all
paid hours up to an employee's standard hours and shall be excluded when
determining the appropriate rate of pay for promotion or demotion. Employees
who qualify for Probation Retention pay shall begin to receive the pay
following completion of the required service hours.
 
Completed Continuous Service Hours  Compensation
31,200 continuous service hours (15 2.0%
years)
41,600 continuous service hours (20 An additional 2.0% for a total of 4.0%
years)
52,000 continuous service hours (25 An additional 4.0% for a total of 8.0%
years)
 
      For purposes of Probation Retention pay, a year of completed continuous
service hours is defined as 2,080 service hours with the County.
   (pp)   Captains who are released from active duty but are required by the
Sheriff's Department or District Attorney to provide notice where they can be
reached and to be able to return to active duty when required by the department
shall be assigned to administrative duty. While on administrative duty, an
employee shall be free to use the time for his or her own purposes.
      Administrative duty requires that employees so assigned shall: (1) leave
a telephone number where they can be reached or wear a communicating device;
and (2) be able to return to active duty within an hour.
      Assignment of administrative duty and approval of compensation shall be
made by the appointing authority based upon the needs of the department.
Administrative duty shall be compensated at the rate of three hundred ninety
dollars ($390.00) per pay period. Captains assigned administrative duty shall
receive the pay if the employee works a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours
during the pay period that the employee is assigned to administrative duty.
Said compensation is exclusive of any other compensation and shall not count as
hours worked.
   (qq)   The County agrees to provide an annual uniform and clothing allowance
in the sum of nine hundred dollars ($900.00) to the classifications of
Sheriff's Captain, Sheriff's Deputy Chief, Assistant Sheriff, and Undersheriff
in regular positions on payroll in a paid status as of pay period 24 to
compensate for costs associated with uniform and clothing purchase,
maintenance, cleaning and replacement.
      Employees on a leave of absence without pay in pay period 24 shall
receive the uniform allowance upon return to paid status, provided, however,
that an employee who is not in paid status during the entire year (i.e., not in
paid status from pay period 24 of one year through pay period 23 of the
following year) shall not receive the annual Uniform Allowance for the year(s)
during which he/she was not in paid status. For example, if an employee is not
in paid status from October 2018 through January 2020, and then returns to paid
status in February 2020, the employee shall receive the allowance payment for
2019 upon return to paid status but shall not receive the 2018 allowance
because the employee was not in paid status from pay period 24/2018 through pay
period 23/2019. Any employee separating from County employment at the
conclusion of a leave of absence shall not receive the uniform allowance.
   (rr)   Direct Deposit (Electronic Funds Transfer). All employees must make
and maintain arrangements for the direct deposit of paychecks and
reimbursements into the financial institution of their choice via electronic
fund transfer. Employees who have not made such arrangements by the end of the
4th pay period after their date of hire shall be subject to disciplinary
action. In cases where an employee is unable to make arrangements for
electronic fund transfer, the Director of Human Resources may allow an
exception to this subsection. Any exceptions granted may be reviewed
periodically for continuation, subject to the approval of the Director of Human
Resources.
      Employees who fail to make arrangements for direct deposit shall receive
paychecks and reimbursements via pay card.
   (ss)   Modified Benefit Option (MBO).
      (1)   General Provisions.
         (A)   All full-time employees in regular Exempt Group positions shall
be provided an opportunity to convert from a regular position with traditional
benefits (i.e., traditional benefit option) to a regular position with modified
benefits and a wage differential.
         (B)   Employees may choose to enroll in the MBO at hire or during the
annual open enrollment period and may choose to change to the traditional
benefit option during subsequent open enrollment periods.
         (C)   Employees who select the Modified Benefit Option must commit to
work a minimum of 1,560 hours per calendar year.
         (D)   In order to receive the benefits and wage differential of the
MBO, the employee must specifically choose the Option.
      (2)   Modified Benefit Option Wage Differential.
         (A)   Employees who select the MBO shall receive a wage differential
of 4% above the base rate of pay. The wage differential shall be paid on all
paid hours (e.g., REG, PTO, etc.).
         (B)   The wage differential shall be considered as part of the base
hourly rate when calculating the following: County contribution to the
employee's Retirement Medical Trust (RMT) account, County match to employee's
contribution to 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan, County match to employee's
contribution to County's 401(k) Defined Contribution Plan, differentials paid
on a percentage basis (e.g., Retention Pay, POST), sick leave conversion cash-
out pursuant to §§
13.0613(g)(1)(I) and
13.0613(k)(4), and other leave cash-outs if any. Provided below is an example
of how the County's contribution to the RMT would be calculated:
            Example: Employee with 17 years of continuous County service and an
80-hour per pay period schedule selects the MBO. The employee's base hourly
rate is $70 per hour. This employee is eligible for a County contribution to
the RMT equal to 3.75% of the employee's base bi-weekly salary. The County
contribution to the RMT is calculated as follows:
            80 hours X ($70.00 per hour X 1.04 MBO Wage Differential) = $5,824
base
            bi-weekly salary for purposes of County contribution to the RMT
            $5,824 X 3.75% Contribution Rate = $218.40
            The County will contribute $218.40 to the RMT on behalf of the
employee that pay period.
      (3)   Benefits and Leaves. Except as provided in this Subsection,
employees who select the MBO shall receive the same benefits and leaves that
employees who select the traditional benefit option receive.
         (A)   Medical Coverage. Employees who select the MBO shall have the
same medical plan options as employees who select the traditional benefit
option (e.g., Blue Shield HMO, Kaiser HMO, Blue Shield Access + HMO, Kaiser
Choice HMO, and Blue Shield PPO).
         (B)   Medical Premium Subsidy (MPS).
            (I)   Employees who select the MBO shall receive MPS in the
following amounts per pay period:
               Effective July 15, 2023, the MPS amounts for employees who
select the MBO shall increase to the following amounts per pay period:
 
Coverage Type MPS
Employee Only $215.60
Employee + 1  $392.21
Employee + 2  $550.37
 
               Effective February 10, 2024 through July 11, 2026, the MPS
amounts for employees enrolled in the MBO will be based on a percent of the MPS
amounts for the Traditional Benefit Option (i.e., 71% Employee Only; 82%
Employee + 1; 82% Employee + 2).
         (C)   Dental Premium Subsidy (DPS). Employees who select the MBO and
are enrolled in both County-sponsored medical and dental coverage whose premium
costs for medical and dental exceeds the MPS shall be eligible to receive DPS
up to $9.46 per pay period, but not to exceed the combined total of the
employee's out-of-pocket premium expenses.
      (4)   Paid Time Off (PTO).
         (A)   Definition. Employees who select the MBO shall be granted Paid
Time Off (PTO) in lieu of any other Vacation or Sick accrual leave provisions.
However, employees shall continue to be eligible to receive Administrative
Leave as provided in §
13.0613(p). Additionally, employees shall receive holiday pay in accordance
with §
13.0613(g)(3), except that employees shall not be eligible for the floating
holiday.
         (B)   Accumulation.  Employees who select the MBO shall accrue PTO
each pay period as provided in the chart below and shall be eligible for prior
service credit in accordance with §
13.0613(g)(2)(D). Employees who have standard hours of less than eighty (80)
hours per pay period shall accumulate PTO on a pro-rata basis; provided,
however, that the maximum combined vacation and PTO accrual that may be carried
over to future calendar years shall not be prorated. PTO shall be available for
use on the first day following the pay period in which it is earned.
 
                                            Maximum PTO      Maximum Combined
                           Approximate      Accrual That May Vacation and PTO
Service Hours   Annual PTO Accrual Rate Per Be Carried Over  Accrual That May
                Allowance  Pay Period       to a Future      be Carried Over to
                                            Calendar Year    a Future Calendar
                                                             Year
0 through 8,320 120 hours  4.62 hours       272 hours        374 hours*
service hours
Over 8,320
through 18,720  160 hours  6.15 hours       362 hours        480 hours*
service hours
Over 18,720     200 hours  7.69 hours       452 hours        586 hours*
service hours
 
            *The employee's maximum PTO accrual that may be carried over to a
future calendar year may not exceed 272, 362, or 452, as applicable.
Additionally, the maximum combined vacation and PTO accrual that may be carried
over to a future calendar year for an employee who has a grandfathered maximum
vacation accrual balance of more than 480 hours as allowed in §
13.0613(g)(2)(B) shall be this employee's grandfathered maximum vacation
accrual balance plus 106 PTO hours. For example, if employee's grandfathered
maximum vacation accrual balance is 600 hours, the maximum combined vacation
and PTO accrual that may be carried over to a future calendar year shall be 706
hours (600 vacation hours plus 106 PTO hours). As indicated in §
13.0613(g)(2)(B), the grandfathered maximum vacation accrual balance shall be
adjusted annually at the end of each calendar year and shall never be
increased.
            Any PTO accrual balance at the end of the calendar year in excess
of employee's maximum PTO accrual that may be carried over to a future calendar
year shall be automatically cashed out and paid in accordance with §
13.0613(ss)(4)(E)(II). Additionally, any combined vacation/PTO accrual balance
at the end of the calendar year in excess of the employee's allowed maximum
combined vacation/PTO balance, in which vacation accruals do not exceed
employee's allowed maximum vacation accrual balance, shall be cashed out in PTO
hours paid in accordance with §
13.0613(ss)(4)(E)(II). For example, if an employee with a maximum combined
accrual balance of 586 has 480 vacation hours (i.e., employee's vacation
maximum accrual balance) and 200 PTO hours for a combined accrual balance of
680 hours, 94 PTO hours shall be automatically cashed out in accordance with §
13.0613(ss)(4)(E)(II).
         (C)   Administration.
            (I)   PTO for Vacation Leave Purposes.  When PTO has been requested
for vacation leave purposes, PTO shall be administered according to §
13.0613 (g)(2)(C).
            (II)   PTO for Sick Leave Purposes. When PTO has been requested for
sick leave purposes, PTO shall be administered according to §
13.0613 (g)(1)(D).
         (D)   Separation.  Employees separating from County employment shall
have any unused PTO administered in the same manner that Vacation Leave is
administered at separation according to §
13.0613 (g)(2)(C)(IV).
            Exempt employees who are subsequently hired into a position in a
bargaining unit that does not contain the MBO, shall carry over their existing
PTO balance and begin accruing vacation, floating holiday, and sick leave
immediately.
         (E)   PTO Cash-Out.
            (I)   Elective Conversion. An employee may sell back PTO at the
base hourly rate of the employee as hereinafter provided, upon approval of the
appointing authority. Eligible employees may exercise these options under
procedures established by the Director of Human Resources. In lieu of cash, the
employee may designate that part or all of the value of PTO be contributed to
the County's 401(k) Defined Contribution Plan or 457(b) Deferred Compensation
Plan. In order to sell back PTO prior to termination or retirement, an employee
may exercise the following options:
               Option 1. Future Accruals.  An employee must make an irrevocable
election during the month of December, specifying the number of PTO hours to be
sold back from the next calendar year's PTO accrual. Such election must be made
in increments of not less than ten hours and may not exceed 160 hours. All
designated hours remaining in the last period of the calendar year will
automatically be converted into cash in the last period of the calendar year.
               Option 2. Existing Accruals. Existing PTO accruals may be cashed
out in whole hour increments with a minimum cash out of ten hours and will be
subject to a ten percent penalty.
            (II)   Automatic Conversion.  At the end of the last pay period of
the calendar year, an employee shall automatically have any PTO accruals in
excess of the employee's maximum PTO accrual balance converted to cash. Such
automatic PTO cash out shall be paid in pay period 1 of the next calendar year.
         (F)   Accrual Carryover Following Benefit Change.
            (I)   Traditional Benefit Option to Modified Benefit Option.
               (i)   Employees who convert from the traditional benefit option
to the MBO shall carry over and may utilize their existing vacation, holiday,
and sick leave balances; provided, however, that the employee shall no longer
accrue vacation leave, sick leave, and a floating holiday after converting to
the MBO. After converting to the MBO the employee shall be immediately eligible
to accrue PTO.
                  Any vacation leave accrual balance carried over to the MBO
that is in excess of the employee's allowed maximum vacation leave accrual
balance at the end of the calendar year shall be cashed out and paid in
accordance with §
13.0613(g)(2)(E)(II). For example, an employee with a maximum vacation leave
accrual balance of 480 hours begins MBO in pay period 16 and carries over 572
vacation hours. This employee then uses 20 vacation hours and has 552 vacation
hours at the end of the last pay period of the calendar year. In this example,
72 vacation hours shall automatically cash out in pay period 1 of the next
calendar year such that 480 vacation hours carries over to the next calendar
year (552 hours - 72 hours = 480 hours).
               (ii)   Vacation Cash-Out. Employees who met the eligibility
requirements for the vacation cash-out prior to selecting the MBO, and
predesignated to cash-out vacation leave during the required pre-designation
period while in the traditional benefit option, shall remain eligible to cash-
out vacation leave. However, employees enrolled in the MBO shall not be
eligible to pre-designate to cash-out vacation leave while enrolled in the MBO
unless employee intends to convert to the traditional benefit option during
next calendar year's open enrollment period and start accruing vacation that
calendar year.
                  Additionally, employees who select the MBO will continue to
have the option to cash-out existing vacation accruals according to §
13.0613(g)(2)(E).
            (II)   Modified Benefit Option to Traditional Benefit Option.
               (i)   Employees who convert from the MBO to the traditional
benefit option shall carry over and may utilize their existing PTO balance (if
any) and begin accruing vacation, floating holiday, and sick leave immediately;
however, the maximum combined PTO and vacation accrual that may be carried over
to a future calendar year shall not exceed this employee's allowed maximum
vacation accrual balance at the end of the calendar year as established in §
13.0613(g)(2)(B). Any combined excess leave hours at the end of the calendar
year shall be cashed out as PTO hours and paid in accordance with §
13.0613(ss)(4)(E)(II). For example, an employee with a maximum vacation accrual
balance of 480 hours begins the traditional benefit option in pay period 16 and
carries over 150 PTO hours and 375 Vacation Leave hours and accrues an
additional 68 vacation hours through pay period 26 (i.e., total combined leave
at the end of calendar year equals 593 hours). In this example, 113 PTO hours
shall automatically cash out in pay period 1 of the next calendar year such
that 480 total combined vacation/PTO hours carries over to the next calendar
year (593 hours - 113 hours = 480 hours). If employee has a grandfathered
maximum vacation accrual balance, the grandfathered vacation accrual balance
shall be the maximum combined vacation and PTO balance that may be carried
over.
               (ii)   PTO Cash-Out. Employees who met the eligibility
requirements for the PTO cash-out prior to converting from the MBO to the
traditional benefit option and predesignated to cash-out PTO during the
required pre-designation period while in the MBO, shall remain eligible to
cash-out PTO. However, employees enrolled in the traditional benefit option
shall not be eligible to pre-designate to cash-out PTO while enrolled in the
traditional benefit option unless employee intends to convert to the MBO during
next calendar year's open enrollment period and start accruing PTO that
calendar year.
Additionally, employees who convert from the MBO to the traditional benefit
option will continue to have the option to cash-out existing PTO according to §
13.0613(ss)(4)(E)(I).
   (tt)   The Director of Human Resources may, in appropriate circumstances,
provide an employee who is separating from County employment up to six months
of the employee's annual salary and benefits in the form of administrative
leave or a lump sum payment. The Director of Human Resources, in consultation
with County Counsel, is authorized to approve the administrative leave or
payment; provided, however, no administrative leave may be granted or salary
paid if allegations of conduct involving misappropriation of public funds or
property, misuse or destruction of public property, acts that would constitute
a felony or misdemeanor, malfeasance in office or conviction of a crime
involving moral turpitude are pending against the employee.
(Ord. 3749, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3786, passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 3805,
passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 3845, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 3869, passed - -2002;
Am. Ord. 3883, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 3933, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 3953,
passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 3968, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 3970, passed - -2006;
Am. Ord. 3971, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 3989, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4018,
passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4024, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4056, passed - -2008;
Am. Ord. 4069, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4074, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4100,
passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4131, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4142, passed - -2011;
Am. Ord. 4145, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4294,
passed - -2016; Am. Ord. 4306, passed - -2016; Am. Ord. 4339, passed - -2018;
Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4376, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4386,
passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4392, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4409, passed - -2021;
Am. Ord. 4416, passed - -2021; Am. Ord. 4433, passed - - 2022; Am. Ord. 4454,
passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4456, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4466, passed - -2024;
Am. Ord. 4476, passed - -2024)
§ 13.0614 Salaries and Working Conditions of the County-Wide Elected Officials.
   (a)   Compensation.
      (1)   County-Wide Elected Officials.  Section
308 of Article III of the County Charter establishes the annual salaries of
County-wide elected officials, as defined in §
13.0613 (b), except that of the Superintendent of County Schools, and provides
that salary is re-evaluated, and adjusted if necessary, every year.
   (b)   Benefits-County-Wide Elected Officials.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the County Code, County-
wide elected officials shall receive the same benefits provided to Exempt Group
employees in Benefit Group A, or as otherwise specified, in Subsections (f),
(j), (k), (l), (o), (p), (q), (s), (t), (cc), and (gg) of §
13.0613, and as otherwise specified by law or the County Code and as modified
below.
         (A)   County-wide elected officials are not required to enroll in
County-sponsored medical and dental coverage as described in §
13.0613(f)(1). A County-wide elected official who does not participate in a
County-sponsored medical plan will receive an amount of $161.54 per pay period.
         (B)   County-wide elected officials shall not receive the benefits
described in §
13.0613(f)(6) related to short term disability.
         (C)   County-wide elected officials shall not receive the benefits
described in §
13.0613(k)(1)(B)(III) related to eligibility for MPS and DPS while on leave.
         (D)   County-wide elected officials shall not receive the benefits
described in §§
13.0613(k)(4)(A) and
13.0613(k)(4)(B) related to sick leave conversion to Retirement Medical Trust
Fund (RMT). County-wide elected officials shall be eligible to participate in
the RMT upon taking office. The County will contribute to the RMT as follows
for County-wide elected officials:
 
Total Years of Service Percentage of Base Salary*
0-9 years              2.00 percent
10-15 years            2.75 percent
16 or more years       3.75 percent
*For purposes of the RMT contribution, base salary is as defined in the RMT
plan document.
 
         (E)   The County-wide elected officials receive the benefits described
in §
13.0613(o)(1) related to automobiles with the following exceptions:
            (I)   The County-wide elected officials who have a Category I
County vehicle assigned to them for use on County business will not be required
to reimburse the County for occasional personal use. County-wide elected
officials shall be taxed for any such personal use in accordance with state and
federal tax law and regulation.
            (II)   County-wide elected officials who do not have a Category I
County vehicle assigned to them shall receive an automobile allowance of
$561.54 per biweekly pay period.
            (III)   The District Attorney and Sheriff-Coroner are eligible to
have a Category I County vehicle assigned and for an automobile allowance of
$750 per biweekly pay period.
         (F)   The County-wide elected officials receive the benefits described
in §
13.0613(cc) related to the portable communication device allowance with the
exception that they will receive an allowance of $150.00 per biweekly pay
period.
         (G)   In lieu of other benefits provided to Exempt Group employees,
County-wide elected officials shall have five percent of their base salary
contributed by the County on their behalf on a biweekly basis to either (1) the
County's 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan, or (2) the County's 401(a) Defined
Contribution Plan.
         (H)   Tier 1 County-wide elected officials shall have $442.53
contributed by the County on their behalf on a biweekly basis to either (1) the
County's 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan, or (2) the County's 401(a) Defined
Contribution Plan.
         (I)   Should Article III of the County Charter be modified through
additions or amendments that impacts County-Wide Elected Officials as defined
in §
13.0613(b), the benefits described in §§
13.0613(p) and
13.0614(b)(1)(e)(3) shall not apply.
   (c)   Employment Status.  A County employee in a regular County position
becoming an elected official of San Bernardino County shall be compensated, at
the time of termination from regular employment to the time of assuming office,
for unused vacation, holidays, and sick leave conversion, if eligible. Should
such an elected official return to County employment in a regular position,
such employee shall be treated as a new employee and receive a new benefit date
except as hereinafter provided. A person that has served as an elected official
of the County and who returns or has returned to County employment in a regular
position within 90 days after leaving an elected office of the County, shall be
entitled for purposes of vacation accrual rates to count all prior County
employment, including the time as an elected official of the County. The
effective date of any vacation accrual rate adjustment shall not precede the
effective date of this amendment
   (d)   Salary Adjustments.  The County Administrative Office, in concurrence
with County Counsel, shall conduct the compensation and salary surveys required
in Section
308 of Article III of the County Charter, and shall report to the Auditor-
Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector and the Board of Supervisors concerning
appropriate adjustments to be implemented as required by Section
308 of Article III of the County Charter. The Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax
Collector shall implement any required adjustments effective December 1 of the
applicable year based on the report of the County Administrative Office.
(Am. Ord. 3845, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 3953, passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 4069,
passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4080, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4157, passed - -2012;
Am. Ord. 4339, passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4376,
passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4386, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4409, passed - -2021;
Am. Ord. 4416, passed - -2021; Am. Ord. 4433, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4454,
passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4456, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4476, passed - -2024)
§ 13.0615 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Professional Unit.
   The salaries and working conditions applicable to employees of the
Professional Unit are as set forth in the Memorandum of Understanding between
the County and the Service Employees International Union Local 721, approved by
the Board of Supervisors on July 12, 2016, and as set forth in any amendments
thereto approved by the Board of Supervisors, or as provided by law if the
Memorandum of Understanding expires.
(Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0616 Salaries and Working Conditions of the Sheriff’s Station Officer.
   (a)   Establishment of Classification. The Sheriff’s Station Officer was
established effective April 19, 2003. Said class shall be recurrent employees
and serve in the unclassified service. Sheriff’s Station Officers are general
employees who shall provide assistance to peace officers in searching,
escorting and observing female prisoners at remote Sheriff’s stations where
there are no female deputies available. In addition, they may perform other
related duties, including but not limited to booking and fingerprinting
inmates.
   (b)   Wages. Sheriff’s Station Officers shall be compensated at top step of
range 22, of the General MOU.
   (c)   Working Conditions. The following working conditions shall be
applicable to all employees covered by this section.
      (1)   Overtime. Sheriff’s Station Officers shall be paid at one and one-
half times their regular rate of pay for hours worked over 40 hours per work
week. Work week shall be defined as 12:01 a.m. each Saturday and end at 12:00
a.m. midnight the following Friday.
      (2)   PST Deferred Compensation Plan. Employees covered by this section
shall participate in the County’s PST deferred compensation plan in lieu of
participation in any other retirement plan, program, or benefit. Said employees
shall contribute seven and one-half percent of the employee’s biweekly base
compensation up to seven and one-half percent of the employee’s maximum covered
wages for Social Security purposes. The employee’s contributions to PST
deferred compensation shall be automatically deducted from employee’s earnings.
Employees shall enroll in the plan on forms approved by Human Resources. This
subdivision shall not apply to any employee who is otherwise covered by the
County retirement system.
(Repealed by Ord. 3749, passed - -1999; Ord. 3887, passed - -2003; Am. Ord.
4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4339, passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -
2019)
§ 13.0617 County Employee Election Worker Program.
   (a)   Employees, including but not limited to regular employees, Public
Service Employees (PSE), extra-help and recurrent employees, and contract
employees, who desire to volunteer their services as Election Workers will
apply through the San Bernardino County Registrar of Voters and coordinate
their intent to serve through their respective department head or designee.
Acceptance as an Election Worker is conditional upon the approval of the
employee's department head and the Registrar of Voters. For time spent as an
Election Worker, County employees will be compensated in accordance with the
applicable memorandum of understanding and/or County ordinances, policies, and
procedures. For purposes of compensation under this Section, time spent as an
Election Worker, including time spent attending a training session during
regular work hours or outside of regular work hours, shall be considered as
time actually worked under the applicable memorandum of understanding and/or
County ordinances, policies, and procedures.
   (b)   California Elections Law requires that election workers attend a
training session prior to each election. This training will be conducted by the
Registrar of Voters during and after regular work hours. County employees will
be encouraged to attend training during their regular work hours.
   (c)   Any additional equipment or supplies necessary to carry out Election
Worker duties on Election Day will be provided by the Registrar of Voters. The
Registrar of Voters will keep affected department heads informed of employees
who volunteer for service on Election Day in terms of their attendance.
   (d)   The Registrar of Voters will reimburse each employee's department for
the compensation the employee receives while in election worker training.
Regardless of whether the hours worked as an Election Worker on or before
Election Day count as overtime, the Registrar of Voters will reimburse an
employee's department for any weekly overtime that the department is liable for
due to the employee working as an Election Worker on Election Day.
(Ord. 4372, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4409, passed - -2021; Am. Ord. 4493,
passed - -2025)
§ 13.0617a Salaries and Working Conditions of the Sheriff’s Trainees.
   The following is the salary range for Sheriff's Trainees:
 
Effective 7/29/2023
1      2      3      4      5
$30.25 $30.86 $31.62 $32.42 $33.20
 
 
Effective 7/27/2024
1      2      3      4      5
$31.60 $31.79 $32.57 $33.39 $34.20
 
      This salary range shall increase at the same time and by the same rate as
the salary range adjustments for the County's Deputy Sheriff classification.
      Except as provided herein, incumbents shall be hired at step 1. The
Sheriff may hire Sheriff's Trainees at a higher step if justified by
recruitment needs. Sheriff Trainees shall not receive step advancements.
      Sheriff's Trainees shall only receive the following benefits: the same
medical and dental plan coverage, medical premium subsidy, Internal Revenue
Code § 125 conversion plan, retirement system contributions, uniform allowance,
sick leave and annual leave benefits as provided to County's Deputy Sheriff
classification. Sheriff's Trainees as nonsworn employees shall not be eligible
for benefits under Labor Code § 4850 and shall be general members of the
County's 1937 Act Retirement System.
      The classification of Sheriff's Trainee shall be a trainee classification
in which employees remain in probationary status for the duration of such
employment and employees who are not promoted to Deputy Sheriff shall be
terminated. Sheriff's Trainees who successfully complete the Sheriff's Academy
shall be promoted to Deputy Sheriff in accordance with the terms and conditions
included in §
13.0611. Time spent as a Sheriff's Trainee shall not count toward the 26 pay
period probationary period required for the classification of Deputy Sheriff.
(Am. Ord. 3816, passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 3983, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4339,
passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4409, passed - -2021;
Am. Ord. 4466, passed - -2024)
§ 13.0617b (Repealed by Ord. 3599, passed - -1995)
§ 13.0617c Salaries and Working Conditions of the Student Intern.
   (a)   Wages. The following classes are hereby established: Student Intern
and Graduate Student Intern. Student Interns shall be compensated at salary
range 35 of the MOU applicable to the Administrative Services Unit and Graduate
Student Interns shall be compensated at salary range 36 of the MOU applicable
to the Administrative Services Unit. Student Interns and Graduate Student
Interns shall receive step advances in the same manner as employees in the
Administrative Services Unit except that there shall be no right to review or
appeal. Advanced step placement may be approved by the Director of Human
Resources.
   (b)   Working Conditions.
      (1)   PST Deferred Compensation Plan. Employees covered by this section
shall participate in the County's PST deferred compensation plan in lieu of
participation in any other retirement plan, program, or benefit. Said employees
shall contribute seven and one- half percent of the employee's biweekly base
compensation up to seven and one-half percent of the employee's maximum covered
wages for Social Security purposes. The employee's contributions to PST
deferred compensation shall be automatically deducted from employee's earnings.
Employees shall enroll in the plan on forms approved by Human Resources. This
Subdivision shall not apply to any employee who is otherwise covered by the
County retirement system.
      (2)   Employees covered by this section shall be paid at one and one-half
times their regular rate of pay for hours worked over 40 hours per work week.
      (3)   Unclassified Service. Employees covered by this section are in the
unclassified service.
(Am. Ord. 3894, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4339,
passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4409, passed - -2021;
Am. Ord. 4433, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4476, passed - -2024)
§ 13.0617d (Repealed by Ord. 3749, passed - -1999)
§ 13.0617e (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0617f Salaries and Working Conditions of the Student Nurses.
   (a)   Wages.  Student nurses shall receive an hourly rate of pay that is
within Salary Range 35 of the Craft, Labor, and Trades Unit.
   (b)   Working Conditions. The student nurse classification is for training
purposes, and the class is in the unclassified service. The salary rates and
step advancement provisions applicable to the Craft, Labor, and Trades Unit
shall also apply to student nurses. Student nurses shall be compensated on an
hourly rate basis only for hours actually worked and shall receive no other
compensation or benefit. Overtime shall be defined as all hours actually worked
in excess of 40 hours per work period, except that with mutual consent of the
appointing authority, student nurses may define overtime as hours worked over
eight in one day, or 80 in a 14-day work period. Any student nurse authorized
by the appointing authority or authorized representative to work overtime shall
be compensated at premium rates, i.e., one and one-half times the employee's
regular rate of pay.
      (1)   PST Deferred Compensation Plan. Employees covered by this section
shall participate in the County's PST deferred compensation plan in lieu of
participation in any other retirement plan, program, or benefit. Said employees
shall contribute seven and one-half percent of the employee's biweekly base
compensation up to seven and one-half percent of the employee's maximum covered
wages for Social Security purposes. The employee's contributions to PST
deferred compensation shall be automatically deducted from employee's earnings.
Employees shall enroll in the plan on forms approved by Human Resources. This
subdivision shall not apply to any employee who is otherwise covered by the
County retirement system.
      (2)   Deferred Compensation. Employees covered by this section may
participate in the § 457(b) Deferred Compensation Plan administered by the
County, to the maximum extent provided by law.
      (3)   Unclassified Service. Employees covered by this section are in the
unclassified service.
(Am. Ord. 3845, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4339,
passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4409, passed - -2021;
Am. Ord. 4433, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4476, passed - -2024)
§ 13.0617g (Repealed by Ord. 3749, passed - -1999).
§ 13.0617h (Repealed by Ord. 4347, passed - -2018).
§ 13.0617i (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
§ 13.0617j (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
§ 13.0617k (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015).
§ 13.0617l (Repealed by Ord. 4315, passed - -2017).
§ 13.0617m Salaries and Working Conditions of the Law Clerk.
   (a)   Wages. The following classes are hereby established: Law Clerk I.
      (1)   The following is the salary range for the Law Clerk:
 
1      2      3
$27.30 $28.00 $28.75
 
 
Effective 6/17/2023
1      2      3
$28.12 $28.84 $29.61
 
 
Effective 2/24/2024
1      2      3
$28.96 $29.71 $30.50
 
 
Effective 2/22/2025
1      2      3
$29.83 $30.60 $31.42
 
 
Effective 2/21/2026
1      2      3
$30.72 $31.52 $32.36
 
      (2)   Salary ranges shall increase at the same time and by the same
percentage rate as the salary range adjustments for the County's Legal Research
Attorney I classification.
      (3)   Except as provided herein, incumbents shall be hired at step 1. The
District Attorney and the Public Defender may hire Law Clerks at a higher step
if justified by recruitment needs. Law Clerks shall not receive step
advancements.
   (b)   Working Conditions.
      (1)   PST Deferred Compensation Plan. Employees covered by this section
shall participate in the County's PST deferred compensation plan in lieu of
participation in any other retirement plan, program, or benefit. Said employees
shall contribute seven and one-half percent of the employee's biweekly base
compensation up to seven and one-half percent of the employee's maximum covered
wages for Social Security purposes. The employee's contributions to PST
deferred compensation shall be automatically deducted from employee's earnings.
Employees shall enroll in the plan on forms approved by Human Resources. This
subdivision shall not apply to any employee who is otherwise covered by the
County Retirement System.
      (2)   Unclassified Service. Employees covered by this section shall be in
the unclassified service.
(Ord. 4017, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4339,
passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4454, passed - -2023;
Am. Ord. 4456, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4466, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4466,
passed - -2024)
§ 13.0617n Salaries and Working Conditions of the Pool Manager.
   (a)   Wages. The class of Pool Manager is hereby established. Positions in
the Pool Manager class may only be allocated as extra-help or recurrent. A Pool
Manager range is established with a starting step of $17.00 per hour and steps
progressing at $0.50 per hour up to a maximum of $20.00 per hour. Pool Managers
may be hired at any step within the pay range as determined by the appointing
authority commensurate with their experience and training, subject to approval
by the Director of Human Resources or designee. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this code, step advances are at the discretion of the appointing
authority after completion of not less than 1,040 hours worked for each step.
   (b)   Working Conditions. Pool Managers shall be compensated on an hourly
rate basis only for hours actually worked and shall receive no other
compensation or benefit, except those benefits required by law and as set forth
in this subsection. Overtime shall be defined as all hours actually worked in
excess of 40 hours per work period. Any Pool Manager authorized by the
appointing authority or authorized representative to work overtime shall be
compensated at premium rates, i.e., one and one-half times the employee's
regular rate of pay.
      (1)   PST Deferred Compensation Plan. Employees covered by this section
shall participate in the County’s PST deferred compensation plan in lieu of
participation in any other retirement plan, program, or benefit. Said employees
shall contribute seven and one-half percent of the employee’s biweekly base
compensation up to seven and one-half percent of the employee’s maximum covered
wages for Social Security purposes. The employee’s contributions to PST
deferred compensation shall be automatically deducted from employee’s earnings.
Employees shall enroll in the plan on forms approved by Human Resources. This
subdivision shall not apply to any employee who is otherwise covered by the
County retirement system.
      (2)   Unclassified Service. Employees covered by this section are in the
unclassified service.
(Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0618 Boards, Commissions, and Committees.
   (a)   Stipend. Members of the following boards, commissions, and committees
shall receive a stipend as indicated.
 
Civil Service Commission $200.00/meeting
Planning Commission      $200.00/meeting
 
      Except that in the event more than one-half day of hearings is scheduled,
and a member of the Planning Commission attends for one-half day or less, that
member shall receive $100.00/meeting and, except further that in the event more
than a full day of meeting is scheduled, and a member attends for more than a
full day, the member shall receive $300.00/meeting. For purposes of the
previous sentence, a full day shall compromise two of the three periods from
the morning, afternoon, or evening of the day in question.
 
                         $175.00/less than three hours per meeting
Assessment Appeals Board $225.00/three to six hours per meeting
                         $300.00/more than six hours per meeting
 
      The length of the meeting will be determined by the actual meeting
length, not the scheduled length.
 
Equal Opportunity Commission                            $100.00/meeting
Regional Parks Advisory Commission and Retirement Board $100.00/meeting
Airport Commission                                      $60.00/meeting
Economic and Community Development Commission           $60.00/meeting
Fish and Game Commission                                $60.00/meeting
IHSS Advisory Committee, including alternates           $60.00/meeting
 
(Am. Ord. 3819, passed - -2001; Am. Ord. 3989, passed - -2006)
   (b)   Expenses.
      (1)   Mileage. Except as otherwise provided by federal, state or local
regulations, members of boards, commissions and committees shall be reimbursed
for private automobile mileage incurred in attending called meetings at the
rates approved for Exempt Group employees. All travel which is 20 miles or less
round trip from a member’s home shall not be reimbursed. If the round trip
exceeds 20 miles, then all mileage is reimbursable as provided herein.
      (2)   Meals. Except as otherwise provided by federal, state or local
regulations, members of boards, commissions and committees shall be reimbursed
for the cost of meals while attending called meetings in accordance with the
procedures approved for Exempt Group employees. However, except as otherwise
provided by federal, state or local regulations, such members who receive a per
meeting stipend shall not be reimbursed for the cost of meals.
      (3)   Conference Cost. Except as otherwise provided by federal, state or
local regulations, members of boards, commissions and committees who attend
annual or special conferences, seminars, meetings of professional
organizations, or other meetings not classified as regular or specific board
meetings, with the prior approval of the Board of Supervisors, shall be
reimbursed for their expenses in the same manner as Exempt Group employees, but
they shall not be paid a stipend for such meetings, conferences, etc.
      (4)   Travel and Subsistence. Members of boards, commissions and
committees may be reimbursed for approved travel and subsistence while on
authorized board, commission or committee business. Said reimbursements shall
be in accordance with the established rates for Exempt Group employees provided
in Section
13.0613(j).
      (5)   All reimbursement of expenses for boards, commissions and
committees appointed by the Board of Supervisors shall comply with the
provisions of Section
13.0613(j)(6)(B)(I) in addition to the provisions of this section.
   (c)   Public Employee Representatives. All members of commissions,
committees, and boards appointed by the Board of Supervisors who are regular
employees of the County or other public agency shall not receive a stipend for
serving on such boards if they are otherwise compensated for their use of such
time by the public entity.
   (d)   Lists of Members. The Clerk of the Board shall maintain listings of
all commissions, committees, and boards, and of all members of such bodies. New
commissions and committees being formed may not be created without specific
provisions for stipends, expense reimbursements, and related policies.
   (e)   Special District, County Service Area and Municipal Advisory
Commissions.
      (1)   Stipend. Each member shall receive a stipend of $25.00 per quarter
provided a member attends at least one meeting during the quarter (quarters
are: July—September; October—December; January—March; April—June). Members
shall not receive a stipend if the special district, county service area or
municipal advisory commission they serve does not have a total aggregate budget
for expenditures of more than $10,000.00.
      (2)   Mileage.  Except as otherwise provided by federal, state or local
regulations, members shall be reimbursed for private automobile mileage
incurred in attending called meetings at the rates approved for Exempt Group
employees. All travel which is 20 miles or less round trip from a member’s home
shall not be reimbursed. If the round trip exceeds 20 miles, then all mileage
is reimbursable as provided herein.
      (3)   Meals. Except as otherwise provided by federal, state or local
regulations, members shall not be reimbursed for meals.
      (4)   Conference Cost. Except as otherwise provided by federal, state or
local regulations, members who attend annual or special conferences, seminars,
meetings of professional organizations, or other meetings not classified as
regular or specific board meetings, with the prior approval of the Board of
Supervisors, shall be reimbursed for their expenses in the same manner as
Exempt Group employees, but they shall not be paid a stipend for such meetings,
conferences, etc.
      (5)   Board Approval. Payment of stipends and expenses to members shall
not become operative until requested by the respective special district, county
service area, or municipal advisory commission and approved by the Board of
Supervisors in advance of incurring expenses, which approval shall continue
until rescinded by the Board of Supervisors.
      (6)   Travel and Subsistence. Members may be reimbursed for approved
travel and subsistence while on authorized business. Said reimbursements shall
be in accordance with the established rates for Exempt Group employees provided
in Section
13.0613(j)(6)(B)(I).
   (f)   Special Fund Activities.
      (1)   Members of municipal advisory commissions not funded by special
districts shall not receive stipend or expense payments.
      (2)   Citizen Participation Advisory Committees.
         (A)   Mileage. Except as otherwise provided by federal, state or local
regulations, committee members shall be reimbursed for private automobile
mileage incurred in attending called meetings at the rates approved for Exempt
Group employees. All travel which is 20 miles or less round trip from a
member’s home shall not be reimbursed. If the round trip exceeds 20 miles, then
all mileage is reimbursable as provided herein.
         (B)   Meals. Committee members shall not be reimbursed for meal
expenses; however, meals for members may be paid for by the County when such
meals are arranged by the County.
         (C)   Conference Cost. Except as otherwise provided by federal, state
or local regulations, committee members who attend annual or special
conferences, seminars, meetings of professional organizations, or other
meetings not classified as regular or specific board meetings, with the prior
approval of the Board of Supervisors, shall be reimbursed for their expenses in
the same manner as Exempt Group employees.
         (D)   Stipends. Committee members shall receive no stipend.
      (3)   Behavioral Health Commission. Members of the local Behavioral
Health Commission shall be reimbursed from the local behavioral health budget
for the actual and necessary expenses they incur incidental to the performance
of their official duties and functions. Such expenses shall include travel,
lodging, and meals for the members while on official business as approved by
the Director of Behavioral Health for in-County travel and the Board of
Supervisors for out-of-County travel. Reimbursement for expenses shall not
exceed rates allotted to Exempt Group employees as set forth in the County
Code, and the procedures providing for reimbursement shall be the same as those
established for Exempt Group employees.
(Am. Ord. 3971, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4271, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357,
passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4365, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0619 Special Service Fees.
   (a)   Election Workers and Polling Places/Early Vote Sites.
Field Representative              $375.00/day
Ballot Security                   $300.00/day
Machine Technician                $175.00/day
Supervisor                        $300.00/day
Assistant Supervisor              $260.00/day
Clerk                             $255.00/day
Business Purpose Mileage*         IRS allowable rate
Bilingual Differential            $20.00/day
Training Class Stipend            $30.00/2-hour session
On-call Stipend                   $30.00/2 hours
Polling Places/Early Voting Sites Negotiated by Registrar of Voters
*Pursuant to the requirements of County of San Bernardino Standard Practice
No. 08-03 SP1 and County Code section
13.0613(j).
 
   (b)   Judiciary.
 
Grand Jury         $60.00 for each day’s attendance and mileage reimbursement as applicable to
                   County employees
Hearing Officer    Per agreement
Public              
Administrator
   Attorney’s Set by State Law
   Witness Fees Set by State Law
 
(Am. Ord. 3558, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3957, passed - -2005; Am. Ord. 4344,
passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4352, passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4353, passed - -2018;
Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4464, passed - -2023)
§ 13.0620 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0621 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0622 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0623 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0624 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0625 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0626 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0627 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0628 Extra-Help Employment.
   An EXTRA-HELP APPOINTMENT means an appointment which is intended to be on
less than a year-round basis, including, but not limited to the following: to
cover seasonal peak workloads; emergency extra work loads of limited duration;
necessary vacation, holiday or sick leave relief; and other situations
involving a fluctuating staff. At the end of 2,080 service hours the
appointment shall be terminated unless the appointing authority receives
approval from the Director of Human Resources to continue the appointment.
   Extra-help employees shall be compensated on an hourly basis only for hours
actually worked unless otherwise provided for in this Code or required by law.
Extra-help employees' salary shall be within the base salary range established
for the job level, with commensurate duties, as determined by Human Resources.
   Under unusual circumstances and with the approval of the appropriate
appointing authority or authorities and the Director of Human Resources, an
employee in a regular position may choose to work in an extra-help capacity for
the same or another appointing authority and be compensated as such pursuant to
this section.
   Extra-help employees shall participate in the County's PST deferred
compensation plan in lieu of participation in any other retirement plan,
program, or benefit. Said employees shall contribute seven and one-half percent
of the employee's biweekly base compensation up to seven and one-half percent
of the employee's maximum covered wages for Social Security purposes. The
employee's contributions to PST deferred compensation shall be automatically
deducted from employee's earnings. Employees shall enroll in the plan on forms
approved by Human Resources. This Subdivision shall not apply to any employee
who is otherwise covered by the County Retirement System.
   The Director of Human Resources shall have the authority, with the approval
of the County's Chief Executive Officer, to provide extra-help employees with
COVID-19 Premium Pay consistent with COVID-19 Premium Pay provided to the
majority of the bargaining units.
(Am. Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4433,
passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4437, passed - -2022)
§ 13.0629 Recurrent Employment.
   A RECURRENT APPOINTMENT means an appointment which is made for an indefinite
period of time to provide for on-call staffing needs related to variable
workload/service demands attendant to such things as fluctuating census or
population in institutions, special projects, and annually recurring seasonal
peak workloads. Recurrent employees may remain on the payroll system year-round
for an indefinite period of time and may be scheduled to work as needed over
the course of one or more years. Employees may not exceed 1,547 hours in a year
without the express approval of the Director of Human Resources. Recurrent
employees shall be compensated on an hourly basis only for hours actually
worked unless otherwise provided or required by law. A recurrent employee's
salary shall be within the then-current base salary range established for a job
classification with commensurate duties. Recurrent employees may be hired up to
the midpoint of the appropriate base salary range with the approval of the
appointing authority and through the top step of the appropriate base salary
range with the approval of the Director of Human Resources; provided, however,
that regular employees appointed to a recurrent position of the same
classification shall be compensated at the same step in the recurrent position
as they are in their regular position. Exceptions may be made subject to the
approval of the Director of Human Resources. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this code, step advances are at the discretion of the appointing
authority after completion of not less than 1,040 hours worked for each step.
   Under unusual circumstances and with the approval of the appropriate
appointing authority or authorities and the Director of Human Resources, an
employee in a regular position may choose to work in a recurrent capacity for
the same or another appointing authority and be compensated as such pursuant to
this section.
   Recurrent employees shall participate in the County's PST deferred
compensation plan in lieu of participation in any other retirement plan,
program, or benefit. Said employees shall contribute seven and one-half percent
of the employee's biweekly base compensation up to seven and one-half percent
of the employee's maximum covered wages for Social Security purposes. The
employee's contributions to PST deferred compensation shall be automatically
deducted from employee's earnings. Employees shall enroll in the plan on forms
approved by Human Resources. This subdivision shall not apply to any employee
who is otherwise covered by the County Retirement System.
   The Director of Human Resources shall have the authority, with the approval
of the County's Chief Executive Officer, to provide Recurrent employees with
COVID-19 Premium Pay consistent with COVID-19 Premium Pay provided to the
majority of the bargaining units.
(Am. Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4433,
passed - -2022)
§ 13.0630 Per Diem Classifications.
   All Per Diem classifications shall be in the unclassified service.
(Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0631 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0632 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0633 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0634 (Repealed by Ord. 3679, passed - -).
§ 13.0635 (Repealed by Ord. 3679, passed - -).
§ 13.0636 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0637 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0638 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0639 (Deleted by Ord. 2860, passed - -).
§ 13.0640 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0641 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0642 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0643 (Deleted by Ord. 2860, passed - -).
§ 13.0644 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0645 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0646 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0647 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0648 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0649 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0650 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0651 (Deleted by Ord. 2860, passed - -).
§ 13.0652 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0653 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0654 (Deleted by Ord. 2860, passed - -).
§ 13.0655 Salary and Step Adjustments.
   An appointing authority may request, in limited exceptional circumstances
and with adequate justification, the adjustment of the salary step or salary
rate of an employee to maintain salary equity within the system, to prevent
undue hardship or unfairness due to the application of any rule or policy, or
to correct any salary inequity, subject to the recommendation of the Director
of Human Resources and the final approval of the Chief Executive Officer or
his/her designee. The Director of Human Resources may authorize the adjustment
of salary step or salary rate of any employee to correct any payroll error or
omission, including any such action which may have arisen in any prior fiscal
year.
(Ord. 4357, passed - -2019)
§ 13.0656 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0658 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0659 (Repealed by Ord. 4270, passed - -2015)
§ 13.0660 Public Service Employees.
   The class of Public Service Employee (PSE) is hereby established. Positions
in the PSE class may be assigned to entry level duties in a variety of fields
and occupations. Positions may only be allocated as extra-help or recurrent
and, as such, are in the unclassified service. For layoff purposes, PSE
positions are deemed to be the same classification as those positions
performing substantially the same duties.
   A PSE range is established with a starting step at the state minimum wage
per hour and steps progressing at $0.25 per hour up to a maximum of $25.00 per
hour.
   PSEs may be hired at any step within the pay range as determined by the
appointing authority commensurate with their education and/or training and
duties to be performed; provided, however, that the PSE salary is consistent
with that of employees in regular positions of the same or similar type or
nature and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Human
Resources or his/her designee. Notwithstanding any other provision in this
code, step advances are at the discretion of the appointing authority after
completion of not less than 1,040 hours worked for each step.
(Ord. 4270, passed - -2015; Am. Ord. 4357, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4433,
passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4454, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4456, passed - -2023;
Am. Ord. 4476, passed - -2024)
CHAPTER 7: DISQUALIFICATION OF FORMER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
13.0700   Title and Legislative Intent.
   
13.0701   Definitions.
   
13.0702   Representation by Former Administrative Official as Agent or Attorney
Before Court or County Agency; Appearance or Communication; Prohibition.
   
13.0703   Prohibition of Aid, Advice or Counsel by Former Official if
Appearance Prohibited Pursuant to §
13.0702.
   
13.0704   Exemptions From the Prohibitions of §§
13.0702 and
13.0703.
   
13.0705   Exclusion of Violator; Petition; Hearing.
   
13.0706   Criminal Penalty.
   
13.0707   Civil Action.
   
13.0708   Chapter Application Prospective.
   
13.0709   Timely Filing of Statements of Economic Interest.
   
13.0710   Violation of County Policy regarding Bidding or Purchase at Sales and
Auctions of County Property.
§ 13.0700   Title and Legislative Intent.
   This Chapter shall be known as and may be cited as “The Ethics in San
Bernardino County Government Act.” It is the declared intent of the Board of
Supervisors that the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure § 1021.5 should be
applicable to private enforcement of this Chapter.
   (a)   The legislative intent of the Board of Supervisors in enacting §§
13.0701 through
13.0708 of this Chapter is to protect the County and public from the potential
conflict of interest and harm which may occur when the former officers and
employees take with them information which is not readily available to or
accessible by the public or press upon leaving County government and thereafter
attempt to use such information for the private economic advantage or gain.
   (b)   The legislative intent of the Board of Supervisors in enacting §§
13.0709 through
13.0710 of this Chapter is to expand and fortify the ethical standards that are
applicable to County officers and employees. It is the intent of the Board of
Supervisors that these standards shall apply to all County officers and
employees in addition to the legal requirements of Government Code §§ 1090,
1126, 87100 and any other provisions of the Government Code applicable to
County employment.
(Ord. 3293, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3971, passed - -2006)
§ 13.0701   Definitions.
   Unless the contrary is stated or is clearly apparent from the context, the
definitions set forth in this Section shall govern the interpretation of this
Chapter.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY. Every County office, department, division, bureau,
board and commission listed in the County Code §
13.0618(a), but does not include the courts.
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL. Every member, officer, employee or consultant of a
County administrative agency or members of the Board of Supervisors or their
staff who as part of his or her official responsibilities engages in any
judicial, quasi-judicial or other proceeding in other than a purely clerical,
secretarial or ministerial capacity. CONSULTANT means any natural person who as
an independent contractor provides advice, recommendation or counsel to the
County and who has acquired access to information which is not readily
available to or accessible by the public or press.
   JUDICIAL, QUASI-JUDICIAL, OR OTHER PROCEEDING. Any proceeding, application,
request for ruling or other determination, contract, claim, controversy,
investigation, charge, accusation, arrest, or other particular matter involving
a specific party or parties in any court or County administrative agency and
includes, but is not limited to, administrative adjudicatory proceedings.
   PARTICIPATED. To have personally and substantially taken part through
decision, approval, disapproval, formal written recommendation, rendering
advice on a substantial basis, or investigation, but excluding approval,
disapproval or rendering of legal advice to departmental or agency staff which
do not involve a specific party or parties.
(Ord. 3293, passed - -1988)
§ 13.0702   Representation by Former Administrative Official as Agent or
Attorney Before Court or County Agency; Appearance of Communication;
Prohibition.
   No former administrative official, after the termination of his or her
employment or term of office, shall for compensation act as agent or attorney
for, or otherwise represent, any other person, except the County of San
Bernardino, before any court or administrative agency or any officer or
employee thereof, by making any formal or informal appearance, or by making any
oral or written communication with the intent to influence, in connection with
any judicial, quasi-judicial, or other proceeding if the County of San
Bernardino is a party or has a direct and substantial interest and either of
the following apply:
   (a)   The former administrative official was a member of the Board of
Supervisors or a staff member thereof, County Administrative Officer or member
of such officer’s staff, County department head, assistant County department
head, or an employee in the Exempt Group, Management Unit or Safety Management
Unit and one year has not elapsed from the last day of active County
employment.
   (b)   The proceeding or specific pending matter is one in which the former
administrative official participated.
(Ord. 3293, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3802, passed - -2000)
§ 13.0703   Prohibition of Aid, Advice or Counsel by Former Official if
Appearance Prohibited Pursuant to § 13.0702.
   No former administrative official, after the termination of his or her
employment or term of office, shall for compensation aid, advise, counsel,
consult or assist in representing any other person, except the County of San
Bernardino, in any proceeding in which the official would be prohibited from
appearing under §
13.0702.
(Ord. 3293, passed - -1988)
§ 13.0704   Exemptions From the Prohibitions of §§ 13.0702 and 13.0703.
   The prohibitions contained in §§
13.0702 and
13.0703 shall not apply:
   (a)   To prevent a former administrative official from making or providing a
statement, which is based on the former administrative official’s own special
knowledge in the particular area that is the subject of the statement, provided
that no compensation is thereby received other than that regularly provided for
by law or regulation for witnesses; or
   (b)   To communications made solely for the purpose of furnishing
information by a former administrative official if the administrative agency to
which the communication is directed, makes findings in writing that (1) the
former administrative official has outstanding and otherwise unavailable
qualifications; (2) the former administrative official is acting with respect
to a particular matter which requires such qualifications and (3) the public
interest would be served by the participation of the former administrative
official; or
   (c)   With respect to appearances or communications in a proceeding in which
a court or administrative agency has issued a final order, decree, decision or
judgment but has retained jurisdiction, if the administrative agency of former
County employment gives its consent by determining that (1) at least five years
have elapsed since the termination of the former administrative official’s
employment or term of office and (2) the public interest would not be harmed.
   (d)   To any former administrative official who has left County employment
or service for other government employment or service as long as he or she is
employed or serves in that capacity.
(Ord. 3293, passed - -1988)
§ 13.0705   Exclusion of Violator; Petition; Hearing.
   Upon the petition of any interested person or party or resident of San
Bernardino County, the court or the presiding or other officer, including but
not limited to a hearing officer serving in an administrative capacity for the
County, in any judicial, quasi-judicial or other proceeding including
administrative proceedings may, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing,
exclude any person found to be in violation of this Chapter from further
participation, or from assisting or counseling any other participant, in the
proceeding then pending before such court or presiding or other officer.
(Ord. 3293, passed - -1988)
§ 13.0706   Criminal Penalty.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the penalty shall be a fine of
not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not
more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this Chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable
accordingly.
(Ord. 3293, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3802, passed - -2000)
§ 13.0707   Civil Action.
   In addition to the criminal penalties provided in §
13.0706 and the injunctive and other relief provided in §
13.0705, any interested person or party or resident of San Bernardino County
may initiate a civil action to prevent violation of this Chapter and to enforce
this Chapter.
   If a person in such civil action is found to be in violation of this
Chapter, such person shall be required by the court to pay any compensation
received back to the payor and shall also pay a civil fine in an amount not to
exceed $1,000.00 for a first violation and in an amount not to exceed
$10,000.00 for a second or additional violation. Such civil fines shall be
payable to the County Treasurer.
   Any person initiating civil action pursuant to this Section shall file a
copy of the complaint with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors within ten
calendar days of filing with the court.
(Ord. 3293, passed - -1988)
§ 13.0708   Chapter Application Prospective.
   The requirements imposed by this Chapter shall not apply to any person who
left County service prior to the effective date of this Chapter except that any
such person who returns to County service on or after the effective date of
this Chapter shall thereafter be covered thereby.
(Ord. 3293, passed - -1988)
§ 13.0709   Timely Filing of Statements of Economic Interest.
   (a)   All County officers, employees and members of County boards,
committees and commissions who are required by law or by an applicable Conflict
of Interest Code to file a Form 700, Statement of Economic Interest, are
expected to comply with all applicable time deadlines, and file all Statements
of Economic Interest on a timely basis.
   (b)   Any filing officer whose duties include accepting for filing
Statements of Economic Interest completed by any County officer, employee or
member of a County board, committee or commission shall notify all such
officers, employees, or board members of the designated time deadline for the
filing of the Form 700, Statement of Economic Interest. If any such officer,
employee or member of a board, committee, or commission fails to file within
the designated time deadline, the filing officer shall impose the fine as
specified in Government Code § 91013, which is currently the amount of $10.00
per day, up to a maximum of $100.00. Liability need not be enforced by the
filing officer if, on an impartial basis, he or she determines that the late
filing was not willful and that enforcement of the liability will not further
the purposes of the Political Reform Act, except that no liability shall be
waived if a statement of economic interest is not filed within 30 days after
the filing officer has sent specific written notice of the filing requirement.
If, after notice and imposition of the maximum fine, the County officer,
employee, or member of a County board, committee or commission fails to file
the Form 700 Statement of Economic Interest, the filing officer shall refer the
person to the Fair Political Practices Commission and the District Attorney for
enforcement action.
   (c)   No filing officer shall be subject to criminal penalties for violation
of this Section, unless that violation is knowing and willful.
(Ord. 3971, passed - -2006)
§ 13.0710   Violation of County Policy regarding Bidding or Purchase at Sales
and Auctions of County Property.
   (a)   County Policy 11-11 reads as follows: “POLICY STATEMENT: It is the
policy of the Board of Supervisors that the disposal by the County of any
County property (real or personal) authorized by statute or County policy be
conducted in a fair manner. County employees are prohibited from bidding or
purchasing either directly or indirectly through an intermediary at auctions or
other sales of County property. This prohibition is in addition to any
prohibitions or limitations contained in any other County Policies.
      POLICY AMPLIFICATION:
      1.   “County employee” is defined, for purposes of this policy, as any
employee of the County, including but not limited to regular, contract, extra
help, or recurrent employee.
      2.   “Auctions” of property include any sale or disposal of County
property conducted by or on behalf of the County or any of its elected or
appointed officials in the execution or implementation of the County’s
statutory duties.
      3.   “County Property” includes all property (real or personal), owned by
the County and disposed of by the County or any of its elected or appointed
officials in the course of statutory duties. This includes, but is not limited
to, County surplus property, property that has been seized by the Sheriff in
the performance of that office’s duties, and any property that a department may
have been awarded by a court in any civil or criminal action.
      4. The Board of Supervisors may waive the application of this policy to
any individual County employee upon a showing of good cause, and approval of
the waiver by the Board of Supervisors in open session.”
   (b)   Unless a waiver is approved by the Board of Supervisors, any County
employee in the Exempt Group or any County elected official who violates County
Policy 11-11 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, the
penalty shall be a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the
County jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 3971, passed - -2006)
DIVISION 4: PURCHASING, REVENUE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1: PURCHASING
Section
   
14.0101   Duties of Purchasing Agent—General.
   
14.0102   Duties of Purchasing Agent—On Behalf of County and Districts.
   
14.0103   General Functions of Purchasing Agent.
   
14.0104   Administration of Funds.
   
14.0105   Purchasing Procedure.
   
14.0106   Emergency Purchases.
   
14.0107   Void Purchases.
   
14.0108   When Competitive Bidding Not Required.
   
14.0109   Noncompetitive Purchases.
   
14.0110   Property Surplus and Salvage Pool.
   
14.0111   Advertising Proposed Sale of Surplus Property.
   
14.0112   Standards Committee.
   
14.0113   Provision for the Adoption of Rules and Regulations.
   
14.0114   Informal Bidding Procedures Pursuant to the California Uniform Public
Construction Cost Accounting Act.
   
14.0115   Contracts for Services.
   
14.0116   Prohibited Advertising by Elected Officials.
   
14.0117   Recovered Organic Waste Product - Mulch Procurement.
§ 14.0101   Duties of Purchasing Agent—General.
   The Purchasing Agent shall perform the duties and have the powers and
responsibilities prescribed by the general laws of the State of California
relating to County Purchasing Agents, this Chapter and ordinances or
resolutions of the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960)
§ 14.0102   Duties of Purchasing Agent—On Behalf of County and Districts.
   (a)   Purchase Material. Purchase for the County, its offices and Board-
governed special districts, all materials, supplies, furnishings, equipment,
livestock, and other personal property of whatever nature. No purchase of
personal property of any kind or nature for use of the County, any departments
or districts thereof, shall be valid, bind the County, or constitute a lawful
charge against any fund of the County unless made by the Purchasing Agent as
herein provided; except as otherwise provided by law, the County Charter, the
provisions of this Chapter or action of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Rent Furnishings and Equipment. Rent for the County and its offices
and districts, all furnishings, equipment, and livestock, with the exception of
road equipment and machinery which the Road Commissioner of the County is
authorized by law to rent for County use.
   (c)   Negotiate Contracts. Negotiate and execute, as agent for the County,
agreements relating to personal property.
   (d)   Enter into Service Contracts. Engage outside service providers to
perform services for the County and Board-governed special districts and the
offices thereof, with or without the furnishing of material, where the annual
aggregate cost per scope of services per contractor per agency, department, or
Board-governed special district does not exceed the amount authorized by
Government Code § 25502.5, as amended, (set at $200,000 effective January 1,
2019) and ensuring the competitive process is followed as defined in §
14.0115. For purposes of this Chapter, “scope of services” means all the work
and materials necessary to complete a contract, job or project. Also for
purposes of this chapter, with respect to any Board-governed special district
managed by and reporting to the County Special Districts Department (or its
successor department or agency), the limit stated above applies to the
cumulative total of all special districts, not to each individual special
district.
   (e)   Enter into Construction Contracts. Employ, by negotiated contract or
purchase order, state- licensed independent contractors for public projects, as
defined by the California Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act
(Public Contract Code §§ 22000 et seq.), in an amount equal to or less than the
amount set forth in Public Contract Code § 22032(a) (set at $30,000.00 as of
June 15, 2010).
   (f)   Allow Participation of Other Political Subdivisions in Existing
Purchase Contracts. Allow participation, at their option, by other independent
political subdivisions in continuing purchase contracts of the County, provided
that:
      (1)   Said political subdivision requests the privilege of participation,
and the provisions of the purchase contract so permit;
      (2)   Said political subdivision does not have and will not have in
force, any other contract for like purchases;
      (3)   Said political subdivision does not have under consideration for
award any other bids or quotations for like purchases;
      (4)   Said political subdivision shall make purchases in its own name,
make payments directly to the vendor, and be liable directly to the vendor,
holding the County harmless therefrom;
      (5)   The Purchasing Agent may terminate such participation for violation
of the terms of participation or if required to do so pursuant to the contract
with the vendor.
   (g)   Community-Based Organization Participation. Allow participation, upon
agreement of the County and a vendor, by community-based organizations (CBOs)
in existing purchase contracts of the County. A CBO is defined as a private
non-profit group with a facility or facilities located within San Bernardino
County, engaged in meeting the needs of the residents of the County, including
but not limited to, providing assistance and social services to individuals and
families residing within San Bernardino County. The following requirements must
be met for participation by a CBO:
      (1)   The CBO is on a list approved by the Assistant Executive Officer
for Human Services pursuant to County policy.
      (2)   The CBO requests the privilege of participation and the provisions
of the purchase contract permit the participation.
      (3)   The CBO does not have and will not have in force any other contract
for like purchases with the same or different vendors.
      (4)   The CBO does not have under consideration any other bids, proposals
or requests for like purchases with the same or different vendors.
      (5)   The CBO must make purchases in its own name, make payments directly
to the vendor and be directly liable to the vendor, holding the County harmless
from any liability.
      (6)   The CBO shall use the property to provide and enhance the services
provided to County residents.
      (7)   The Purchasing Agent may terminate the participation of any CBO for
violation of the terms of participation or if required to do so pursuant to a
contract with a vendor.
   (h)   Sell or Dispose of Personal Property. Sell or dispose of in accordance
with Government Code §§ 25503—25507, and subject to rules and regulations
adopted by the Board of Supervisors, any personal property belonging to the
County and found not to be required for public use. When purchasing personal
property, for which it is not necessary to advertise for bids, the Purchasing
Agent may solicit and accept advantageous trade-in allowance for County
personal property no longer required for public use, without advertising for
offers on such property. When specifically authorized, the Purchasing Agent
shall similarly dispose of personal property of any special district and pay
the proceeds into the treasury of the district or return the proceeds from
exchange or trade to said special district.
   (i)   Perform Other Services. Perform such other services as the Board of
Supervisors may from time to time require.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 3461, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 3546, passed
- -1993; Am. Ord. 3769, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3772, passed - -1999; Am. Ord.
3856, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 3982, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 3999, passed - -
2006; Am. Ord. 4113, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4123, passed - -2010; Am. Ord.
4307, passed - -2016; Am. Ord. 4355, passed - -2019)
§ 14.0103   General Functions of Purchasing Agent.
   The Purchasing Agent, on behalf of the County and on behalf of the districts
of the County, governed by the Board of Supervisors, shall:
   (a)   Supervise and administer the work of such assistants as may be
employed in such Purchasing Department for the performance of the assigned
duties;
   (b)   Furnish to the Board of Supervisors an annual report (based upon the
preceding fiscal year) no later than January 30 of each year. This report shall
include, at minimum, the following:
      (1)   A list of non-competitive procurements issued under the Purchasing
Agent's authority as stated in Section 14.0102(d), by department and amount,
and the department's reason for the non-competitive nature of the acquisitions.
      (2)   A list of all blanket purchase orders, fixed price contracts and
lease purchase agreements by department and vendor, and whether the contracts
were competitively procured. If the items were not competitively procured, the
report will also state the reason for the non-competitive procurement.
      (3)   A list of all vendors receiving more than $150,000 in payments and
the departments utilizing these vendors.
      (4)   An analysis of the percentage of dollars expended with local
vendors and non-local vendors.
   (c)   Establish methods and procedures as may be necessary for the proper
functioning and practical conduct of the Purchasing Department;
   (d)   Perform such other acts as may be deemed necessary by the Board of
Supervisors.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 3982, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4355, passed
- -2019)
§ 14.0104   Administration of Funds.
   The Board of Supervisors shall, on an annual basis, as part of the budget
process, set the level and make the fund allocations necessary for the
Purchasing Agent to make quantity purchases and maintain an inventory of
supplies, materials and equipment for issue to the several offices,
departments, districts of the County, cities and other political subdivisions,
as needed.
   As such supplies, materials, equipment, and services are issued, the fund
from which purchases were made shall be periodically reimbursed from the proper
budget appropriations of the entity receiving such issue.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 2425, passed - -1980)
§ 14.0105   Purchasing Procedure.
   The Board of Supervisors hereby grants authority to heads of offices,
departments, and districts to draw requisitions on the Purchasing Agent. This
authority may be delegated to any of their deputies, officers, or employees by
filing written authorization with the Purchasing Agent; and the Purchasing
Agent shall supply the requisition form to the heads of the various entities,
prescribing the number of copies required to be submitted. Except as provided
in §
14.0104 of this Chapter, or as otherwise provided by general law or ordinance
of this County, the Purchasing Agent shall make purchases, rentals, and
contracts only upon proper written requisition. Unless purchases are approved
by either the Purchasing Agent or the Board of Supervisors, or as otherwise
provided by law, the costs thereof shall not constitute a legal charge against
the County but shall constitute a charge against the person making such
purchase.
   No purchase order shall be issued until the Auditor/Controller-Recorder
shall have certified that sufficient monies are available in the proper budget
appropriation to pay for such purchases, rentals, or contracts, and the
Purchasing Agent shall immediately notify the requisitioning entity of the
insufficiency of funds. If the costs of any purchase order cannot be readily
ascertained, the Purchasing Agent may estimate such cost, and the Auditor/
Controller-Recorder may make the aforesaid certification based upon such
estimated cost.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960)
§ 14.0106   Emergency Purchases.
   Emergency purchases may be made by an person or official herein authorized
to sign requisitions when: (a) The Board of Supervisors or an official
designated by ordinance has proclaimed a local emergency, pursuant to
Government Code § 8630 (or any successor statute); or (b) Such item or items
are immediately necessary for the preservation of life or property; or (c) The
Purchasing Agent or any deputy or assistant authorized to make purchases is not
immediately available, and the item or items are immediately necessary for
continued operation of the entity, and undue delay would cause substantial loss
to the County.
   Such emergency purchases shall be subsequently approved and confirmed by the
Purchasing Agent. If the Purchasing Agent refuses such confirmation, the Board
of Supervisors may subsequently approve and confirm such purchase by a two-
thirds vote of the members present at any of its regular meetings. Unless such
purchases are so approved and confirmed by either the Purchasing Agent or the
Board of Supervisors, the costs thereof shall not constitute a legal charge
against the County but shall constitute a charge against the person making such
purchase.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 4123, passed - -2010)
§ 14.0107   Void Purchases.
   If any County entity purchases or contracts for any supplies, materials,
equipment, or contractual services contrary to the provisions of this Chapter,
such purchase or contract shall be void, and of no effect, and shall not
constitute a lawful charge against any County fund, but shall constitute a
charge against the person making such purchases.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960)
§ 14.0108   When Competitive Bidding Not Required.
   Except as otherwise required by general law, charter, or this Chapter, the
Purchasing Agent shall have the power, without public notice, preparation of
specifications, or the securing of competitive bids or price quotations, to
make any purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, or other personal
property, or to contract or engage independent contractors to perform sundry
services for the County.
   In the performance of the functions hereunder, the Purchasing Agent shall
comply with all applicable statutes, ordinances, and policies. In making
purchases, the Purchasing Agent shall use such methods and procedures as, in
the Agent’s judgment, will secure the lowest price consistent with the quality
desirable for the use intended and the needs of the County.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960)
§ 14.0109   Noncompetitive Purchases.
   The competitive process is the preferred method of conducting County
purchases. The Purchasing Agent has the authority to approve all non-
competitive purchases of goods, supplies, and equipment up to an amount
equivalent to that authorized by Section
14.0102(d) upon receipt of a written justification from the appropriate
department head. The non-competitive purchase of goods, supplies and equipment
in excess of that amount must be approved by the Board of Supervisors. Non-
competitive procurement of services from outside service providers may be
approved by the Purchasing Agent where the annual aggregate cost per scope of
services (as defined in Section
14.0102) per contractor per agency, department, or Board-governed special
district (as defined in Section
14.0102) does not exceed the amount authorized by Government Code section
25502.5, as amended (set at $200,000 effective January 1, 2019) upon receipt of
a written justification from the appropriate department head. Any non-
competitive procurement of services, where the annual aggregate cost per scope
of services per contractor per agency, department or Board-governed special
district exceeds the amount authorized by Government Code section 25502.5, as
amended, must be submitted to the Board of Supervisors for approval.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 3856, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 3982, passed
- -2006; Am. Ord. 4123, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4355, passed - -2019)
§ 14.0110   Property Surplus and Salvage Pool.
   (a)   Whenever any items of personal property are no longer needed by an
office, department, or Board-governed special district, the entity carrying
inventory thereof, may report and transfer by Property Transfer Form, subject
to rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Supervisors, such property to
a surplus or salvage pool to be maintained and supervised by the Purchasing
Agent, who will be custodian and charged with maintaining an inventory thereof.
   Whenever any office, department, or Board-governed special district has need
of any property placed in the surplus and salvage pool, such entity may acquire
said property by Property Transfer Form, subject to rules and regulations
adopted by the Board of Supervisors or may acquire such property pursuant to
contract.
   (b)   A community based organization (a tax-exempt nonprofit corporation or
foundation which performs a County purpose by providing services to County
residents) on a list approved by the Assistant County Administrator of Human
Services pursuant to County policy may acquire property (other than vehicles)
placed in the surplus and salvage pool after such property has been made
available for a reasonable period of time to County departments, groups, or
Board-governed special districts, subject to rules and regulations adopted by
the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 2170, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3999, passed
- -2006)
§ 14.0111   Advertising Proposed Sale of Surplus Property.
   In the disposition of any surplus or salvage property found, in accordance
with rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Supervisors, not to be
required for public use, the Purchasing Agent may purchase advertising and may
advertise the proposed sale or other disposition of the personal property in
such medium, including paper and electronic, as in the Purchasing Agent’s
judgment will best publicize the proposed sale or other disposition to those
persons most likely to bid for or purchase the personal property. The
Purchasing Agent shall decide the amount, nature, makeup, and content of the
advertising.
   In the disposition of specialty property, including property that has
limited marketability or purpose, the Purchasing Agent may utilize alternative
methods for disposition of the property without advertising. Alternative
methods include, but are not limited to, consignment and sale to a single
identified buyer.
   In the event that any item of County personal property is found to have no
resale value, the Purchasing Agent may direct that such item be destroyed or
disposed of in any manner the Purchasing Agents may see fit.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 4307, passed - -2016)
§ 14.0112   Standards Committee.
   The Purchasing Agent may organize a “Standards Committee” as needed to
establish standards, with respect to the type, design, quality, or brand of a
certain article or group of related articles or services purchased by the
County.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960)
§ 14.0113   Provision for the Adoption of Rules and Regulations.
   The Purchasing Agent may, from time to time, adopt procedural and such other
rules and policies consistent with law, ordinances and policies to assist in
the proper and efficient performance of the duties under this Chapter. Such
rules and policies, if adopted, shall be reduced to writing and followed by the
Purchasing Agent wherever applicable. A copy of any such rule or policy shall
be kept open to public inspection in the Office of the Purchasing Agent.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 3546, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3769, passed
- -1999)
§ 14.0114   Informal Bidding Procedures Pursuant to the California Uniform
Public Construction Cost Accounting Act.
   In accordance with the mandate of Public Contract Code § 22034, the County
adopts the following provisions to govern the selection of contractors to
perform public projects pursuant to Public Contract Code § 22032(b).
   (a)   Informal Bid Procedure. Public projects, as defined by the California
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, less than or equal to the
amount set forth in Public Contract Code § 22032(b) [currently, $100,000], may
be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in § 22030 et seq. of
the Public Contract Code and shall be subject to those provisions and the
provisions of this Section.
   (b)   Contractors List. A list of contractors identified according to
categories of work, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of § 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from
time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission.
   (c)   Notice Inviting Informal Bids. Where a public project subject to the
provisions of this Section is to be performed, a notice inviting informal bids
shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown
on the list developed in accordance with this Section, and/or to all
construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction
Cost Accounting Commission pursuant to § 22036 of the Public Contract Code.
Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at
the discretion of the department/agency soliciting bids; provided, however:
      (1)   If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained for the
particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be
sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the Commission.
      (2)   If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can
be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting
informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.
      All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals
shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before bids are due. The
notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms, how
to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and
place for the submission of bids.
   (d)   Award of Contracts. The Board of Supervisors delegates the authority
to award contracts pursuant to this Section to the County Administrative
Officer up to the amount authorized in Public Contract Code § 22032(b) (set at
$125,000.00 as of June 14, 2010).
   (e)   Bids in Excess of the Amount in Public Contract Code § 22032(b). If
all bids received are in excess of the amount authorized in Public Contract
Code § 22032(b) [currently, $100,000], the Board may, by passage of a
resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract at up to the amount set
forth in Public Contract Code § 22034(f) [currently $110,000], to the lowest
responsible bidder, if it determines the cost estimate of the County was
reasonable.
   (f)   Failure to Receive Bids. If no bids are received, through the formal
or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the
County by force account, or negotiated contract without further complying with
the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act procedures.
   (g)   Adjustments to Amounts Listed. The County recognizes that the monetary
limits set forth in Public Contract Code §§ 22032(a), 22032(b) and 22034(f) are
subject to adjustment every five years pursuant to the procedure set forth in
Public Contract Code § 22020.
   (h)   Change Orders. For contracts awarded pursuant to this Section, the
County Administrative Officer or Department Head responsible for construction
management of the public project, is authorized to approve change orders not
exceeding a total of $5,000.00, if the original construction contract amount is
$50,000.00 or less, and not exceeding a total of ten percent of the original
construction contract amount, if the original construction contract amount is
over $50,000.00. All such approved change orders must be reported to the County
Administrative Officer. The Board of Supervisors shall approve all change
orders exceeding the amounts described in this Section.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 3912, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4113, passed
- -2010)
§ 14.0115   Contracts for Services.
   (a)   Pursuant to Section
14.0102(d), contracts for services, which may be entered into by the Purchasing
Agent, with or without the furnishing of material, may not exceed the annual
aggregate amount per vendor, per agency, department, or Board-governed special
district set forth in Government Code § 25502.5, as amended. Any agency,
department, or Board-governed special district contract in excess of that
amount must be approved by the Board of Supervisors. The Purchasing Agent is
responsible for ensuring the competitive process is utilized for any service
contract in an amount less than the annual aggregate amount set forth in
Government Code § 25502.5, as amended, which is not subject to approval by the
Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Agencies, departments, or Board-governed special districts contracting
for services ranging from in excess of $50,000 up to $100,000 annually are
required to develop a written scope of work and conduct a solicitation process
contacting as many vendors as practical using sources as may be recommended by
the Purchasing Agent.
   (c)   Agencies, departments, or Board-governed special districts contracting
for services in excess of $100,000 annually are required to conduct a formal
request for proposal (RFP) process. Approval from the Chief Executive Officer
or designee, is required prior to issuing the RFP.
   (d)   In the calculation of the above-identified limits, no officer or
employee shall split or separate any contract, work, project or services into
smaller contracts, work, projects or services for the purpose of evading the
limitations of this Section.
   (e)   All requests for professional services must receive approval from the
appropriate department head. Any person who violates this Section will be
subject to discipline, up to and including termination.
   (f)   Where the aggregate amount of contracts for services exceed $150,000
per vendor for the County overall per fiscal year, a report will be generated
by the Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector and provided to the Board of
Supervisors and the County Administrative Office (CAO). The CAO will review the
report and may include recommendations to the Board of Supervisors regarding
department coordination with respect to vendor services.
(Ord. 934, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 964, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1875, passed
- -1973; Am. Ord. 2274, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 2402, passed - -1979; Am. Ord.
3982, passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4123, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4355, passed - -
2019)
§ 14.0116   Prohibited Advertising by Elected Officials.
   (a)   The purpose of this Section is to extend prohibitions similar to those
that apply to mass mailings to paid advertising by elected officials of the
County. Advertising for purposes of this Section is defined to include any paid
notice, announcement, broadcast or other paid information placed with
newspapers, magazines, radio or television media or other commercial media but
shall not include legal notices as required by law or court order.
   (b)   Elected officials of the County are prohibited from using public funds
for advertising which includes an elected official’s photograph unless such use
of a photograph is required by law and are prohibited from using public funds
for advertising which includes an elected official’s name except as provided in
this Section. The name of an elected official may be included in advertising
related to the governmental programs and activities that are the responsibility
of the elected official and shall be limited to the duties and responsibilities
of the official. Whenever the name of an elected official is included, the
official’s name shall appear only once and the name shall be in the same type
font and size as the general text of the advertisement and shall not be set in
boldface or otherwise featured. In any radio or television media advertisement,
there shall only be one mention of the official’s name and the name of the
official shall not be emphasized by volume or otherwise. Further, elected
officials are prohibited from using public funds for advertising which includes
an elected official’s name during the 60-day period prior to a primary or
general election when they are on the ballot unless such advertising is
necessary in the performance of their duties and responsibilities. The County
will not pay the costs for any advertising which violates this Section and the
Auditor/Controller shall not process payment for any such advertising.
(Ord. 3865, passed - -2002)
§ 14.0117 Recovered Organic Waste Product - Mulch Procurement.
   All County departments when procuring mulch shall procure mulch that meets
or exceeds the physical contamination, maximum metal concentration, and
pathogen density standards for land application specified in Title 14 of the
California Code of Regulations, Division 7, § 17852(a)(24.5)(A)1 through 3. The
mulch is required to be produced at one or more of the following:
   (a)   A compostable material handling operation or facility as defined in 14
CCR § 17852(a)(12), other than a chipping and grinding operation or facility as
defined in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(10), that is permitted or authorized under this
division; or
   (b)   A Transfer/Processing facility or Transfer/Processing operation as
defined in 14 CCR §§ 17402(a)(30) and (31), respectively, that is permitted or
authorized under this division; or
   (c)   A Solid Waste landfill as defined in Public Resources Code § 40195.1
that is permitted under Division 2 of Title 27 of the California Code of
Regulations.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 2: REVENUE AND TAXATION
Section
   
14.0201   Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax.
   
14.0202   Uniform Assessment Roll System.
   
14.0203   Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax.
   
14.0204   Assessment Appeals Board.
   
14.0205   Assessment or Reassessment of Damaged or Destroyed Property in
Disaster Areas.
§ 14.0201   Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax.
   (a)   Name. This Section shall be known as the San Bernardino County Uniform
Local Sales and Use Tax Code.
   (b)   Purpose. The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino
hereby declares that this Section is adopted to achieve the following, among
other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order
to accomplish those purposes:
      (1)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of
Division 2;
      (2)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of
Division 2;
      (3)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a one and one-
quarter percent tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered
and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner which adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California
State Sales and Use Taxes;
      (4)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in
a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of
Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2, minimize the cost of
collecting County sales and use taxes and, at the same time, minimize the
burden of record-keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions
of this Section.
   (c)   Effective Date. This Section shall become operative on July 1, 1956,
and prior thereto this County shall contract with the State Board of
Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Code.
   (d)   Sales Tax Rate.
      (1)   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail,
a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the County at the rate of one
percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible
personal property sold at retail in the County of San Bernardino on and after
July 1, 1956, to and including June 30, 1972, and at the rate of one and one-
quarter percent thereafter.
      (2)   For the purposes of this Section, all retail sales are consummated
at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property
sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination
or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. Delivery
charges shall be included in the gross receipts by which the tax is measured,
regardless of the place to which delivery is made, when such charges are
included in the measure of the sales or use tax imposed by the State of
California. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the
State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the
retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to
be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
      (3)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of
Division 2, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Code, as
amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes are
hereby adopted and made a part of this Section as though fully set forth
herein.
      (4)   Wherever and to the extent that, in Revenue and Taxation Code Part
1 of Division 2 is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the County of San
Bernardino shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this Subdivision shall be
deemed to require the substitution of the name of the County of San Bernardino
for the word STATE when that word is used as part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of
Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the
State of California; nor shall the name of the County be substituted for that
of the State in any section when the result of that substitution would require
action to be taken by or against the County or any agency thereof, rather than
by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this Section; and neither shall
the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including but
not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of
the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to
provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain
subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code
Part 1 of Division 2; nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross
receipts which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said
provisions of that Code; and, in addition, the name of the County shall not be
substituted for that of the State in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701; 6702,
except in the last sentence thereof; 6711; 6715; 6737; 6797; and 6828 as
adopted, and the name of the County shall not be substituted for the word STATE
in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State,” in § 6203 nor in
the definition of that phrase in § 6203.
      (5)   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Revenue
and Taxation Code § 6067, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required
by reason of this Section.
      (6)   There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is
measured:
         (A)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of
California upon a retailer or consumer;
         (B)   Eighty percent of the gross receipts from the sale of tangible
personal property to operators of waterborne vessels, to be used or consumed
principally outside of the County in which the sale is made and directly and
exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for
commercial purposes;
         (C)   Eighty percent of the gross receipts from the sale of tangible
personal property to operators of aircraft, to be used or consumed principally
outside the County in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in
the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the
authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign
government.
   (e)   Excise Tax for Storage, Use or Other Consumption.
      (1)   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the County of San Bernardino of tangible personal property
purchased from any retailer on or after July 1, 1956, for storage, use or other
consumption in the County at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the
property to and including June 30, 1972, and at the rate of one and one-quarter
percent thereafter. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such
charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which
delivery is made.
      (2)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Part 1.5 of
Division 2, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Code, as
amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes, are
hereby adopted and made a part of this Section as though fully set forth
herein.
      (3)   Wherever, and to the extent that, in Revenue and Taxation Code Part
1 of Division 2 is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the
County of San Bernardino shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this
Subdivision shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this
County for the word STATE when that word is used as part of the title of the
State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State
Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the
Constitution of the State of California; nor shall the name of the County be
substituted for that of the State in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the County or any
agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
Section; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in
those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to
the exterior boundaries of the State of California where the result of the
substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to
certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other
consumption remains subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Revenue
and Taxation Code Part 1 of Division 2, or to impose this tax with respect to
certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of that
Code; and in addition, the name of the County shall not be substituted for that
of the State in Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701; 6702, except in the last
sentence thereof; 6711; 6715; 6737, 6797; and 6828 as adopted, and the name of
the County shall not be substituted for the word “State” in the phrase
“retailer engaged in business in this State” in § 6203 nor in the definition of
that phrase in § 6203.
      (4)   There shall be exempt from the tax due under this Section:
         (A)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of
California upon a retailer or consumer.
         (B)   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales
tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Revenue and
Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2 by any city and County, or city in this
State, shall be exempt from the tax due under this Section.
         (C)   Provided, however, that the storage, use, or other consumption
of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and
used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of
persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from 80
percent of the tax.
         (D)   And provided that in addition to the exemptions provided in
Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft
and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign
government is exempt from 80 percent of the tax.
   (f)   Reciprocal Ordinances; Credit for Collection.
      (1)   Any person subject to a sales and use tax under this Section shall
be entitled to credit against the payment of taxes due under this Section the
amount of sales and use tax due any city in this County; provided, that the
city sales and use tax is levied under an ordinance including provisions
substantially conforming to the provisions of Subdivisions (1) to (8),
inclusive, of Revenue and Taxation Code Subsection (h) of § 7202 and other
applicable provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of that Code.
      (2)   Any person subject to a sales or use tax or required to collect a
use tax under this Section shall be entitled to credit against the payment of
taxes due under this Section the amount of sales and use tax due any city in
this County, provided that the city sales and use tax is levied under an
ordinance including provisions substantially conforming to the provisions of
Subdivisions (1) to (10), inclusive, of Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202.
   (g)   Equitable Process Prohibited. No injunction or writ of mandate or
other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding
in any court against the State or this County or against any officer of the
State or this County to prevent or enjoin the collection of any tax or any
amount of tax required to be collected under this Section or under Revenue and
Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2.
   (h)   Application of Amendments to Law. All amendments of the Revenue and
Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of this Section, which
relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Revenue and
Taxation Code Part 1.5 of Division 2, shall automatically become part of this
Section.
   (i)   Violation Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by
imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the County Jail or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
   (j)   Validity of Separate Parts of this Section. If any subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Section, including but not limited
to any exemption, is, for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by
the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portion of this Section. The Board of
Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino hereby declares that it would have
adopted this Section and each subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, sentences,
clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
   (k)   Provisions Inoperative.
      (1)   Section
14.0201 shall become inoperative on the first day of the first calendar quarter
which commences more than 60 days following the date upon which any city within
the County increases the rate of its sales or use tax above the rate in effect
on January 1, 1976.
      (2)   Section
14.0201 may be made inoperative not less than 60 days, but not earlier than the
first day of the calendar quarter, following the County’s lack of compliance
with Government Code §§ 29530 et seq.
   (l)   Provisions Operative. This Section shall become operative July 1,
1956.
(Am. Ord. 2030, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 1854, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2818,
passed - -1983)
§ 14.0202   Uniform Assessment Roll System.
   (a)   Authorization to Compile Maps and Indexes. The County Surveyor and the
County Assessor are hereby authorized to prepare and formulate a system of
assessing the lots, blocks and lands in the County of San Bernardino, State of
California, by a lot number or letter and a block number or letter. They are
hereby authorized to make and compile a map or maps, indexes and map books from
existing maps now used by the Assessor or from maps on file in the Recorder’s
Office, and to renumber the lots, blocks and lands, and to give a lot number or
lot letter or combined number and letter to each lot or parcel of land as shown
on the Assessor’s block books.
   (b)   Authorization to Write Assessment Rolls. The Assessor is hereby
authorized, commencing with the assessment rolls for the fiscal year 1927-1928,
to write the real estate assessment rolls describing each parcel of land by lot
and block number or tract number, as depicted on said map and block book.
   (c)   Authorization to Revise Map and Block Books. The Assessor is hereby
authorized to make the necessary changes in such map and block books from year
to year as may be required to meet conditions imposed by the cutting up of
present lots or parcels of land or platting of acres or changing of ownership.
   (d)   Certification of Map. Each and every map made and adopted, as
hereinabove provided, shall be certified under the hands of a majority of the
members of the Board of Supervisors of said County and the Chairperson of said
Board of Supervisors and the County Clerk and ex officio Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors, and the official seal shall be placed thereon. Such map, so
certified, shall be forthwith filed by the Office of the County Recorder of
said County, and a copy thereof shall be filed in the Office of the Assessor,
Tax Collector and Auditor.
§ 14.0203   Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax.
   (a)   Definitions and General Provisions.
      (1)   Reference to Ordinance or Statute. Whenever any reference is made
to any portion of this, or of any other ordinance, or to any statute, such
reference shall apply to all amendments and additions thereto now or hereafter
made.
      (2)   Severance Clause. If any section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter or any part thereof is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter or any part thereof. The
Board of Supervisors hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
      (3)   Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses.
      (4)   Genders. Each gender includes the other two genders.
      (5)   Number. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular.
      (6)   Definitions. Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions
in this Article shall govern the construction of this Chapter.
      ARTICLE. An Article of this Chapter unless some other chapter or statute
is mentioned.
      BOARD. The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino.
      COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino.
      HOTEL. Any structure in the unincorporated territory of the County, or
any portion of any such structure, which is occupied or intended or designed
for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and
includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor
hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or
private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar
structure or portion thereof.
      OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession
of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
      OPERATOR. The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any
other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a
managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this
Chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal.
Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter by either the principal or the
managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group of
combination acting as a unit.
      RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the
occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money,
goods labor or otherwise including all receipts, cash, credits and property and
services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
      SECTION. A Section of this Chapter.
      SHALL and MAY. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.
      TAX COLLECTOR. The Tax Collector of the County of San Bernardino.
      TRANSIENT. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy
by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement
for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of
calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall
be deemed a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is
an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a
longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient,
uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the
effective date of this Chapter may be considered.
   (b)   Imposition of Tax.
      (1)   Tax imposed. For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each
transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of seven percent of
the rent charged by the operator.
      (2)   Payment by Transient. The transient shall pay the tax to the
operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in
installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each
installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy
space in the hotel. If, for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator
of the hotel, the Tax Collector may require the transient to pay such tax
directly to the Tax Collector.
      (3)   Exemptions. If a proper claim for exemption is made, a tax shall
not be imposed upon (a), (b), (c):
         (a)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is
beyond the power of the County to impose the tax herein provided;
         (b)   Any Federal or State of California officer or employee when on
official business;
         (c)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of Federal law or intentional treaty.
         (d)   Any occupancy of a hotel which is used exclusively for
religious, educational, charitable or welfare purposes, such as church lodges,
camps and retreats, Boy Scout and Girl Scout grounds, fresh air camps, and
similar sites, shall be exempt from this tax, and the operators of such hotels
are not required to register as provided for under Article 3. However, it shall
be the duty of the operator of any such hotel to furnish the Tax Collector with
such information as the Tax Collector deems necessary to establish or retain
such exempt status. Transients occupying such hotels are not required to
furnish individual exemption claims.
      (4)   Claim of Exemption. The Tax Collector shall prepare and furnish to
the operators of hotels, who have registered as required by Article 3, forms by
which transients may claim exemption from the payment of the tax. An exemption
shall not be granted to any transient except upon a claim therefor made at the
time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon the form supplied by
the Tax Collector.
      (5)   Operator’s Duties. Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by
this Section to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected
from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the
amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for
payment from the operator. The operator of a hotel shall not advertise or state
in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof
will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to
the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner
hereinafter provided.
      (6)   Records. Every operator liable for the collection and payment to
the County of any tax imposed by this Article shall keep and preserve, for not
less than three years, all records which may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax for the collection of, and payment of, to the County may be
or may become liable. The Tax Collector may inspect these records at any
reasonable time. The operator shall make such records available at any
reasonable time requested by the Tax Collector.
   (c)   Registration.
      (1)   Operator Must Register. Within 30 days after the effective date of
this Section, or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later,
each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the
said hotel with the Tax Collector. Upon such registration, the Tax Collector
shall issue to such operator a “Transient Occupancy, Registration Certificate.”
      (2)   Posting of Certificate. The operator shall post, and at all times
keep posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the hotel, the transient
occupancy registration certificate.
      (3)   Contents of Certificate. The transient occupancy certificate shall,
among other things, state the following: 1) the name of the operator; 2) the
address of the hotel; 3) the date upon which the certificate was issued;
      (4)   This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that
the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the
Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Collector
for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and
remitting said tax to the Tax Collector. This certificate does not authorize
any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business
in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with
all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a
permit from any board, commission, department or office of this County. This
certificate does not constitute a permit.
   (d)   Reporting and Remitting.
      (1)   Operator Must Report. Each operator, on or before the last day of
the month following the close of the calendar quarter, or at the close of any
other reporting period which may be established by the Tax Collector, shall
make a return to the Tax Collector, on forms provided by him or her, of the
total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient
occupancies.
      (2)   Payment of the Tax. At the time the return is filed, the operator
shall remit the full amount of the tax collected to the Tax Collector. The Tax
Collector may establish shorter, longer, or other reporting periods for any
certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary or expedient in order to
insure collection of the tax. The Tax Collector may require further information
in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of
business for any reason.
      (3)   Taxes Held in Trust. Every operator shall hold in trust for the
account of the County until payment thereof is made to the Tax Collector, all
taxes collected by such operator.
   (e)   Penalties and Interest.
      (1)   Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax
imposed by this Section within the time required, shall pay a penalty of ten
percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
      (2)   Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency
penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of
the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.
      (3)   Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the non-payment of
any remittance due under this Section is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent
of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties
stated in §
14.0203(e)(1) and
14.0203(e)(2).
      (4)   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who
fails to remit any tax imposed by this Section shall pay interest at the rate
of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the
tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent until paid.
      (5)   Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest
as accrues under the provisions of this Section shall become a part of the tax
herein required to be paid.
      (6)   Failure to Collect and Report Tax. Determination of Tax
Administrator. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to
make, within the time provided in this Section, any report and remittance of
said tax or any portion thereof required by this Section, the Tax Collector
shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and
information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the
Tax Collector shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to
obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this Section and
payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to
make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and
assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by
this Section.
      (7)   Notice. If the Tax Collector makes a determination pursuant to this
Chapter, he or she shall give a notice of the amount so assessed, either by
serving such notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known
place of business.
      (8)   Application for Hearing. Within ten days after the serving upon any
operator of such notice, such operator may apply in writing to the Tax
Collector for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator
for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and
penalties, if any, determined by the Tax Collector shall become final and
conclusive and immediately due and payable.
      (9)   Hearing by Tax Collector. If such application is made, the Tax
Collector shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner
prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in
said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax,
interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer
evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be fixed.
After such hearing, the Tax Collector shall determine the proper tax to be
remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner
prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest
and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days
unless an appeal is taken as provided in Subdivision (1).
   (f)   Appeal.
      (1)   Notice of Appeal. Any operator deeming himself or herself aggrieved
by any decision of the Tax Collector with respect to the amount of the tax,
interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the Board by filing a notice of
appeal with the Clerk of the Board within 15 days of the serving or mailing of
the determination of the tax due.
      (2)   Notice of Hearing. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the Board
shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and the Clerk of the Board
shall give not less than five days notice in writing, either personally or by
United States mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the operator.
      (3)   Appointment of Referee. The Board may appoint a referee to take
testimony at any hearing provided for in this Article, and to report his
findings and recommendations to the Board. Neither the Tax Collector nor any
officer or employee in be Office of the Tax Collector may be appointed referee.
      (4)   Compensation of Referee. If the Board appoints a County officer or
County employee to act as referee, he or she shall serve as such without any
additional compensation. All time spent as a referee shall be considered as
time spent by such officer or employee in performing the duties of his
position.
      (5)   Conduct of Hearing. At the time set for the hearing or at the date
to which the hearing may be continued by the Board or referee, the Board or
referee shall hear the appellant and any other competent witnesses and decide
whether the determination of the Tax Collector was correct or not, and if not,
what tax, interest, or penalties, if any, are due to the County from the
appellant. The Board or referee may place any witness, including the appellant,
under oath.
      (6)   Decision on Appeal. The Board shall determine from the evidence or
from the report of the referee, what tax, interest, or penalties, if any, are
due to the County from the appellant. This decision shall be final and
conclusive. The Clerk of the Board shall serve a copy of the decision upon the
appellant as provided in §
14.0203(f)(2). Any amount due shall be immediately due and payable upon the
service of the said notice.
   (g)   Refunds. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been
overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected
or received by the County under this Section, the operator so paying may have
such amount applied to subsequent taxes due or it may be refunded as provided
in this Article if, within three years after the date of payment the operator
files with the Tax Collector in writing, a claim therefor. In such claim the
operator shall state, under penalty of perjury, the specific grounds and
specific facts upon which the claim is founded. The claims shall be on forms
furnished by the Tax Collector.
      (1)   Credit to Operator. An operator may take as credit against
subsequent taxes, the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or
illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed
by the Tax Collector that the person from whom the tax was collected was not a
transient and the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to
the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the
operator.
      (2)   Refund to Operator. When an operator establishes a right to a
credit as provided in this Article, and also shows to the satisfaction of the
Tax Collector either that he or she no longer is operating a hotel in the
unincorporated territory of the County or will cease such operation before the
credit can be applied, and files a proper claim therefor, in lieu of such
credit the County shall refund to such operator the amount overpaid, paid more
than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received.
      (3)   Refund to Guest. A transient or other guest of a hotel may obtain a
refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the County by filing a claim in the manner provided in
§
14.0203(g), if the tax was paid by the transient or other guest directly to the
Tax Collector, or if the transient or other guest has paid the tax to the
operator, and establishes to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that the
transient or other guest has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator
who collected the tax.
      (4)   Written Records. A refund shall not be paid pursuant to this
Article unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written
records showing that he or she is entitled thereto.
   (h)   Civil Actions.
      (1)   Debt Due From Transient. Any tax required to be paid by any
transient under the provisions of this Section shall be deemed a debt owed by
the transient to the County.
      (2)   Debt Due from Operator. Any tax collected from a transient by an
operator pursuant to the provisions of this Section which has not been paid to
the County shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the County.
      (3)   Actions to Collect. The Tax Collector, in the name of the County of
San Bernardino, as plaintiff, may bring suit for the recovery of this Section.
      (4)   Responsibility. Any tax required to be paid by any transient under
the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to
the County. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to
the County shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the County. Any
person owing money to the County under the provisions of this Chapter shall be
liable to an action brought in the name of the County of San Bernardino for the
recovery of such amount.
      (5)   Recording Certificate; Lien. If any amount required to be paid to
the County under this Chapter is not paid when due, the Tax Collector may,
within three years after the amount is due, file for record in the Office of
the San Bernardino County Recorder a certificate specifying the amount of tax,
penalties and interest due, the name and address as it appears on the records
of the Tax Collector of the operator liable for the same and the fact that the
Tax Collector has complied with all provisions of this ordinance in the
determination of the amount required to be paid. From the time of the filing
for record, the amount required to be paid together with penalties and interest
constitutes a lien upon all real property in the County owned by the operator
or afterwards and before the lien expires acquired by him or her. The lien has
the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for ten
years from the time of filing of the certificate unless sooner released or
otherwise discharged.
      (6)   Priority and Lien of Tax. The amount required to be paid by any
operator under this Chapter with penalties and interest shall be satisfied
first in any of the following cases:
         (A)   Whenever the person is insolvent;
         (B)   Whenever the person makes a voluntary assignment of his or her
assets;
         (C)   Whenever the estate of the person in the hands of executors,
administrators or heirs is insufficient to pay all debts due from the deceased;
         (D)   Whenever the estate and effects of an absconding, concealed or
absent person required to pay any amount under this Chapter are levied upon by
process of law. This Chapter does not give the County a preference over any
recorded lien which attached prior to the date when the amounts required to be
paid became a lien.
         The preference given to the County by this Section shall be
subordinate to the preference given to claims for personal services by Code of
Civil Procedure §§ 1204 and 1206.
      (7)   Seizure and Sale. At any time within three years after any operator
is delinquent in the payment of any amount, the Tax Collector may forthwith
collect the amount in the following manner:
      The Tax Collector shall seize any property, real or personal, of the
operator and sell the property, or a sufficient part of it, at public auction
to pay the amount due together with any penalties and interest imposed for the
delinquency and any costs incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Any
seizure made to collect occupancy taxes due shall be only of property of the
operator not exempt from execution under the provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure.
      (8)   Successor’s Liability—Withholding by Purchaser. If any operator
liable for any amount under this Chapter sells out his or her business or quits
the business, his or her successor or assignee shall withhold sufficient of the
purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt
from the Tax Collector showing that it has been paid or a certificate stating
that no amount is due.
      (9)   Liability of Purchaser; Release. If the purchaser of a hotel fails
to withhold from the purchase price as required, he or she shall become
personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him
or her to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days
after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, or
within 30 days from the date the former owner’s records are made available for
audit, whichever period expires the later, but in any event not later than 60
days after receiving the request, the Tax Collector shall either issue the
certificate or mail notice to purchaser at his or her address as it appears on
the records of the Tax Collector of the amount that must be paid as a condition
of issuing the certificate. Failure of the Tax Collector to mail the notice
will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold from the
purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of the
successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells his
or her business or at the time that the determination against the operator
becomes final, whichever event occurs the later.
   (i)   Violations.
      (1)   Misdemeanor. Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:
         (A)   Fails or refuses to register as required by this Section;
         (B)   Fails or refuses to furnish any return required to be made, or
fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the
Tax Collector;
         (C)   Renders a false or fraudulent return;
         (D)   If required by this Section to make, render, sign or verify any
report or claim, makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to
defeat or evade the determination of any amount due;
         (E)   Collects the tax due pursuant to this Section from any transient
and fails to pay the same to the County;
         (F)   Violates in any way any other provision of this Section.
      (2)   Punishment. Violation of any provisions of this Section is
punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County
Jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Am. Ord. 1994, passed - -1975; Am. Ord. 2155, passed - 1977; Am. Ord. 2703,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2777, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3522, passed - -1992;
Am. Ord. 3861, passed - -2002)
§ 14.0204   Assessment Appeals Boards.
   (a)   Establishment. The County of San Bernardino shall have four County
Assessment Appeals Boards designated as Boards 1, 2, 3, and 4. Each Board shall
consist of three members. The purpose of each Assessment Appeals Board is to
sit as a Board of Equalization to review property assessments.
   (b)   Nomination and Appointment of Members. The San Bernardino County Board
of Supervisors shall appoint the 12 members of the Assessment Appeals Boards,
and each such appointment shall be by majority vote of the Board. Ten members
shall be nominated by Supervisorial District, with each Supervisor nominating
two members. A candidate for a new term of office or a vacant office in one of
these ten offices shall be nominated by the Supervisor of the District from
which the current or most recent holder of that office was nominated. The other
two members shall be nominated by the Chair of the Board of Supervisors. A
candidate for a new term of office or a vacant office in one of these two
offices shall be nominated by the Chair of the Board of Supervisors. In the
event of a vacancy on an Assessment Appeals Board, the person appointed to fill
the vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (c)   Service on Different Boards. From time to time the Clerk of the Board
of Supervisors, who acts as the Clerk of the Assessment Appeals Boards, may
designate a member of any Assessment Appeals Board to serve temporarily on a
different Assessment Appeals Board.
   (d)   Term of Membership. The term of office of Assessment Appeals Board
members shall be three years commencing on the first Monday in September. A
member may be removed for cause by majority vote of the Board of Supervisors. A
member whose term expires shall continue to serve until such time as a new
member takes office, and shall continue to serve after the new member takes
office for the limited purpose of promptly completing work on any matter on
which the outgoing member has participated in a hearing.
   (e)   Local Rules. Under the authority granted by Section 16 of Article XIII
of the Constitution of the State of California, the Board of Supervisors shall
adopt such rules of notice and procedures as it deems appropriate to facilitate
the work of the Assessment Appeals Boards and to ensure uniformity in the
processing and decision of equalization applications. Those provisions of Title
18, Chapter 1, Subchapter 3, Article 1, commencing with Section 301, of the
California Code of Regulations that do not conflict with these rules shall be
applicable to all matters pertaining to the Assessment Appeals Boards and the
hearings conducted by them.
   (f)   Legal Hearing Officers. Under the authority granted by Section 16 of
Article XIII of the Constitution of the State of California, there shall be an
Office of Legal Hearing Officer. The Clerk of the Assessment Appeals Boards may
designate any Assessment Appeals Board member who possesses a minimum of five
years of professional experience in the State of California as an attorney to
serve temporarily as a Legal Hearing Officer. More than one Legal Hearing
Officer may be designated at one time. A Legal Hearing Officer shall be vested
with all of the powers and duties of an Assessment Appeals Board to decide
whether the Assessor has correctly determined that a “change of ownership”
(Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 60 et seq.) or new construction (Revenue and
Taxation Code §§ 70 et seq.) has occurred with regard to real property in the
County so as to cause a reassessment of said property for ad valorem tax
purposes. The decision of a Legal Hearing Officer is binding on the Assessment
Appeals Board, and constitutes the final administrative decision of the
Assessment Appeals Board on the application without any further action by the
Board, unless the application also raises a value issue that must be heard by
an Assessment Appeals Board or a Value Hearing Officer.
   (g)   Value Hearing Officers. Under the authority granted by Section 16 of
Article XIII of the Constitution of the State of California and the California
Revenue and Taxation Code, there shall be an Office of Value Hearing Officer.
The Clerk of the Assessment Appeals Boards may designate any Assessment Appeals
Board member to serve temporarily as a Value Hearing Officer where the
equalization application has requested that the hearing be held before a Value
Hearing Officer, and the total assessed value of the property under
consideration, as shown on the current assessment roll, does not exceed
$500,000.00, or the property under consideration is a single-family dwelling,
condominium or cooperative, or a multiple-family dwelling of four units or less
regardless of value. A Value Hearing Officer shall be vested with all of the
powers and duties of an Assessment Appeals Board to decide value issues raised
by an application. More than one Value Hearing Officer may be designated at one
time. The decision of a Value Hearing Officer is binding on the Assessment
Appeals Board, and constitutes the final administrative decision of the
Assessment Appeals Board on that application without any further action by the
Board.
(Am. Ord. 2369, passed - -1979; Am. Ord. 3225, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3264,
passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 4241, passed - -2014)
§ 14.0205   Assessment or Reassessment of Damaged or Destroyed Properly in
Disaster Areas.
   (a)   Pursuant to the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code § 155.1,
effective August 5, 1970, the provisions of § 170 which are incorporated by
reference herein and made a part hereof are adopted as a County Ordinance.
   (b)   Applications for relief, in order to be considered valid, must be
received by the San Bernardino County Assessor, Hall of Records, San
Bernardino, California 92415 by 5:00 p.m. on the last day of the third month
after the month in which the damage to the applicant’s property occurred.
Applications submitted by mail must be deposited in the United States mail in a
sealed envelope, properly addressed with postage prepaid, on or before the last
day for receipt as determined above, and such applications shall be deemed
received on the date shown by the Post Office cancellation mark stamped upon
the envelope containing the application or on the date it was mailed, if proof
satisfactory to the Assessor establishes that the mailing occurred at any
earlier date. The Assessor is not required to accept such an application if it
is received more than 30 after the date and time for filing as provided in this
Section.
   (c)   Application forms for filing for relief under this Section must be
obtained from the San Bernardino County Assessor’s office and all questions
must be answered or the Assessor may deny the application.
CHAPTER 3: REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Section
   
14.0301   Title.
   
14.0302   Tax Imposed—Rate.
   
14.0303   Person Obligated to Pay Tax.
   
14.0304   lnapplicability to Instrument Securing Debt.
   
14.0305   Government Entities Not Liable for Payment.
   
14.0306   Exempt Transactions—Bankruptcy, Receivership, Change of Identity,
Place or Form of Organization.
   
14.0307   Exempt Transactions—Conveyance Pursuant to S.E.C. Order.
   
14.0308   Applicability to Partnership Transactions.
   
14.0309   Credit for City Imposed Real Property Transfer Tax.
   
14.0310   Stamps—Redemption by Recorder.
   
14.0311   Administration, Allocation, and Distribution of Proceeds.
   
14.0312   Tax Payment Required Before Recordation—Location and Sales Data
Required.
   
14.0313   (Deleted by Ord. 1430, passed - -1968).
   
14.0314   Procedure for Claiming Refunds of Taxes.
   
14.0315   Administrative Interpretation.
   
14.0316   Recorder May Require Sales Records.
   
14.0317   Intentional Avoidance by Misrepresentation a Misdemeanor.
   
14.0318   Parcel Numbers on Instruments of Conveyance.
§ 14.0301   Title.
   This Chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Code of the
County of San Bernardino.” It is adopted pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code
§§ 11901 et seq.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0302   Tax Imposed—Rate.
   There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any
lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the County of San Bernardino
shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to or vested in
the purchaser or purchasers or any other person or persons by his or her or
their direction when the consideration or value of the interest or property
conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon
at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.55 for each
$500.00 or fractional part thereof.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0303   Person Obligated to Pay Tax.
   The tax imposed by §
14.0302 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or
instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made,
signed or issued.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0304   Inapplicability to Instrument Securing Debt.
   The tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument
in writing given to secure a debt.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0305   Government Entities Not Liable for Payment.
   The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any State or
territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall
not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter with respect to any
deed, instrument or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be
collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0306   Exempt Transactions—Bankruptcy, Receivership, Change of Identity,
Place or Form of Organization.
   The tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making,
delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of
reorganization or adjustment:
   (a)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
   (b)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation, as defined in Subdivision (3) of 11 U.S.C. § 506, as amended;
   (c)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation, as defined in Subdivision (3) of 11 U.S.C. § 506, as amended; or
   (d)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is
effected.
   Subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive, of this Section shall only apply if the
making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs
within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0307   Exempt Transactions—Conveyance Pursuant to S.E.C. Order.
   The tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or
delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in Subdivision (a) of § 1083 of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:
   (a)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of 15 U.S.C. § 79k, relating to the
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
   (b)   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
   (c)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0308   Applicability to Partnership Transactions.
   (a)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no tax shall be
imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in
the partnership or otherwise, if:
      (1)   Such partnership (or other partnership) is considered a continuing
partnership within the meaning of § 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954;
and
      (2)   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (b)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of §
708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this Chapter, such
partnership shall be treated as having executed all instruments whereby there
was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or
encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time
of such termination.
   (c)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by
reason of a termination described in Subdivision (b), and any transfer pursuant
thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of
such termination.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0309   Credit for City Imposed Real Property Transfer Tax.
   If the legislative body of any city in the County imposes a tax pursuant to
Revenue and Taxation Code Part 6.7 of Division 2 equal to one-half the amount
specified in §
14.0302 of this Chapter, a credit shall be granted against the taxes due under
this Chapter in the amount of the city’s tax.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0310   Stamps—Redemption by Recorder.
   The Recorder shall repurchase any unused adhesive stamps sold by him or her
not later than July 10, 1968.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 1430, passed - -1968)
§ 14.0311   Administration, Allocation, and Distribution of Proceeds.
   The County Recorder shall administer this Chapter and shall also administer
any ordinance adopted by any city in the County pursuant to Revenue and
Taxation Code §§ 11901 et seq. imposing a tax for which a credit is allowed by
this Chapter.
   On or before the fifteenth day of the month, the Recorder shall report to
the County Auditor the amounts of taxes collected on documents recorded during
the preceding month pursuant to this Chapter and each such city ordinance. The
Auditor shall allocate and distribute monthly said taxes as follows:
      (1)   All moneys which relate to transfers of real property located in
the unincorporated territory of the County shall be allocated to the County.
      (2)   All moneys which relate to transfers of real property located in a
city in the County which has imposed a tax pursuant to said Part 6.7 shall be
allocated one-half to such city and one-half to the County.
      (3)   All moneys which relate to transfers of real property located in a
city in the County which imposes a tax on transfers of real property not in
conformity with said Part 6.7 shall be allocated to the County.
      (4)   All moneys which relate to transfers of real property in a city in
the County which does not impose a tax on transfers of real property shall be
allocated to the County.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 1430, passed - -1968)
§ 14.0312   Tax Payment Required Before Recordation—Location and Sales Data
Required.
   The Recorder shall not record any deed, instrument or writing subject to the
tax imposed by this Chapter unless the tax described in §
14.0310 is paid in the amount of the tax due under this Chapter. If the party
submitting the document for recordation so requests, the amount of tax due
under this Chapter shall be shown on a separate paper which shall be affixed to
the document by the Recorder after the permanent record is made and before the
original is returned as specified in Government Code § 27321.
   Every document subject to tax hereunder which is submitted for recordation,
shall show on the face of the document or in a separate document the amount of
taxes due under this Chapter and the Recorder may rely thereon.
   Every document subject to tax hereunder which is submitted for recordation,
shall show on the face of the document, or in a separate document, the location
of the lands, tenements or other realty described in the document. If said
lands, tenements or other realty are located within a city in the County, the
name of the city shall be set forth. If said lands, tenements or other realty
are located in the unincorporated area of the County, that fact shall be set
forth.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 1430, passed - -1968)
§ 14.0313   (Deleted by Ord. 1430, passed - -1968).
§ 14.0314   Procedure for Claiming Refunds of Taxes.
   Claims for refunds of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be
governed by the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 5096 et seq.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0315   Administrative Interpretation.
   In the administration of this Chapter, the Recorder shall interpret its
provisions consistently with those Documentary Stamp Tax Regulations adopted by
the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Treasury Department which
relate to the Tax on Conveyances and identified as 26 C.F.R. §§ 47.4361-1,
47.4361-2, and 47.4362-1 of Part 47, as the same existed on November 8, 1967,
except that for the purposes of this Chapter, the determination of what
constitutes “realty” shall be determined by the definition or scope of that
term under State law.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0316   Recorder May Require Sales Records.
   Whenever the County Recorder has reason to believe that the full amount of
tax due under this Chapter has not been paid, he or she may, by notice served
upon any person liable therefor, require him or her to furnish a true copy of
his or her records relevant to the amount of the consideration or value of the
interest or property conveyed.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0317   Intentional Avoidance by Misrepresentation a Misdemeanor.
   Any person or persons who makes, signs, issues, or accepts or causes to be
made, signed, issued or accepted and who submits or causes to be submitted for
recordation any deed, instrument or writing subject to the tax imposed by this
Chapter and makes any material misrepresentation of fact for the purpose of
avoiding all or any part of the tax imposed by this Chapter, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
   No person or persons shall be liable, either civilly or criminally, for any
unintentional error made in designating the location of the lands, tenements or
other realty described in a document subject to the tax imposed by this
Chapter.
(Ord. 1394, passed - -1967)
§ 14.0318   Parcel Numbers on Instruments of Conveyance.
   Pursuant to authority set forth in Revenue and Taxation Code § 11911.1, each
deed, instrument, or writing by which lands, tenements, or other realty is
sold, granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed, shall have noted
upon it the tax roll parcel number. The number will be used only for
administrative and procedural purposes and will not be proof of title, and in
the event of any conflicts, the stated legal description noted upon the
document shall govern. The validity of such a document shall not be affected by
the fact that such parcel number is erroneous or omitted, and there shall be no
liability attaching to any person for an error in such number or omission of
such number. The Recorder shall not accept any deed, instrument, or conveyance
for recording unless the tax roll parcel number has been noted upon it. A
parcel which has been created by the division of an existing parcel number and
which at the time of recording has no separate parcel number, shall have noted
upon it the words “portion of” and the parcel number of the parcel from which
it was created.
(Ord. 2139, passed - -1977)
CHAPTER 4: REFUSE DISPOSAL LAND USE FEES
Section
   
14.0401   Authority and Purpose.
   
14.0402   Land Areas for Fee Purposes.
   
14.0403   Area No. 1—Fee Schedule.
   
14.0404   Area No. 2—No Fee.
   
14.0405   Area No. 3—No Fee.
   
14.0406   (Repealed by Ord. 3077, passed - -1986).
   
14.0407   Collection.
   
14.0408   Categories of Land Use.
   
14.0409   “No Fee” Category.
§ 14.0401   Authority and Purpose.
   This Chapter is enacted pursuant to Government Code §§ 25830 and 25831 for
the purpose of raising revenue to assist in defraying costs involved in the
acquisition, operation, and maintenance of refuse disposal sites in the
unincorporated area of the County.
   Environmental protection requirements have necessitated a change from the
burning of refuse to cut-and-cover land-fill disposal methods in areas of the
County where it is not feasible to maintain a pay-at-the-gate disposal program.
Accordingly, a schedule of refuse disposal land use fees is hereby established
as set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 1923, passed - -1974)
§ 14.0402   Land Areas for Fee Purposes.
   Land within the unincorporated area of the County is hereby classified into
the following areas:
   (a)   Area No. 1. All land within the boundaries covered by the following
Assessor’s Book numbers [referred to in § 16.0222 of the San Bernardino County
Code, respectively, as the “West Mountain Area,” the “East Mountain Area,” the
“Trona and Baker Areas,” and the “Desert Area excluding the Trona and Baker
Areas” of the County: West Mountain: 295, 296, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331,
332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, and 348.
East Mountain: 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 446,
447, 2328, and 2350. Trona-Baker: 483, 485, 486, 503, 543, pp. 23-28 inclusive,
and 544, pp. 21-39 inclusive, pp. 44-49 inclusive. Desert Area (excluding
Trona-Baker Areas): 181,182, 183, 351, 355-357, 394-428, 432-445, 448-470, 472,
473,475, 477-482, 488-498, 512, 515-517, 521, 527-533, 537-540, 580-635, 651,
659, 661, 3100-3103, 3128-3131.
   (b)   Area No. 2. All land within the boundaries covered by the following
Assessor’s Book numbers: 484, 500-502 inclusive, 504-507 inclusive, 518-520
inclusive, 541-542 inclusive, 543, pp. 1-22 and 29-31 inclusive, 544, pp. l-20
and 40-43 inclusive, 545-546 inclusive, 551-553 inclusive, 556-558 inclusive,
562-563 inclusive, 567-573 inclusive, 643-649 inclusive.
   (c)   Area No. 3. All land not included in Area No. 1 or Area No. 2
(referred to in § 16.0222 of the San Bernardino County Code as the “Valley”
area of the County).
(Ord. 1923, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2287, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3445,
passed - -1991)
§ 14.0403   Area No. 1—Fee Schedule.
   The Board of Supervisors finds and determines that refuse disposal sites are
provided for use by owners of property within each separate area of Area No. 1.
The Board of Supervisors also finds and determines that it is not feasible in
the East Mountain Area, West Mountain Area, or the Trona and Baker Areas of
Area No. 1 to establish a pay-at-the-gate management system of refuse disposal
sites. The low volume of waste brought to the refuse disposal sites located in
such areas of Area No. 1, resulting from the rural nature of such areas, makes
it economically unfeasible to incur the additional cost of acquiring and
installing scales and retaining personnel to weigh the refuse and collect the
resulting gate fee. Accordingly, parcels of property within the West Mountain
Area, East Mountain Area and Trona and Baker Areas of Area No. 1 shall be
subject to a refuse disposal land use fee in accordance with that Schedule of
Fees set forth in § 16.0222 of the San Bernardino County Code, with no pay-at-
the-gate fee being imposed at refuse disposal sites in such areas of Area No. 1
[except to the extent necessary to prevent disposal of refuse without the
payment of any fee, as provided in § 16.0222(c)(3)].
   Within the Desert Area, excluding the Trona and Baker Areas, of Area No. 1 a
pay-at-the-gate management system of refuse disposal sites is utilized. The
Board of Supervisors finds and determines that the more urbanized nature of the
Desert Area, excluding the Trona and Baker Areas, of Area No. 1 and the
resulting greater volume of refuse received at refuse disposal sites located in
this area of Area No. 1, make the equipment and personnel costs of a pay-at-
the-gate system economically feasible. However, because of the lack of
mandatory collection of residential refuse and the limited voluntary collection
by use of commercial haulers of refuse generated on residential property, a
land use fee will be imposed on residential property in order to discourage
illegal dumping in the desert. Refuse generated on parcels of property used for
commercial purposes is less likely to be illegally dumped because a greater
percentage of such refuse is collected by commercial haulers and because the
gate fee resulting from self-hauling is less likely to deter the use of the
refuse disposal site, as such fee can be treated as an additional cost of doing
business. Therefore, only residential parcels of property within the Desert
Area, excluding the Trona and Baker Areas, of Area No. 1 shall be subject to a
refuse disposal land use fee in accordance with that Schedule of Fees set forth
in § 16.0222 of the San Bernardino County Code. The payment of such a land use
fee shall entitle the owners of such residential parcels (or a licensed
commercial hauler designated by an owner) to utilize refuse disposal sites
without the payment of any pay-at-the-gate fee for ordinary refuse generated on
such residential property (ordinary refuse does not include demolition-type
waste generated on any such parcel of property). Owners of parcels of property
within the Desert Area, excluding the Trona-Baker Areas, of Area No. 1 which
are not residential are provided refuse disposal sites, but with respect to
their refuse the refuse disposal sites are to be operated on a pay-at-the-gate
basis. Accordingly, no refuse disposal land use fee is established for the
nonresidential, improved parcels within the Desert Area, excluding the Trona-
Baker Areas, of Area No. 1.
(Ord. 1923, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 3445, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 3458,
passed - -1991)
§ 14.0404   Area No. 2—No Fee.
   The Board of Supervisors finds and determines that no refuse disposal sites
are provided within reasonable distance to be of use to owners of property
within Area No. 2. Accordingly no refuse disposal land use fee is established
for parcels within Area No. 2.
(Ord. 1923, passed - -1974)
§ 14.0405   Area No. 3—No Fee.
   The Board of Supervisors finds and determines that refuse disposal sites are
provided for owners of property within Area No. 3, but that such refuse
disposal sites are operated on a pay-at-the-gate basis. Accordingly, no refuse
disposal land use fee is established for parcels within Area No. 3.
(Ord. 1923, passed - -1974)
§ 14.0406   (Repealed by Ord. 3077, passed - -1986).
§ 14.0407   Collection.
   The fees set forth in § 16.0222 of this Code shall be billed and collected
by the County Tax Collector as part of the regular county tax billing. Any
revised billings shall be by revised tax bill.
(Ord. 1923, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 3077, passed - -1986)
§ 14.0408   Categories of Land Use.
   The fees set forth in § 16.0222 of this Code have been fixed in accordance
with the land use codes established by the County Assessor. Should the owner of
any parcel of land demonstrate to the Administrator of the Public Works Agency,
or to his or her designated representative, by evidence satisfactory to the
Administrator or representative that such land use code is inappropriate to
such parcel, the Administrator is authorized and directed to prepare and submit
a revised billing for such parcel in accordance with the fee applicable to that
land use code appropriate to the evidence presented. Where a single business is
divided by a highway, the fee shall be determined as though there was no such
division.
(Ord. 1923, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 3292, passed - -1979)
§ 14.0409   “No Fee” Category.
   In addition to other categories established hereunder, and pursuant to
Government Code § 25830, there is hereby established a category to be
designated the “X” category for parcels of land for which no services are
provided and for which no fee shall be charged. Inclusion of parcels within
this category shall be by application therefor and shall be determined by the
Board of Supervisors on a case-by-case basis.
(Ord. 1923, passed - -1974)
CHAPTER 5: REASSESSMENT OF DAMAGED PROPERTY
Section
   
14.0501   Application Requirements.
   
14.0502   Reassessment and Right of Appeal.
   
14.0503   Reassessment Without Application.
   
14.0504   Tax Rate and Proration Formula.
   
14.0505   Lien Date Review and Taxable Value.
   
14.0506   Tax Refunds.
   
14.0507   (Ord. 2117, passed - -1976; Deleted by Ord. 2658, passed - -1982).
§ 14.0501   Application Requirements.
   Every person who at 12:01 a.m. on January 1 was the owner of, or had in his
or her possession, or under his or her control, any taxable property, or who
acquired such property after such date and is liable for the taxes thereon for
the fiscal year commencing immediately following July 1, which property was
thereafter damaged or destroyed, without his or her fault, by a misfortune or
calamity, may, within 12 months of such misfortune or calamity, apply for
reassessment of such property by delivering to the Assessor a written
application showing the condition and applicant’s opinion of value, if any, of
the property immediately before and after the damage or destruction, which
damage must be shown therein to be in excess of $10,000.00. The application
shall be executed under penalty of perjury, or if executed outside the State of
California, verified by affidavit.
(Ord. 1940, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2117, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2658,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3752, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3881, passed - -2003)
§ 14.0502   Reassessment and Right of Appeal.
   Upon receiving a proper application, the Assessor shall complete an
independent evaluation of the property to verify the amounts claimed on the
application in the before and after condition. The Assessor shall then compute
a percentage relationship of loss and reduce the current assessed value by that
percentage. The Assessor shall notify the applicant in writing of the amount of
the proposed reassessment. The notice shall state that the applicant may appeal
the proposed reassessment to the Assessment Appeals Board within six months of
the date of mailing the notice. If an appeal is requested within the six-month
period, the Board shall hear and decide the matter as if the proposed
reassessment had been entered on the roll as an assessment made outside the
regular assessment period. The decision of the Board regarding the damaged
value of the property shall be final, provided that a decision of the
Assessment Appeals Board regarding any reassessment made pursuant to this
Section shall create no presumption as regards the value of the affected
property subsequent to the date of the damage. If the amount of damage, as
verified by the Assessor, is not at least $10,000.00, no adjustment shall be
made to said roll and no taxes shall be canceled or refunded.
(Ord. 1940, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2117, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2658,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3752, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3881, passed - -2003)
§ 14.0503   Reassessment Without Application.
   If no such application is made and the Assessor determines that within the
preceding 12 months a property has suffered damage caused by misfortune or
calamity, which may qualify the property owner for relief under provisions of
this Chapter, the Assessor may reassess the property in the same manner as
provided for in §
14.0502 and notify the last known owner of the property of the reassessment.
(Ord. 1940, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2117, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2658,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3752, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 3881, passed - -2003)
§ 14.0504   Tax Rate and Proration Formula.
   The tax rate fixed for property on the roll on which the property so
reassessed appeared at the time of the misfortune or calamity, shall be applied
to the amount of the reassessment and the assessee shall be liable for: (1) a
prorated portion of the taxes that would have been due on the property for the
current fiscal year had the misfortune or calamity not occurred, such proration
to be determined on the basis of the number of months in the current fiscal
year prior to the misfortune or calamity; plus (2) a proration of the tax due
on the property as reassessed in its damaged or destroyed condition, such
proration to be determined on the basis of the number of months in the fiscal
year after the damage or destruction, including the month in which the damage
was incurred. If the damage or destruction occurred after January 1 and before
the beginning of the next fiscal year, the reassessment shall be utilized to
determine the tax liability for the next fiscal year provided, however, if the
property is fully restored during the next fiscal year, taxes due for that year
shall be prorated based on the number of months in the year before and after
the completion of restoration.
(Am. Ord. 3881, passed - -2003)
§ 14.0505   Lien Date Review and Taxable Value.
   The assessed value of the property in its damaged condition, compounded
annually by the inflation factor specified in Revenue and Taxation Code
Subdivision (a) of § 51, shall be the taxable value of the property until it is
restored, repaired, reconstructed or other provisions of the law require the
establishment of a new base year value.
   If partial reconstruction, restoration, or repair has occurred on any
subsequent lien date, the taxable value shall be increased by an amount
determined by multiplying the difference between its factored base year value
immediately before the calamity and its assessed value in its damaged condition
by the percentage of the repair, reconstruction, or restoration completed on
that lien date.
   When the property is fully repaired, restored or reconstructed, its new
taxable value shall be the lesser of (1) its full cash value, or (2) its
factored base year value or its factored base year value as adjusted pursuant
to Revenue and Taxation Code Subdivision (c) of § 70. The new taxable value
shall be enrolled on the lien date following completion of the repair,
restoration or reconstruction.
(Ord. 1940, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2117, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2658,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3752, passed - -1999)
§ 14.0506   Tax Refunds.
   Any tax paid in excess of the total tax due shall be refunded to the
taxpayer pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 5096 et seq., as an
erroneously collected tax or by order of the Board of Supervisors without the
necessity of a claim being filed pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Chapter
5.
(Ord. 1940, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2117, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2658,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3752, passed - -1999)
§ 14.0507   (Ord. 2117, passed - -1976; Deleted by Ord. 2658, passed - -1982).
CHAPTER 6: SURVEY MONUMENT PRESERVATION FUND
Section
   
14.0601   Intent and Purpose.
   
14.0602   Definitions.
   
14.0603   Fee.
   
14.0604   Survey Monument Preservation Fund.
   
14.0605   Administration.
   
14.0606   Effect of Failure to Collect Fee.
   
14.0607   Reliability on Information.
§ 14.0601   Intent and Purpose.
   This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Survey Monument
Preservation Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino.” The purpose of this
Article is to develop a survey monument preservation fund to pay the necessary
expenses incurred or authorized by the County Surveyor in any retracement or
remonument survey of major historical land division lines upon which later
surveys are based, such as, but not limited to Government Section Lines, Rancho
Lines, Grant Lines, Rancho Section Lines, Acreage Subdivision Lot Lines, and
Subdivision Boundary Lines within said County.
   This Article is adopted pursuant to Government Code §§ 27584 and 27585.
(Ord. 3154, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 2821, passed - -1983)
§ 14.0602   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOVERNMENT ENTITY. Includes the State of California, a county, city,
district, public authority, public agency, and any other political subdivision
in the State.
   GRANT DEED. Any conveyance by which an estate in real property is passed
except that it does not include a reconveyance deed, decree of distribution,
judgment of partition, trust deeds, deeds conveying easements, deeds conveying
oil or mineral rights only, deeds changing title from one form to another such
as from community property to joint tenancy, or any grant deed that is recorded
or re-recorded solely for the purpose of correcting an error in a previously
recorded document.
   RECORDED TRACT MAP. A final map filed under the authority of the
“Subdivision Map Act” of the State of California.
   PARCEL MAP. A parcel map filed under the authority of the “Subdivision Map
Act” of the State of California.
(Ord. 3154, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 2821, passed - -1983)
§ 14.0603   Fee.
   There is imposed a user’s fee of $10.00 which shall be charged and collected
by the County Recorder over and above any other fees required by law as a
condition precedent to the filing or recording of any grant deed conveying real
property, except for those grants:
   (a)   Conveying lots created by recorded tract or parcel maps;
   (b)   Conveying lots to government entities;
   (c)   Which are recorded solely for the purpose of correcting errors in a
previously recorded document.
(Ord. 3154, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 2821, passed - -1983)
§ 14.0604   Survey Monument Preservation Fund.
   The Treasurer of the County of San Bernardino is required to maintain a
Survey Monument Preservation Fund and under no circumstances shall funds
collected by the County Recorder for the Survey Monument Preservation Fund be
directed into any other fund or used for any other purpose.
(Ord. 3154, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 2821, passed - -1983)
§ 14.0605   Administration.
   The County Recorder shall administer this Article and shall on or before the
fifteenth day of each month forward to the County Treasurer all fees collected
under this Article during the previous month for deposit into the County’s
Survey Monument Preservation Fund.
(Ord. 3154, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 2821, passed - -1983)
§ 14.0606   Effect of Failure to Collect Fee.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, the failure of the
County Recorder to collect said fee at the time of a document recordation:
   (a)   Shall not create any liability on the part of the County Recorder;
   (b)   Shall not affect the constructive notice otherwise imparted by the
recording of the document;
   (c)   Shall not prevent the County from subsequently collecting the fee from
the grantee or other party who was liable for payment of the fee at the time
the document was recorded.
(Ord. 3154, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 2821, passed - -1983)
§ 14.0607   Reliability on Information.
   In determining the applicability of the fee to any conveyance, the County
Recorder may rely on the information on the document involved, or information
obtained from the flier of the document, or information from the County
Surveyor.
(Ord. 3154, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 2821, passed - -1983)
CHAPTER 7: FRANCHISE PROGRAM
Section
   
14.0701   Findings.
   
14.0702   Intent.
   
14.0703   Administration.
   
14.0704   Enforcement and Monitoring.
   
14.0705   Severability.
§ 14.0701   Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino hereby finds and
determines:
   (a)   That the County of San Bernardino, pursuant to provisions of the
Government Code and Public Utilities Code, is authorized to grant franchises
along and over public roads and rights-of-way for all lawful purposes, upon
such terms, conditions and instructions as the Board of Supervisors may deem
necessary and proper;
   (b)   That such franchises may be granted with respect to the furnishing of
services or commodities to the public or any portion thereof;
   (c)   That there are numerous utility and non-utility providers within the
unincorporated areas of the County which are utilizing public roads and rights-
of-way without franchise agreements in effect;
   (d)   That existing franchises need to be administered and monitored in
order to insure that franchisees are in full compliance with current
agreements.
(Ord. 3702, passed - -1997)
§ 14.0702   Intent.
   It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors to require that there are
franchise agreements for those service providers using the public roads and
rights-of-way within the unincorporated areas of the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 3702, passed - -1997)
§ 14.0703   Administration.
   The Special Districts Department, through its Franchise Unit, shall perform
whatever tasks are necessary to accomplish the directives set forth in this
Chapter. All recommendations for action and proposed agreements/ordinances
shall be reviewed by the Administrative Office and County Counsel, subject to
final approval by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 3702, passed - -1997)
§ 14.0704   Enforcement and Monitoring.
   (a)   All current franchise agreements/ordinances shall be carefully
examined, monitored and audited to determine whether all applicable
requirements are being met.
   (b)   The Special Districts Department shall investigate and determine which
service providers are operating without franchise agreements in order to insure
that such providers enter into appropriate agreements with the County.
   (c)   Any ordinance granting a franchise, or any notice or resolution
pertaining to a franchise, shall be subject to the terms and conditions
approved by the Board of Supervisors. Such terms and conditions shall include,
without limitation, provisions relating to: construction; maps and data to be
furnished to the County; compensation to the County; bonding and insurance
requirements; assignment and successors; default; and other necessary and
proper considerations.
   (d)   The franchise agreement may provide for a discount of up to 15 percent
of the first year’s periodic franchise fees, for the prepayment of such fees.
(Ord. 3702, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3734, passed - -1998)
§ 14.0705   Severability.
   If any portion of this Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3702, passed - -1997)
CHAPTER 8: TAXATION OF REPLACEMENT RESIDENCES
Section
   
14.0801   Transfer of Base Year Value.
   
14.0802   Claims for Transfer of Base Year Value.
   
14.0803   Determination of Base Year Value.
   
14.0804   Date of Acquisition of Replacement Residence.
   
14.0805   Operation.
§ 14.0801 Transfer of Base Year Value.
   Any person over the age of 55 years or any person severely and permanently
disabled, as provided in Revenue and Taxation Code § 69.5, who resides in
property that is eligible for the homeowner’s exemption under subdivision (k)
of Section 3 of Article XIII of the California Constitution and § 218 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code may transfer, subject to the conditions and
limitations provided in § 69.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the base year
value of that property, provided that the property is located in the State of
California and outside of San Bernardino County, to any replacement dwelling of
equal or lesser value which is located within San Bernardino County and is
purchased or newly constructed by that person as his or her principal residence
within two years of the sale by that person of the original property, provided
that the base year value of the original property shall not be transferred to
the replacement dwelling until the original property is sold.
(Ord. 4259, passed - -2014)
§ 14.0802 Claims for Transfer of Base Year Value.
   All claims for transfers of base year value from original property located
in the State of California and outside of San Bernardino County shall be
granted, if the claims meet the applicable requirements of both subdivision (a)
of Section 2 of Article XIIIA of the California Constitution and § 69.5 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code. All claims for transfers of base year value shall be
filed with the assessor, on forms prescribed by the State Board of Equalization
for this purpose. The assessor shall make the claim forms available to
prospective claimants.
(Ord. 4259, passed - -2014)
§ 14.0803 Determination of Base Year Value.
   In determining the base year valuation of original property located in
another County, the base year valuation as determined by the assessor of such
other County shall be accepted by the assessor of this County, in connection
with the granting of claims for transfers of base year value.
(Ord. 4259, passed - -2014)
§ 14.0804 Date of Acquisition of Replacement Residence.
   Any person meeting the requirements of this Chapter and subdivision (a) of
Section 2 of Article XIIIA of the California Constitution and § 69.5 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code may transfer the base year value of his or her former
principal residence located in the State of California and outside San
Bernardino County to a new principal residence within San Bernardino County
which is acquired on or after January 1, 2014.
(Ord. 4259, passed - -2014)
§ 14.0805 Operation.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall remain operative until repealed, but in
no event for a period of less than five years from the date this Chapter
becomes effective, unless otherwise permitted or authorized by law.
(Ord. 4259, passed - -2014)
DIVISION 5: COURTS
CHAPTER 1: SUPERIOR COURTS
Section
   
15.0101   (Deleted by Ord. 2425, passed - -1980).
   
15.0102   (Deleted by Ord. 2425, passed - -1980).
   
15.0103   Assignment of Municipal Court Attaches to Superior Court.
§ 15.0101   (Deleted by Ord. 2425, passed - -1980).
§ 15.0102   (Deleted by Ord. 2425, passed - -1980).
§ 15.0103   Assignment of Municipal Court Attaches to Superior Court.
   The provisions of Government Code § 69740 are adopted, as follows: If the
Chairperson of the Judicial Council assigns a judge of a municipal court in a
county to sit on the superior court of the same county, the presiding judge of
the municipal court may with the consent of the presiding judge of the superior
court also assign the court reporter, deputy clerk and deputy marshal, or any
of them, of the municipal court from which such judge is assigned to act as
court reporter, deputy clerk and deputy sheriff, respectively, for the superior
court during the period for which the judge is assigned. During the period for
which the court reporter, deputy clerk, or deputy marshal is assigned, they
shall receive the same salary as a court reporter, deputy clerk, or deputy
sheriff, respectively, for the superior court. If there be no presiding judge,
the senior or sole judge may make or consent to the assignment of the attaches.
(Ord. 2384, passed - -1979)
CHAPTER 2: JUSTICE COURTS (REPEALED BY ORD. 3600, PASSED - -)
CHAPTER 3: MUNICIPAL COURTS
Section
   
15.0301   Places Designated for Sessions of the Municipal Courts.
§ 15.0301   Places Designated for Sessions of the Municipal Courts.
   Pursuant to Government Code § 69740, the following are designated as the
places within the San Bernardino County Municipal Court District where sessions
shall be held:
   1.   Barstow Division, 235 East Mt. View, Barstow, California; 73730 Baker
Boulevard, Baker, California;
   2.   Central Division, 351 North Arrowhead Avenue, San Bernardino,
California;
   3.   Chino Division, 13260 Central Avenue, Chino, California;
   4.   East Division, 216 Brookside Avenue, Redlands, California;
   5.   Morongo Basin Division, 6527 Whitefeather Road, Joshua Tree,
California;
   6.   Mountains Division. 477 Summit Boulevard, Big Bear Lake, California;
26010 State Highway 189, Twin Peaks, California;
   7.   Needles Division, 1111 Bailey Avenue, Needles, California;
   8.   Valley Division, 17780 Arrow Highway, Fontana, California;
   9.   Victorville Division, 14455 Civic Drive, Victorville, California;
   10.   West Valley Division, 8303 Haven Avenue, Rancho Cucamonga, California.
CHAPTER 4: TRIAL JUROR FEES
Section
   
15.0401   Trial Juror Mileage Rates.
   
15.0402   (Repealed by Ord. 3177, passed - -).
§ 15.0401   Trial Juror Mileage Rates.
   The mileage rate for trial jurors in all trial courts in the County of San
Bernardino in civil and criminal cases is established as $0.20 per mile
actually and necessarily traveled in attending court as a juror, in going to
the court only (one way).
§ 15.0402   (Repealed by Ord. 3177, passed - -).
CHAPTER 5: PARKING VIOLATIONS—NOT GUILTY PLEA BY MAIL
Section
   
15.0501   Mailed Not Guilty Pleas to Parking Violations.
§ 15.0501   Mailed Not Guilty Pleas to Parking Violations.
   Pursuant to Vehicle Code § 40519(b), any person who receives a notice of a
parking violation may enter a plea of not guilty in writing in lieu of
appearing in person to enter such plea. The written plea shall be directed to
the court or city agency named in the parking citation or notice and, if
mailed, shall be sent by registered or certified mail postmarked not later than
five days prior to the date specified in the citation for payment or
appearance.
   The written plea must be accompanied by a deposit in the sum specified in
the citation or notice, which sum shall consist of the amount of bail specified
for the offense plus any assessment required by Vehicle Code § 42006. Upon
receipt of the written plea, procedures for arraignment and trial shall be as
set forth in § 40519(b).
   Any person using the procedure set forth herein shall be deemed to have
given a written promise to appear at the time designated by the court for
trial, and failure to appear at the trial shall constitute a misdemeanor.
DIVISION 6: COUNTY FEES
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
16.0101   Fixing of Fees.
   
16.0102   Employees Authorized to Accept Negotiable Paper for Payments.
§ 16.0101   Fixing of Fees.
   The fees for services rendered by the County may be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors, and shall appear on a Schedule of Fees on file in the Office of
the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. To the extent such fees included in the
Schedule of Fees now appear in various other sections of the County Code, such
fees are hereby amended to read as provided in the Schedule of Fees set forth
in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal
or amend any other fees set forth in the County Code, except for those listed
in the Schedule of Fees.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0102   Employees Authorized to Accept Negotiable Paper for Payments.
   Pursuant and subject to all of the provisions of Government Code §§ 6150,
6157, 25303.1, 25303.2, 25303.4, 25303.5, and 25303.6, every officer of this
County who is not specifically authorized by any other statutory provision to
accept negotiable paper in payment of any assessment, license, permit, fee,
fine, bail deposit, trust deposit, or any other money owing to the County, may
accept negotiable paper for such payment. If any personal check offered in
payment pursuant to this section is returned without payment, for any reason, a
charge for the returned check, in the amount set forth in §
16.0207D, shall be imposed, which charge shall be added to and become part of
the underlying obligation other than an obligation which constitutes a lien on
real property, and that payment and future payments by such person shall be in
cash or by cashier's check or money order.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
CHAPTER 2: SCHEDULE OF FEES
Section
   
16.0201   Agriculture/Weights & Measures.
   
16.0202   Airports.
   
16.0203   Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk.
   
16.0203A   Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector.
   
16.0203B   Behavioral Health.
   
16.0204   Land Use Services Department - Building Inspection and Plan
Review—Building and Safety.
   
16.0205   Business Licenses.
   
16.0206   Clerk of the Board.
   
16.0207   Human Resources.
   
16.0207A   Booking or Other Processing Services.
   
16.0207B   Photocopy Services.
   
16.0207C   Special Events Certificate of Insurance.
   
16.0207D   Returned Check Fee.
   
16.0208   Repealed.
   
16.0208A   County Counsel.
   
16.0209   Electric Vehicle Charging Station User Fees.
   
16.0210   Community Development and Housing.
   
16.0210A   Economic Development—Filming Permit Processing Fees.
   
16.0211B   Repealed.
   
16.0212   Repealed.
   
16.0213   Repealed.
   
16.0213A   Health Services.
   
16.0213B   Health Services - Environmental.
   
16.0214   Repealed.
   
16.0215   Repealed.
   
16.0215A   Land Use Services Department—Development Review—Planning.
   
16.0215B   Department of Public Works—Development.
   
16.0215C   Land Use Services Department—Development Review—Code Enforcement/
Fire Hazard Abatement.
   
16.0215D   Land Use Services Department—Development Review—Land Development.
   
16.0216   Library.
   
16.0217   Repealed.
   
16.0218   Museum.
   
16.0219   Probation.
   
16.0220   Real Estate Services Department
   
16.0220A   Reserved.
   
16.0220B   Children and Family Services.
   
16.0220C   Human Services Administration.
   
16.0221   Repealed.
   
16.0222   Refuse Disposal.
   
16.0222A   Refuse Franchise Fee.
   
16.0222B   Refuse Hauling Class A Permit Fees.
   
16.0223   Regional Parks.
   
16.0224   Registrar of Voters.
   
16.0225   Public Works.
   
16.0226   Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator.
   
16.0227   Repealed.
   
16.0228   Land Use Services Department—Miscellaneous Services.
   
16.0228A   Repealed.
   
16.0228B   Land Use Services Department and Department of Public Works—Actual
Costs, Deposits, Collection of Applicant’s Obligations, and Refunds.
   
16.0229   Repealed.
   
16.0230   Repealed.
   
16.0231   Waiver/Refund of Fees.
§ 16.0201 Agriculture/Weights & Measures.
   (a)   Certification Services:
      (1)   For each shipment which requires a single inspection or the
inspection of a lot or load, the following fee shall be collected per
certificate:
         (A)   Inspection expected to take an hour or less: $80.00/each.
         (B)   Inspection expected to take more than an hour (charged in 1/
2 hour increments): $133.00/hour.
         (C)   Quarantine Inspection, incoming commercial shipment requiring
inspection (charged in 1/2 hour increments): $133.00/hour.
      NOTE: An additional charge equal to two hours at the applicable rate,
shall be added to the fee of shipments where the inspection is made on
Saturdays, Sundays, County furlough days or County holidays.
      (2)   Inspection Services (if no other provision applies) (Charged in 1/
2 hour increments): $110.00/hour.
   (b)   Direct Marketing Certificates:
      (1)   Producer Certificate: $110.00/hour one hour minimum, 1/2 hour
increments.
      (2)   Farmer's Market Certificate: $370.00/each.
   (c)   Pest Control Registration:
      (1)   Agricultural Pest Control Business Annual Registration Fee
(renewable January 1): $100.00/year.
      (2)   Maintenance Gardener Pest Control Business Registration Fee
(renewable January 1): $25.00/year.
      (3)   Branch 2 and/or 3 Structural Pest Control Business Registration fee
(renewals January 1): $10.00/year.
      (4)   Farm Labor Contractor Registration fee: $72.00/year.
      (5)   Branch 1 Structural Pest Control Business Registration fee
(renewable January 1): $25.00/year.
   (d)   Registration of Commercial Weighing or Measuring Devices:
      (1)   Annual device registration:
         (A)   Location Fee: $120.00/each location.
         (B)   Utility submeters:
            (I)   Water: $5.00/device.
            (II)   Electric: $3.00/device.
            (III)   Vapor: $7.00/device.
            (IV)   Storage fee for Utility Submeters in storage in excess of 10
calendar days post notification of completed inspection: $1.00/day per
submeter.
         (C)   Heavy capacity devices:
            (I)   Over 10,000 lb capacity: $250.00/device.
            (II)   Between 2,000 to 9,999 lb capacity: $150.00/device.
            (III)   100 to 1,999 lb capacity: $50.00/device.
         (D)   Livestock Scales:
            (I)   Over 10,000 lb capacity: $150.00/device.
            (II)   Between 2,000 to 9,999 lb capacity: $100.00/device.
         (E)   Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) Meters: Mobile and Stationary:
$185.00/device.
         (F)   Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) or Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)
Meters: Mobile or Stationary: $185.00/device.
         (G)   Wholesale and vehicle meters: $57.00/device.
         (H)   Computing Scale: $25.00/device.
         (I)   Jewelry, Prescription or Class II Scale: $80.00/device.
         (J)   Vehicle Odometer: $37.00/device.
         (K)   Electric Vehicle Charging Station: $26.00/device.
         (L)   All other commercial weighing and measuring devices: $20.00/
device.
      NOTE: The annual registration consists of a device and location fee. A
single business location is defined as a site that has different types of
devices requiring the use of specialized testing equipment and necessitates not
more than one inspection trip. Locations using different types of utility
submeters shall only be assessed one location fee.
      (2)   Commodity packer/distributor (over 10,000 packages/year): $330.00/
year.
      (3)   Computerized Pricing System (per location): $219.00/year.
   (e)   Miscellaneous Fees:
      (1)   Standby Fee: $130.00/hour one hour minimum, 1/2 hour increments.
      (2)   Documents/Research (charged in 1/2 hour increments): $138.00/hour.
      (3)   Commercial speaking/training engagement: $194.00/presentation.
   (f)   Collection Service Fee: Current Central Collection's charge.
   (g)   Credit Card Convenience Fee: Actual Cost.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0202 Airports.
   (a)   General and miscellaneous charges, except when a valid agreement
provides otherwise:
      (1)   Penalties:
         (A)   Fees are due and payable on the first day of each month. Fees
will be considered delinquent five days after due date. Postmark shall serve as
proof of date paid. Tenant shall pay a penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of
the amount delinquent for each month but no less than thirty dollars ($30.00)
per each month delinquent.
         (B)   Unauthorized Non-Aeronautical Storage Use Fee. Tenant shall
incur a penalty equal to three (3) times the rent based on the current rental
rate for each permitted space or lease.
         (C)   Non-Airworthy Storage Use Fee. Tenant shall pay a penalty
equivalent to 1.75 times the rent based on the current rental rate for each
permitted space or lease.
      (2)   Commercial Operating Permit. Yearly permit renewals, due July 1:
$750.00/year.
      (3)   Photography/Filming Permit Application: $150.00.
      (4)   Airport Use (City, Town/San Bernardino County Film Office Permit
Required). Photography/Filming: $1,316.00/day.
      (5)   Sewer - Commercial - Monthly Charge per hangar: $47.00.
      (6)   Water-Commercial-Monthly Charge (if unmetered) per hangar: $47.00.
      (7)   Aviation Fuel Delivered: $0.14/gallon.
         (A)   Aviation Fuel (per gallon): Actual cost plus 8% administrative
cost.
      (8)   Aviation Oil Delivered: $0.075/quart.
      (9)   Airport Access Gate Cards (non-refundable): $50.00/card.
         (A)   Airport Access Gate Cards - Annual Renewal (non-refundable):
$20.00/year (per card).
      (10)   Transient Aircraft (overnight).
         **Insurance Certificates required after 30 days.
         (A)   Single engine: $10.00/day.
         (B)   Multi engine: $15.00/day.
         (C)   Large aircraft charged by number of spaces required times the
daily rate: $30.00/day.
         (D)   Hangar transient rental with wingspan less than 50 feet: $28.00/
day.
         (E)   Hangar transient rental with wingspan of at least 50 feet but
less than 80 feet: $56.00/day.
         (F)   Hangar transient rental with wingspan of at least 80 feet but
less than 119 feet: $133.00/day.
         (G)   Hangar transient rental with wingspan of at least 119 feet to
150 feet: $300.00/day.
      (11)   Airport Special Use Staffing Charges: Actual cost.
      (12)   Hangar Waitlist Initial Application Administrative Fee (per
application): $50.00.
         (A)   Hangar Waitlist - Annual Fee (per listing): $50.00.
      (13)   Review of plans, studies, surveys, and other related documents by
staff or consultants of the Department of Airports for proposed development
projects at or near Department-managed airports and process submissions, if
required, to the Federal Aviation Administration: Actual cost.
   (b)   Apple Valley, Barstow-Daggett, Needles, Twentynine Palms Airports:
      (1)   Portable Hangar Space:
         (A)   Standard: $90.00/space/month.
         (B)   Executive: $100.00/space/month.
         (C)   Executive III: $110.00/space/month.
      (2)   Tiedowns (County-operated facilities only):
         (A)   Tiedown - on pavement: $55.00/space/month.
         (B)   Tiedown - shade hangar: $85.00/stall/month.
   (c)   Apple Valley (County-operated facilities only):
      (1)   Building A270 - "T" Hangar: $300.00/month.
      (2)   Buildings A270 - "Mini" Bay: $153.00/month.
      (3)   Building A310 - "Box" Hangar: $445.00/month.
         (A)   Building A310, Unit 6 - "Box" Hangar: $423.00/month.
      (4)   Building A315, A340 - "T" Hangar: $330.00/month.
      (5)   Building A315, A340 - "Mini" Bay: $160.00/month.
      (6)   Building A320 - "T" Hangar: $410.00/month.
      (7)   Building A320 - "Mini" Bay: $190.00/month.
      (8)   Building A360 - "T" Hangar: $335.00/month.
      (9)   Building A360 - "Mini" Bay: $165.00/month.
   (d)   Chino (County-operated facilities only):
      **Tenant pays all utilities
      (1)   Building A460, A465, A470, B280, B290 - "T" Hangar: $330.00/month.
      (2)   Building A475 (excluding space #6) - "T" Hangar: $330.00/month.
      (3)   Building A460, A465, A470, A475 B280, B290 - "Mini" Bay: $165.00/
month.
      (4)   Building B220 - "T" Hangar: $470.00/month.
      (5)   Building B220 - "Mini" Bay: $235.00/month.
      (6)   Building B230, B240, B250 - "T" Hangar: $370.00/month.
      (7)   Building B230, B240, B250 - "Mini" Bay: $185.00/month.
      (8)   Building B260 - "T" Hangar: $450.00/month.
      (9)   Building B260 - "Mini" Bay: $225.00/month.
      (10)   Building B270 - "T" Hangar: $315.00/month.
      (11)   Building B270 - "Mini" Bay: $157.00/month.
      (12)   Portable Hangar Space:
         (A)   Standard/Executive: $105.00/space/month.
         (B)   Executive I: $115.00/space/month.
         (C)   Executive II: $125.00/space/month.
         (D)   Executive III: $135.00/space/month.
      (13)   Tiedown - on pavement: $60.00/space/month.
   (e)   Discount to be applied to hangar and tiedown space permits only when
an advance payment for the entire year is made in full (rounded to whole dollar
amount): 5% off/each full payment.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0203 Assessor/Recorder/County Clerk.
   (a)   Public Information Services.
      (1)   Assessor maps paper copy 11 x 17: $2.00/page.
      (2)   Certification of official record: $1.00/each.
      (3)   Data access account setup: $55.00/each.
   (b)   Parcel Combinations or Combination Rescissions: $116.00/each.
   (c)   Special Analysis:
      (1)   Appraiser: $122.50/hour.
      (2)   Clerical: $78.00/hour.
      (3)   Data Queries: $156.00/hour.
      (4)   Technician: $93.00/hour.
      (5)   Senior Staff: $203.00/hour.
   (d)   Recorder/County Clerk.
      (1)   Online image or index-field: $0.05/image or index.
      (2)   Computer copy of index: $2.00/page.
      (3)   Copies:
         (A)   Recorded or filed documents 8-1/2 x 11: $3.00/first page.
            (I)   Each subsequent page: $1.00/page.
         (B)   Conformed copies (other than maps): $6.00/labeled page.
         (C)   Conformed copies (maps): $8.00/map.
      (4)   Certificate under seal: $1.00/page.
      (5)   Certificate of No Record: $30.00/name.
      (6)   Refunds without fault of County: $75.00/item.
      (7)   New account setup: $125.00/account.
      (8)   Account fee-per change: $15.00/change.
      (9)   Priority mailing per order: $26.00/order.
      (10)   Regular mailing per order: $3.00/order.
   (e)   Recorder.
      (1)   Additional statutory fee for recording/filing every instrument,
paper, or notice for record, in order to:
         (A)   Defray the cost of the County Recorder's document storage:
$1.00/title.
         (B)   Defray the cost of participating in an expanded electronic
recording delivery system: $1.00/title.
         (C)   Defray the cost of the County Recorder's Restrictive Covenant
Modification Program: $2.00/title.
      (2)   Recorder Map copies (Bond): $15.00/page.
      (3)   20-day notice filing: $30.00/each.
      (4)   Notification of involuntary lien: $13.00/debtor.
      (5)   Tentative map number issuance: $25.00/map number.
   (f)   Clerk.
      (1)   Fictitious business name: $55.00/each.
      (2)   Additional fictitious business name or registrant name: $5.00/each.
      (3)   Abandonment of fictitious business name: $55.00/each.
      (4)   Statement of withdrawal from partnership operating under FBN:
$55.00/each.
      (5)   Notary public filings: $55.00/each.
         (A)   Bond for notary, including cancellation, withdrawal or
revocation of bond: $35.00/each.
      (6)   Unlawful Detainer Assistant Filing Fee: $175.00/each.
         (A)   Bond for Unlawful Detainer Assistant, including cancellation,
withdrawal or revocation of bond: $35.00/each.
      (7)   Process Server Filing Fee: $175.00/each.
         (A)   Bond for Process Server, including cancellation, withdrawal or
revocation of bond: $35.00/each.
      (8)   Professional Photocopier Filing Fee: $175.00/each.
         (A)   Bond for Professional Photocopier, including cancellation,
withdrawal or revocation of bond: $35.00/each.
      (9)   Legal Document Assistant Filing Fee: $175.00/each.
         (A)   Bond for Legal Document Assistant, including cancellation,
withdrawal or revocation of bond: $35.00/each.
      (10)   Process Server/Professional Photocopier Filing Fees filed at the
same time: $275.00/each.
      (11)   Power of Attorney by Surety filing fee, including cancellation,
withdrawal or revocation: $25.00/each.
         (A)   More than one name on a power of attorney by Surety: $15.00/
additional name.
      (12)   Financial Statement filing fee by a Surety Insurer: $15.00/each.
      (13)   Docked horses certificate: $15.00/each.
      (14)   Certificate re: capacity of public official: $20.00/each.
      (15)   Filing a document where no other charge is given: $35.00/each.
      (16)   Certificate re: authority issued by Insurance Commissioner:
$40.00/certification.
      (17)   Signature Authentication: $20.00/name.
      (18)   Oaths and acknowledgements: $20.00/name.
      (19)   Marriage services:
         (A)   Marriage ceremony: $65.00/each.
         (B)   Renewal of marriage vows: $36.00/each.
         (C)   Confidential marriage license: $100.00/each.
         (D)   Marriage license: $89.00/each.
         (E)   Duplicate/replacement marriage license: $30.00/license.
         (F)   Duplicate/replacement confidential marriage license: $30.00/
license.
         (G)   Affidavit for duplicate or replacement marriage license: $5.00/
each.
         (H)   Deputy Commissioner for one day: $75.00/applicant.
         (I)   Marriage ceremony witness: $20.00/each.
      (20)   Clerk search: $122.50/hour.
      (21)   Birth/Death/Marriage ledger certificate: $32.00/each.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0203A Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector.
   (a)   Management services accounting fee: $96.00/hour.
   (b)   General accounting fee: $96.00/hour.
Central Payroll:
   (c)   Payroll accounting fee: $96.00/hour.
   (d)   Payroll fees:
      (1)   Reprint of Pay Statement: $9.00/statement.
      (2)   Reprint of W-2 forms from 2010-current year: $10.00/form (current
year no charge if requested before April 15).
      (3)   Reprint of W-2 forms prior to 2010: $19.00/form.
   (e)   Child support and other wage assignments: $1.50/pay period.
   (f)   Record subpoena fees (if County is not named in lawsuit):
      (1)   Original Record Delivery: $15.00/request.
      (2)   Document Research and Preparation: $24.00/hour.
      (3)   Additional costs from third parties: Actual costs.
      (4)   Copies, standard, 8½ x 14 inches or less: $0.10/page.
      (5)   Copies - microfilm/fiche document: $0.20/page.
      (6)   Copies, oversized document/special processing: Actual cost.
Property Tax:
   (g)   Property tax accounting fee: $96.00/hour.
   (h)   Amended tax bill: $27.50/bill.
   (i)   Special District collections: ¼ of 1% ad valorem.
   (j)   Special assessments:
      (1)   Set-up fee: $187.00/assessment.
      (2)   Processing fee:
         (A)   Electronic medium compatible with County: $0.30/assessment.
         (B)   Electronic medium non-compatible with County: $1.20/assessment.
   (k)   Special tax reports: Property tax research fee (special requests):
$96.00/hour plus Innovation and Technology Department computer charges.
   (l)   Subdivision map signing fee: $282.00/map.
Miscellaneous:
   (m)   Notary fee (for official County business by County departments and
other governmental agencies only): $7.00 each signature taken.
   (n)   Reissue stale dated warrant, second and subsequent requests: $18.00/
request.
   (o)   Document retrieval from offsite storage vendor: Actual costs.
Tax Collector:
   (p)   Returned item charge, Tax Collector: $40.00 per item.
   (q)   Special Programming Requests: Actual costs.
   (r)   Certification of records: $37.00 each.
   (s)   Tax Status Report: $18.00 per parcel/per year.
   (t)   Tax clearance certificate - subsequent: $86.00 each.
   (u)   Duplicate tax clearance certificate: $26.00 each.
   (v)   Duplicate release of lien: $19.00 each.
   (w)   Application for separate valuation: $104.00 each.
   (x)   Delinquent tax installment plan (5 year): $100.00 each.
   (y)   Escaped tax installment plan (4 year): $75.00 each.
   (z)   Unsecured delinquency processing fee: $13.00 each.
   (aa)   Unsecured default processing fee: $75.00 each.
   (bb)   Unsecured partial payment processing fee: $10.00 per payment.
   (cc)   Unsecured field call: $378.00 each.
   (dd)   Bank account seizure: $100.00 each.
Tax Sale:
   (ee)   Tax Sale - Cost of Notice: $343.00 each.
   (ff)   Tax Sale - Party of Interest Search Fee: $710.00 each.
   (gg)   Tax Sale personal contact fee: $247.00 per parcel with improvement.
   (hh)   Tax Sale Brochure - consolidated: $165.00 each.
   (ii)   Tax Sale Maps: $309.00 each.
   (jj)   Tax Sale Brochure and Maps - CD: $120.00 each.
   (kk)   Tax Sale bid deposit processing fee: $40.00 each.
   (ll)   Tax Sale Property Sold listing: $104.00 each.
   (mm)   Excess Proceeds listing: $271.00 each.
Revenue Recovery:
   (nn)   Returned item charge, Revenue Recovery: $36.00/item.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0203B Behavioral Health.
   (a)   (1)   Behavioral Health Medical Record: $0.25/page.
      (2)   Behavioral Health Medical Record - Subpoena (delivered): $23.64/
request.
      (3)   Behavioral Health Medical Record - Subpoena (on-site review):
$15.00/request.
   (b)   Driving Under the Influence Programs, DUI Monitoring Fee:
      (1)   DUI Programs: $43.00/participant.
      NOTE: This covers state mandated programs including the following 4
levels of service: First Offender, First Offender Extension, Multiple Offender,
and Wet and Reckless.
      (2)   PC 1000 Programs: $43.00/participant.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0204 Land Use Services Department—Building Inspection and Plan Review -
Building and Safety.
   All fees fixed by this section are for each identified process. If
additional plan reviews and/or additional inspections are required for any
project, additional fees will be charged for each additional process that is
required.
   (a)   Building permit fees by square footage: The following establishes
building permit fees by square footage of a project which is based on estimated
processing time, review time, inspection and average travel hours. For the
number of inspections and plan reviews included per permit by square footage,
refer to the Construction Fee Schedule Package. Special consideration of fees
has been given to repetitive work as well as State/County approved standard
plans. The state mandated fees are based on published valuations determined for
construction by the International Code Council Building Valuations Tables and
are subject to change annually.
      (1)   Schedule of fees: See referenced Construction Fee Schedule.
      (2)   SB1473 Building Standards: (California Health & Safety Code).
      (3)   SB861 Strong Motion Instrumentation Program: (California Public
Resources Code Fee).
      (4)   AB1379 Certified Access Specialist Program: (California Gov't
Code).
   (b)   Electrical permit fees:  Any person filing an application for a permit
to do electrical construction only shall pay a fee according to the following
schedule at the time of filing. All electrical permits include two inspections.
Additional inspections will be charged a re-inspection fee. An intake
processing fee, set forth at §
16.0204(i)(1), shall be applied to each electric permit.
      (1)   Residential:
         (A)   Meter change out and upgrades only: $189.00.
         (B)   New wire or rewire: $302.00.
         (C)   Meter reset: $189.00.
            (I)   Each additional meter reset at the same address: $38.00.
         (D)   Temporary power with span poles: $151.00.
         (E)   All other residential electrical work not listed in §
16.0204(b)(1): $151.00.
      (2)   Non-Residential:
         (A)   Meter change out and upgrades only: $189.00.
         (B)   New wire or rewire:
            (I)   Less than or equal to 5,000 sq. ft.: $302.00.
            (II)   5,001 sq. ft. and over: $378.00.
         (C)   Meter reset: $189.00.
            (I)   Each additional meter reset at the same address: $38.00.
         (D)   Temporary power span poles: $151.00.
         (E)   All other non-residential electrical work not listed in §
16.0204(b)(2): $189.00.
      (3)   Plan review fees: Where no plan review fee is charged under §
16.0204(b) and an electrical plan is required to be submitted, a plan review
fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review
which includes one review and a re-check. Additional reviews will be charged a
plan review re-submittal fee.
         (A)   Plan review: $226.00.
   (c)   Plumbing permit fees: Any person filing an application for a permit to
do plumbing work only shall pay a fee, according to the following schedule, at
the time of filing. All plumbing permits include two inspections. Additional
inspections will be charged a re-inspection fee. An intake processing fee, set
forth at §
16.0204(i)(1), shall be applied to each plumbing permit.
      (1)   Residential:
      NOTE: California Building Code (CBC) R-1 and R-2 categories shall be
excluded from residential category.
         (A)   Fixture or traps including water drainage piping and backflow
protection:
            (I)   10 fixtures or less: $151.00.
            (II)   11 to 25 fixtures: $189.00.
            (III)   26 fixtures or more: $227.00.
         (B)   Sewer Line:
            (I)   Each sewer line: $151.00.
            (II)   Each private sewer lift station or sump pump: $151.00.
         (C)   Septic system including tank, cesspool and leach fields:
            (I)   Plan review: $181.00.
            (II)   Permit Fee: $189.00.
         (D)   Each water heater: $151.00.
         (E)   Gas meter reset: $151.00
            (I)   Each additional gas meter reset at same address: $38.00.
         (F)   Gas lines:
            (I)   10 or less: $151.00.
            (II)   11 or more: $189.00.
         (G)   All other residential plumbing work not listed in §
16.0204(c)(1):
            (I)   10 items or less: $151.00.
            (II)   11 to 25 items: $189.00.
            (III)   26 items or more: $227.00.
      (2)   Non-Residential:
      NOTE: CBC R-1 and R-2 categories shall be included in non-residential
category.
         (A)   Fixtures or traps including water drainage piping and backflow
protection:
            (I)   10 fixtures or less: $151.00.
            (II)   11 to 25 fixtures: $189.00.
            (III)   26 to 50 fixtures: $227.00.
            (IV)   51 fixtures or more: $378.00.
         (B)   Sewer line:
            (I)   Each sewer line: $151.00.
            (II)   Each private sewer lift station or sump pump: $151.00.
         (C)   Septic system including tank, cesspool and leach fields:
            (I)   Plan review: $272.00.
            (II)   Permit fee: $189.00.
         (D)   Each water heater: $151.00.
         (E)   Gas meter reset: $151.00.
            (I)   Each additional gas meter reset at the same address: $38.00.
         (F)   Gas lines:
            (I)   10 or less: $151.00
            (II)   11 or more: $189.00
         (G)   Industrial waste pre-treatment interceptors, including traps and
vents: $151.00
         (H)   All other non-residential plumbing work not listed in §
16.0204(c)(2):
            (I)   10 items or less: $151.00.
            (II)   11 to 25 items: $189.00.
            (III)   26 to 50 items: $227.00.
            (IV)   51 items or more: $302.00.
      (3)   Plan review fees: Where no plan review fee is charged pursuant to §
16.0204(c) and a plumbing plan is required to be submitted, a plan review fee
shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review
which includes one review and a re-check. Additional reviews will be charged a
plan review re-submittal fee.
         (A)   Plan review: $226.00.
   (d)   Mechanical permit fees: Any person filing an application for permit to
do mechanical construction only shall pay a fee, according to the following
schedule, at the time of filing. All mechanical permits include two
inspections. Additional inspections will be charged a re-inspection fee. An
intake processing fee, set forth at §
16.0204(i)(1), shall be applied to each mechanical permit.
      (1)   Residential:
         (A)   HVAC change out only: $151.00.
         (B)   Wall heater, floor furnace, radiant heat and all other heating
elements: $151.00.
         (C)   All other residential mechanical work not listed in §
16.0204(d)(1): $151.00.
      (2)   Non-Residential:
         (A)   HVAC change out only: $189.00.
         (B)   Boilers, all BTUs: $302.00.
         (C)   Wall heater, floor furnace, radiant heat and all other heating
elements: $151.00.
         (D)   All other non-residential mechanical work not listed in §
16.0204(d)(2): $151.00.
      (3)   Plan review fees: Where no plan review fee is charged pursuant to §
16.0204(d) and a mechanical plan is required to be submitted, a plan review fee
shall be paid at a time of submitting plans and specifications for review which
includes one review and a re-check. Additional reviews will be charged a plan
review resubmittal fee.
         (A)   Plan review fee: $226.00.
   (e)   Grading permit fees: Any person requesting review of grading and
erosion plans or filing an application for a grading permit shall pay a fee at
the time of filing according to the schedule below together with the fee
required by §
16.0215D(c). An intake processing fee is already included in the grading permit
fees listed below. The fee for additional grading beyond that approved by a
valid and current grading permit and/or plan review shall be the difference
between the fee paid for the original permit and/or plan review and the fee
required for the entire grading project.
   When there are both excavation (cut) and embankment (fill) grading
activities of one hundred (100) cubic yards or more on the same site, the fee
shall be based upon the total activity volume (cubic yardage).
   Separate permits and fees shall apply to retaining walls as indicated in §
16.0204(h). There shall be no separate charges for standard terrace drains and
similar facilities.
      (1)   Residential grading fees:
         (A)   Permit fee:
            (I)   100 - 1,000 cubic yards: $642.00 for first 100 cubic yards
plus $8.44 for each additional 100 cubic yards or fraction thereof with a
maximum fee of $718.00.
            (II)   1,000.1 - 10,000 cubic yards: $718.00 for first 1,000 cubic
yards plus $8.44 for each additional 1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof with
a maximum fee of $794.00.
            (III)   10,000.1 - 100,000 cubic yards: $794.00 for first 10,000
cubic yards plus $16.78 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards or fraction
thereof with a maximum fee of $945.00.
            (IV)   Over 100,000 cubic yards: $945.00 for first 100,000 cubic
yards plus $16.78 for each additional 100,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof.
         NOTE: Less than 100 cubic yards has no charge.
      (2)   Non-Residential grading:
         (A)   Permit fee:
            (I)   100 - 1,000 cubic yards: $719.00 for first 100 cubic yards
plus $8.33 for each additional 100 cubic yards or fraction thereof with a
maximum fee of $794.00.
            (II)   1,000.1 - 10,000 cubic yards: $794.00 for first 1,000 cubic
yards plus $8.33 for each additional 1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof with
a maximum fee of $869.00.
            (III)   10,000.1 - 100,000 cubic yards: $869.00 for first 10,000
cubic yards plus $12.56 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards or fraction
thereof with a maximum fee of $982.00.
            (IV)   Over 100,000 cubic yards: $982.00 for first 100,000 cubic
yards plus $29.44 for each additional 100,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof.
         NOTE: Less than 100 cubic yards has no charge.
   (f)   Erosion and sediment control permit and fees: Land clearing or other
land disturbing activity without grading or building permit shall obtain an
erosion and sediment control permit. Permit fee shall be paid at the time of
filing according to the following schedule together with the fee required by §
16.0215D(d). All erosion and sediment control permits include two plan reviews
and two inspections. Additional inspections will be charged a re-inspection fee
and additional reviews will be charged a plan review re-submittal fee. An
intake processing fee is already included in the erosion and sediment control
permit fees listed below.
      (1)   Residential:
         (A)   Permit fee: $359.00.
      (2)   Non-Residential:
         (A)   Permit fee: $359.00.
   (g)   Geotechnical and geology reports: An intake processing fee, set forth
in §
16.0204(i)(1), shall be applied to each report or review requested in this
section.
      (1)   Geotechnical report review fee:
         (A)   1 to 4 lots: $1,374.00.
         (B)   5 or more lots: $2,290.00.
      (2)   Geology report review: $1,374.00.
      (3)   Compaction report review/Hydro-collapsible soils report review:
         (A)   1 lot: $344.00.
         (B)   2 to 4 lots: $458.00.
         (C)   5 or more lots: $573.00.
      (4)   Geology investigation: $916.00.
   (h)   Retaining walls, walls and fences: An intake processing fee, set forth
in §
16.0204(i)(1), shall be applied to each permit in §
16.0204(h)(3). All fees in §
16.0204(h)(3) include one inspection and additional inspections will be charged
a re-inspection fee.
      (1)   Residential masonry/retaining walls: See referenced Construction
Fee Schedule.
      (2)   Non-residential masonry/retaining walls: See referenced
Construction Fee Schedule.
      (3)   Chain link, wood and/or wrought iron fencing:
         (A)   Residential: $113.00.
         (B)   All others: $189.00.
   (i)   Miscellaneous permit, inspection and plan review fees: Schedule of
fees not otherwise provided for are located in this section. An intake
processing fee, set forth in §
16.0204(i)(1), shall be applied to each miscellaneous permit.
      (1)   Intake processing fee: $57.00.
         NOTE: This fee shall be applied to each permit prescribed by this
schedule. Special consideration of this fee will be given to projects with any
combination of electrical, mechanical, and/or plumbing under one permit number.
      (2)   Miscellaneous inspection: $227.00.
         NOTE: This fee shall be applied to an inspection that is not covered
under any other permit in §
16.0204.
      (3)   Field Investigation:
         (A)   Conversion of Recreational Cabin to Single Family Residence:
$302.00.
         (B)   Miscellaneous Field Investigation: $151.00.
      (4)   Work commencing before permit issuance: cost shall equal to the
cost of the permit for the work being completed.
      (5)   Application to become a certified fabricator to work within
unincorporated San Bernardino County: $272.00.
         (A)   Renewal of or modification to an approved fabricator
application: $91.00.
      (6)   Standard plans (expires with adoption of new code):
         (A)   Single family residence: see (R-3) Model, First Master Plan
referenced in Construction Fee Package.
         (B)   Pools: $181.00.
         (C)   Revision to standard plans: $136.00.
         (D)   Accessory Structures: See referenced Construction Fee Schedule.
         (E)   Re-establish a standard plan: $181.00.
      (7)   Service charge for cash deposits and other sureties: $158.00.
      (8)   Re-roofs:
         (A)   Residential (with detached or attached garage): $227.00.
         (B)   Accessory Structures: $227.00.
         (C)   All others: $302.00.
      (9)   Illuminated and non-illuminated sign:
         (A)   Monument/pole 30 feet in height or less: $279.00.
         (B)   Monument/pole over 30 feet in height: $317.00.
         (C)   All wall signs: $279.00.
      (10)   Additional re-inspection fee: $227.00 per inspection.
      (11)   Inspection cancellation: no notice or same day of scheduled
inspection: $104.00.
      (12)   Additional plan review, re-submittals: $272.00 per submittal.
      (13)   Revision to approved plan (includes one plan check and a recheck):
$272.00 per submittal.
      (14)   Recognized third party/state approved or San Bernardino County
standard plans:
         (A)   Plan review: $181.00.
         (B)   Permit fee: See referenced Construction Fee Schedule.
      (15)   Release of notice of action (each release): $114.00.
      (16)   Business license inspection: $302.00.
      (17)   Expedited plan review: 1.5 times the cost of regular plan review.
      (18)   Inspections during off-hours (minimum 2 hour charge): Actual Cost
per §
16.0228.
      (19)   Day care home-family inspection: $362.00.
      (20)   Addressing:
         (A)   Owner-initiated address changes: $342.00.
         (B)   Written verification of address, full distribution: $114.00.
         (C)   Subdivision addressing: $35.00 per lot.
      (21)   Review for re-issuance of or change to a Certificate of Occupancy
where no permit is otherwise required or OSHPD Certification when requested by
the applicant: $356.00.
      (22)   Antenna or cell tower:
         (A)   Modification to an existing antenna or cell tower: $536.00.
         (B)   New antenna or cell tower: $694.00.
         (C)   Equipment shelter: $400.00.
      (23)   Storage racks:
         (A)   Simple - 20 feet in heights and a single height racking system:
$891.00.
         (B)   Complex - over 20 feet in height and/or multiple height/level
racking system: $1,389.00.
      (24)   Demolition (Complete removal of structure and foundation. This
includes the removal of water lines, sewer lines, gas lines and the demolition
of any septic systems and wells.)
         (A)   Residential: $227.00.
         (B)   Non-residential: $227.00.
      (25)   Damage Assessment Report: $227.00.
      (26)   Residential alteration (R-3 Single Family Dwelling (SFR) only)
Note: A residential alteration can be any combination of permit fee items
related to electrical, mechanical, plumbing or other single family home
rehabilitation. Please refer to the Alteration Worksheet for a list of items
that apply. An intake processing fee is already included in the permit fees
listed below.
         (A)   Minor - 0% to 25% of total sq. ft. of the SFR, or 3 different
items: $403.00.
         (B)   Moderate - 25.01% to 50% of total sq. ft. of the SFR, or 6
different items: $806.00.
         (C)   Major - 50.01% to 90% of total sq. ft. of the SFR, or 7
different items: $1,451.00.
         (D)   Each additional item added from Alteration Worksheet includes 2
half hour inspections: $139.00.
      (27)   Cargo container(s) for storage only:
         (A)   Permit fee:
            (I)   1 to 3 units: $151.00.
            (II)   4 to 6 units: $302.00.
            (III)   7 or more units: $453.00.
         (B)   Plan review fee: $181.00.
   (j)   Permit fee for swimming pools: The building permit fee for new
swimming pools includes plan review fees as shown below and all inspection fees
for all phases of the construction including permit issuance fees, electrical
permit fees, mechanical permit fees, plumbing permit fees and solar energy
permit fees. An intake processing fee, set forth in §
16.0204(i)(1), shall be applied to each swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub
permit fees listed below. Note: These fees are in addition to the fee
prescribed in §
16.0213B for commercial swimming pools, spas and/or hot tubs:
      (1)   Swimming pools accessory to single-family dwellings:
         (A)   With a standard plan: $619.00.
         (B)   With other than a standard plan: $710.00.
      (2)   All other swimming pools:
         (A)   With a standard plan: $695.00.
         (B)   With other than a standard plan: $785.00.
      (3)   Spas and/or hot tubs: $317.00.
      (4)   Plan review fee only when included with other than a standard plan
review: $181.00.
   (k)   Solar Energy Systems: Plans are required to be submitted for the solar
energy system. The review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and
specifications for review and the permit fee shall be paid at the time of
permit issuance. An intake processing fee, set forth in §
16.0204(i)(1), shall be applied to each solar energy system permit. However,
the intake processing fee will be waived for §§
16.0204(k)(1),
16.0204(k)(2), and
16.0204(k)(3).
      (1)   15KW or less photovoltaic systems for single family residential -
roof mount system:
         (A)   Plan review: $215.00.
         (B)   Permit fee: $226.00.
      (2)   For photovoltaic systems for single family residential above 15KW -
roof mount system:
         (A)   Plan review: $225.00 plus $15.00 per each additional kilowatt
above 15KW.
         (B)   Permit fee: $225.00.
      (3)   Photovoltaic systems for single family residential - ground mounted
system:
         (A)   Plan review - 15KW or less: $225.00.
         (B)   Plan review - above 15KW: $225.00 plus $15.00 per each
additional kilowatt above 15KW.
         (C)   Permit fee: $225.00.
      (4)   Solar water heating systems:
         (A)   Plan review: $166.00.
         (B)   Permit fee: $213.00.
      (5)   Commercial rooftop or ground mount solar energy:
         (A)   Permit fee:
            (I)   0 - 50 Kilowatts: $355.00.
            (II)   50.01 - 250 Kilowatts: $355.00 for the first 50 Kilowatts
plus $1.07 for each additional Kilowatt or fraction thereof for a maximum fee
of $568.00.
            (III)   Over 250 Kilowatts: $568.00 for the first 250 Kilowatts
plus $1.42 for each additional Kilowatt or fraction thereof for a maximum fee
of $852.00.
         (B)   Plan Review Fee:
            (I)   0 - 50 Kilowatts: $332.00.
            (II)   50.01 - 250 Kilowatts: $332.00 for the first 50 Kilowatts
plus $1.66 for each additional Kilowatt or fraction thereof for a maximum fee
of $664.00.
            (III)   Over 250 Kilowatts: $664.00 for the first 250 Kilowatts
plus $2.91 for each additional Kilowatt or fraction thereof for a maximum fee
of $1,245.00.
      (6)   Commercial Solar Farms: Actual cost.
         (A)   Initial deposit: $3,910.00.
   (l)   Manufactured buildings or mobile homes: An intake processing fee, set
forth in §
16.0204(i)(1), shall be applied to each manufactured building or mobile home
permit fee.
      (1)   Mobile home site preparation (includes plan review and permit
inspection for septic system, electrical and water line installation): $468.00.
      (2)   Commercial coach installation (includes accessibility review):
$559.00.
      (3)   Foundation Systems:
         (A)   Permit fees:
            (I)   Earthquake Bracing Systems (ERBS) for State Approved Plans
(SPA): $264.00.
            (II)   Foundation plan with a SPA: $264.00.
            (III)   Foundation plan without SPA: $264.00.
         (B)   Plan review:
            (I)   Without a SPA: $272.00.
            (II)   All other with SPA: No Fee.
   (m)   Land use compliance: An intake processing fee, set forth in §
16.0204(i)(1), shall be applied to each land use compliance permit.
      (1)   Temporary structure permit:
         (A)   Initial application: $279.00.
         (B)   Annual renewal: $242.00.
         (C)   Temporary RV site/temporary office trailer: $242.00.
         (D)   Manufactured homes/commercial coaches: $559.00.
         (E)   Temporary sales lot: $370.00.
      (2)   Special use permit for dependent housing:
         (A)   Biennial renewal: $261.00.
      (3)   Document recordation fee: Actual Cost.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0205 Business Licenses.
   (a)   Business Licenses:
      (1)   Peddler and Solicitor:
         (A)   Application: $33.00.
         (B)   Initial License: $64.00.
         (C)   Annual Renewal: $94.00.
   (b)   Delinquency Penalty:
      (1)   Late Renewal Penalty: Up to 90 days after expiration, twenty-five
percent (25%) of the renewal fee in §
16.0205(a)(1).
         NOTE: If a license is renewed prior to expiration, then the annual
renewal fee shall be charged. If a license is renewed after expiration but
within 90 days of expiration, then the late renewal penalty shall be charged in
addition to the annual renewal fee. If more than 90 days has elapsed after
expiration, then a new license will be required.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0206 Clerk of the Board.
   (a)   San Bernardino County Code:
      (1)   Per copy of entire County Code by vendor: Actual cost.
      (2)   Electronic version of entire County Code by vendor: Actual cost.
      (3)   Supplements to the County Code by vendor: Actual cost.
   (b)   Assessment Appeals:
      (1)   Findings of Fact: actual cost for transcription services and County
Counsel or outside attorney preparation $500.00 initial deposit required.
      (2)   Appeals information, electronic version: Actual cost.
      (3)   Non-refundable administrative processing fee for filing.
Application for Changed Assessment: $45.00/application.
         NOTE: This fee must be waived if the Clerk of the Board determines,
based on information supplied by the applicant to the Clerk on a confidential
basis, that the applicant would qualify for an initial fee waiver as defined in
California Government Code §§ 68631 et al.
   (c)   Environmental Review Fees:
      (1)   Documentary handling fee for Notices of Determination: $50.00/
parcel.
      (2)   Documentary handling fee for Notices of Exemption: $50.00/parcel.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0207 Human Resources.
   (a)   Recruitment and Selection Services:
      (1)   Consultation, preparation and execution of recruitment for outside
agencies (includes all phases of the process, from development of announcement
through referral and interview of viable candidates): $95.92/hour.
      (2)   Conduct Written Examination:
         (A)   1 - 25 examinees (1 proctor): $242.42/exam.
         (B)   26 - 50 examinees (2 proctors): $424.23/exam.
         (C)   51 - 100 examinees (3 proctors): $606.05/exam.
      (3)   Referral from Existing List. For list up to 10 names - includes
identification and notification of eligibles: $118.42/each.
      (4)   Western Regional Item Bank (WRIB) Membership: $2,497.21/year.
   (b)   Classification and Compensation Services:
      (1)   Classification Study and Report (includes all phases of study, from
initial consultation and all necessary research and surveying through final
allocation decision and presentation): $124.70/hour.
   (c)   Employee Relations and Equal Employment Opportunity Services:
      (1)   Human Resources Consultation: $255.25/hour.
      (2)   Consultation on Equal Employment Plans: $145.09/hour.
      (3)   EEO/Employee Relations Complaint Investigation: $145.05/hour.
      (4)   Labor Relations Consultation: $240.18/hour.
   (d)   EMACS Services and Development:
      (1)   Functional Programming: $142.26/hour.
      (2)   Technical Programming: Actual cost.
   (e)   Conduct Bilingual Testing:
      (1)   Written or oral certification: $153.26/each.
      (2)   Written and oral certification: $245.91/both.
   NOTE: Except where a valid written agreement shall provide otherwise, the
above fees set forth in Subdivisions (a) through (e) apply to outside agencies.
   (f)   Employment Administration Services Fee: $15.15/applicant.
   (g)   Record Subpoena Fees (if County is not named in lawsuit):
      (1)   Original Record Delivery: $15.00/request.
      (2)   Document Research and Preparation: $24.00/hour.
      (3)   Additional costs from third parties: Actual cost.
      (4)   Copies, standard, 8 1/2 x 14 inches or less: $0.10/page.
      (5)   Copies, microfilm/fiche documents: $0.20/page.
      (6)   Copies, oversized document/special processing: Actual cost.
   (h)   Occupational Health Physical Examinations:
      (1)   Class I Physical: $472.46/each.
      (2)   Class II Physical: $381.59/each.
      (3)   Class III Physical: $307.14/each.
      (4)   Class IV Physical: $293.57each.
      (5)   Hazardous Material Physical: $383.76/each.
      (6)   Medical Surveillance Physical: $240.22/each.
      (7)   Driver's License Physical: $286.72/each.
      (8)   Flu Shot: $52.99/each.
      (9)   PPD (TB) Administration: $45.00/each.
      (10)   Hepatitis B Vaccination (Series of three injections): $342.91/
series.
      (11)   Return-to-Work On-Site Physical: $140.70/each.
      (12)   Fitness for Duty Evaluation: $1,474.40/each.
      (13)   Audiometry: $88.28/each.
      (14)   Rabies Vaccination (Series of three injections): $390.20/series.
      (15)   County Fire Haz Mat Physical: $811.37/each.
      (16)   Chest X-Ray: $44.44/each.
      (17)   Treadmill: $208.30/each.
      (18)   P 14 Lab: $72.24/each.
      (19)   CBC Diff: $69.39/each.
      (20)   Cholinesterase/RBC/Plasma: $72.03/each.
      (21)   Lead (Pb): $64.96/each.
      (22)   Mercury (Hg): $72.25/each.
      (23)   PT Lab: $57.54/each.
      (24)   ZPP Lab: $57.54/each.
      (25)   Honey Bee Venom Allergy Test: $64.92/each.
      (26)   Lipid Panel: $66.02/each.
      (27)   UA Dip: $57.54/each.
      (28)   Vision Snellen: $50.06/each.
      (29)   Vision Ortho Rater: $57.26/each.
      (30)   EKG: $148.47/each.
      (31)   Spirometry: $109.89/each.
      (32)   CA 125: $45.70/each.
      (33)   Immunological Fecal Occult Blood (IFOB): $47.85/each.
      (34)   Hep B Surface Antibody: $63.21/each.
      (35)   Medical Clearance for Fit Testing: $97.88/each.
      (36)   P & S Review: $164.84/each.
      (37)   PSA: $76.81/each.
      (38)   Referral for specialty testing: $134.24/each.
         (A)   Outside Provider Services: Actual cost.
      (39)   Urinalysis: $46.22/each.
      (40)   Work Status Update: $67.85/each.
      (41)   Fit for Duty Monitoring: $548.40/each.
      (42)   Off-work Disability/Work. Comp. Documentation Form: $44.82/
request.
      (43)   TB Verification: $37.80/each.
      (44)   Urine Drug Collection: $76.89/each.
      (45)   Clandestine/FBI Physical: $296.48/each.
      (46)   Rabies Vaccine Response Endpoint Titer: $384.50/each.
      (47)   Varicella Vaccine: $107.74/each.
      (48)   MMR Vaccine: $166.52/each.
      (49)   Tdap Vaccine: $124.45/each.
      (50)   Quantiferon Testing: $152.80/each.
      (51)   Varicella Titer: $70.18/each.
      (52)   MMR Titer: $103.28/each.
      (53)   Tdap Titer: $104.98each.
      (54)   Stress TTE Complete: $405.06/each.
      (55)   Urine Drug Screen: $111.50/each.
      (56)   D&L Isomer Testing: Actual Cost.
      (57)   ADA Evaluation: $447.38/each.
      (58)   Return-to-Work Off-Site Evaluation: $333.64/each.
      (59)   Alcohol Testing: Actual Cost.
      (60)   Alcohol Testing Confirmatory: Actual Cost.
      (61)   Immunization Verification: $33.61/each.
      (62)   Hepatitis A Titer: $68.43/each.
      (63)   Hepatitis A Vaccine (series of two injections): $183.64/series.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0207A Booking or Other Processing Services.
   A criminal justice administrative fee for booking or other processing in the
maximum amount of $102.42 is imposed. The fee is imposed upon a city, special
district, school district, community college district, college, or university
for each person arrested by an employee of that entity and brought to a County
detention facility or jail for booking or detention. For purposes of this
subsection, an "employee" shall include any person making an arrest on behalf
of an agency enumerated above, including those arrests made on behalf of an
agency contracting for law enforcement services with the County. The criminal
justice administrative fee shall apply to any arrest attributable to an above-
specified entity where an arrestee is brought to a County detention facility or
jail for booking or detention.
   The criminal justice administrative fee shall only apply to original or
"fresh" arrests, and shall not apply to holds placed, commitments, warrants,
remands, bail bond surrenders, en routes (temporary holds placed by agencies
transporting prisoners), temporary detention at a court facility where the
arrestee has been previously booked at a County detention facility, orders of
production, orders of return, rollups (inmates returning from work release), or
escapees from county, state or federal detention or corrections facilities. The
criminal justice administrative fee shall not be charged when multiple law
enforcement agencies participate in a particular arrest and one of the agencies
is the San Bernardino County Sheriff's Department not acting on behalf of a
contract law enforcement city, or when a formal task force, as defined by
Government Code § 29550(b)(8), has made the arrest, or where an arrest is made
during any riot, disturbance, or event that is subject to a declaration of
state of emergency by the Governor, or where such fee is otherwise prohibited
by law.
   The criminal justice administrative fee shall apply to all applicable
booking or other processing services rendered on or after July 1, 1990. The
County shall prepare and send invoices to each city, special district, school
district, community college district, college, or university, and said invoices
shall include the name of each arrestee for which an agency is billed and the
date(s) the services were provided. An invoice shall be due and payable 30 days
after the date of the invoice. Delinquent fees may be reimbursed through
offset, provided such offset is not prohibited by law.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0207B Photocopy Services.
   Unless a different fee is authorized in this County Code or by law, a fee of
$0.10 shall be charged for each black and white photocopy of each standard (8
1/2 x 11 inch) or legal (8 1/2 x 14 inch) sized page of a public document.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0207C Special Events Certificate of Insurance.
   Unless a different fee is authorized in this County Code or by law, a fee
for the actual cost shall be charged to purchase Special Event Liability
Insurance from the County's insurance broker, from a Special Event Liability
Insurance Program. The insurance passes the liability of approved events on
County premises to the named insured and includes the County as the additional
insured.
(Ord. 4483, passed - -2025)
§ 16.0207D Returned Check Fee.
   Unless a different fee is authorized in this County Code or by law, a fee of
$25.00 per item shall be charged for each negotiable item returned unpaid by
the drawn financial institution for any reason, including, but not limited to,
non-sufficient funds or closed accounts.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0208 Repealed.
§ 16.0208A County Counsel.
   (a)   County Counsel Attorney Services: $205.00/hour.
   (b)   County Counsel Paralegal Services: $74.00/hour.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0209 Electric Vehicle Charging Station User Fees.
   (a)   Electric vehicle charging station user fees shall consist of a charge
of $0.37/kWh plus vendor operator fees at actual cost as stated in §
16.0209(c).
   (b)   The maximum an electric vehicle may charge at an electric vehicle
charging station shall be four (4) hours per use. The fee for charging over the
4-hour maximum charge time shall be $0.20/minute with a maximum overstay fee of
$48. There shall be a 10-minute grace period after the 4-hour maximum charging
time is reached before these fees are incurred. Any overstay fee shall be in
addition to the total charging service user fee identified in §
16.0209(a).
   (c)   The electric vehicle charging station user fee shall be for the actual
cost to the County associated with the management, operation, and maintenance
of electric vehicle charging stations, and the vendor operator fee charged to
the County for electric vehicle charging stations owned by or under the
jurisdiction of the County. The electric vehicle charging station user fees
shall be comprised of a charge station user fee plus all vendor operator fees.
   (d)   The Director of the San Bernardino County Project and Facilities
Management Department, or his or her designee, in consultation with the Chief
Executive Officer, shall adjust as necessary, the amount for charge station
user fees based upon the actual cost of electricity for each parking facility,
but such charge station user fee shall not exceed a 25% increase of the charge
station user fee identified in §
16.0209(a) above.
(Ord. 4446, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470,
passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483, passed - -2025)
§ 16.0210 Community Development and Housing.
   (a)   Demand Fee for beneficiary statement or payoff demand statement:
$30.00.
   (b)   Reconveyance Fee: $45.00.
      (1)   Document Recording Fee: Actual cost.
   (c)   Subordination Fee:
      (1)   Multi Family Loans: Actual Cost.
   (d)   Assignment & Assumption Fee: Actual Cost.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0210A Economic Development—Filming Permit Processing Fees.
   (a)   Film Permit (Motion, Still, and Student): $258.00/permit.
   (b)   Minor Rider - additions, corrections or alterations to permits:
$69.00/permit.
   (c)   Major Rider - additions, corrections or alterations to permits which
involves collecting fees on behalf of other departments: $94.00/permit.
   (d)   Location Site Monitoring: $33.75/hour.
   NOTE: Clearance of payment is required prior to issuance of permit.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0211B Repealed.
§ 16.0212 Repealed.
§ 16.0213 Repealed.
§ 16.0213A Health Services.
   (a)   Administration:
      (1)   Vital statistics (per state law): Per state law.
         (A)   Children's Trust Fund Certified Birth Certificate Fee: $4.00.
      (2)   After hours death registration: $50.00.
      (3)   Letter of Non-Contagious Disease: $10.00.
      (4)   Refile permit for the disposition of human remains: $2.50.
      (5)   Research and analysis: $77.00/hour.
      (6)   Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) Medical office visit
nominal fee: $25.00.
      (7)   Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) Dental office visit
nominal fee: $40.00.
   (b)   Animals:
      (1)   Animal handling:
         (A)   Owner redemption fee for pick-up/handling of dog or cat (does
not include shelter and license fees):
            (I)   During normal operating hours: $40.00.
            (II)   Picked up between 6:00 p.m. & 7:00 a.m.: $85.00.
         (B)   Pick-up, euthanasia, and disposal of owned dog or cat during
normal operating hours:
(owner requested): $85.00.
         (C)   Apprehension Fine/Penalty (leash law areas only):
            (I)   Loose animal violation:
               (i)   Fine/Penalty for first violation: $50.00.
               (ii)   Fine/Penalty for second violation: $100.00.
               (iii)   Fine/Penalty for third and each subsequent violation:
$250.00.
         (D)   Trap rentals, per day: $4.00.
         (E)   Animal pick-up: (See §
32.0102).
            (I)   Animal pick-up during normal operating hours: horses, cattle,
goats, calves, sheep, and pigs (1 hour minimum): $100.00/hour.
            (II)   Animal picked-up after hours, between 6:00 p.m. & 7:00 a.m.
(1 hour minimum): $125.00/hour.
         (F)   Animal investigations:
            (I)   Investigation time: $100.00/hour.
            (II)   Vicious animal compliance inspection: $100.00/inspection.
         (G)   Quarantine of animals (other than at shelter):
            (I)   At owner's home: $100.00.
            (II)   Quarantine break: $100.00.
         (H)   Owner relinquishment of dog, cat, or other animal:
            (I)   Relinquish in field:
               (i)   With proof of ownership: $95.00.
               (ii)   Without proof of ownership: $140.00.
            (II)   Relinquish in shelter:
               (i)   With proof of ownership: $60.00.
               (ii)   Without proof of ownership: $105.00.
         (I)   Develop a customized record or report: $90.00/hour.
         (J)   Digital photographs on disc (CD):
            (I)   Digital images up to 10 images: $25.00.
            (II)   Each additional digital image over 10: $5.00.
      (2)   Animal licensing:
         (A)   Dog license fees:
            (I)   Unspayed/unneutered annual fee: $120.00.
            (II)   Spayed/neutered annual fee: $36.00.
            (III)   Spayed/neutered - owned by veterans or disabled persons or
those 65 years of age or older (annual): $24.00.
            (IV)   Delinquent Fine/Penalty (waived if licensed within 30 days
from time of notice) (does not include annual fee): $25.00.
            (V)   Medically determined annual fee: $30.00. (Animal is at high
risk for spay/neuter surgery)
         (B)   New owner registration of currently licensed/registered animal:
$5.00.
         (C)   Replacement dog tag: $5.00.
         (D)   Registration of dog currently licensed/registered in another
jurisdiction and issuance of County tag: $5.00.
      (3)   Animal sheltering:
         (A)   Impound fee:
            (I)   Initial Impoundment: $50.00.
            (II)   Daily (after initial impoundment): $15.00.
         (B)   State-mandated unaltered animal fine (Per California Food and
Agriculture Code §§ 30804.7 and 31751.7):
            (I)   First violation: $35.00.
            (II)   Second violation: $50.00.
            (III)   Third violation: $100.00.
         (C)   Euthanasia and disposal fee:
            (I)   Dogs: $50.00.
            (II)   Cats: $45.00.
         (D)   Dead animal disposal: $15.00.
         (E)   Spay/Neuter fee:
            (I)   Dog (over 2 months): No Cost.
            (II)   Cat (over 2 months): No Cost.
         (F)   Spay/Neuter deposit (refundable if animal is altered within 30
days of redemption):
            (I)   Dog (over 2 months): $55.00.
            (II)   Cat (over 2 months): $40.00.
         (G)   Adoption fee:
            (I)   Dog: $20.00.
            (II)   Cat: $10.00.
            (III)   Puppy (under 4 months)   $20.00.
            (IV)   Kitten (under 4 months)   $10.00.
         NOTE: Pursuant to CA Food & Agriculture Code §§ 30505 and 31751.4,
persons with a current and valid driver's license or identification card with
the word "Veteran" printed on its face will be exempt from paying one adoption
fee every six months. Persons 65 or older are also exempt from paying one
adoption fee a year, as set forth in §
16.0213A(b)(3)(G)(I-IV).
         (H)   Adoption fee (minimum bid) - horses: $50.00.
         (I)   Adoption fee (minimum bid) - donkeys: $50.00.
         (J)   Adoption fee (minimum bid) - pigs: $20.00.
         (K)   Adoption fee (minimum bid) - sheep: $20.00.
         (L)   Adoption fee (minimum bid) - goats: $20.00.
         (M)   Adoption fee - rabbits: $5.00.
         (N)   Adoption fee - chickens and other fowl: $5.00.
         (O)   Adoption fee - reptiles, exotic birds & other: 50% of retail
price.
         (P)   Microchip fee: $20.00.
         (Q)   Vaccination fees:
            (I)   Dogs - 5 in 1: No Cost.
            (II)   Cats - 4 in 1: No Cost.
      (4)   Kennel license:
         (A)   5 - 30 dogs: $260.00/year.
         (B)   31 - 60 dogs: $315.00/year.
         (C)   61 - 100 dogs: $370.00/year.
         (D)   101 - 150 dogs: $425.00/year.
         (E)   For each successive range of 50 dogs, add: $60.00/year.
      (5)   Cattery License:
         (A)   5 - 30 cats: $195.00/year.
         (B)   31 - 60 cats: $315.00/year.
         (C)   For each successive range of 10 cats, add: $20.00/year.
      (6)   Calf growers permit fees:
         (A)   10 - 2,500 calves: $190.00/year.
         (B)   2,501 - 5,000 calves: $295.00/year.
         (C)   5,001 - 10,000 calves: $505.00/year.
         (D)   Over 10,000 calves: $715.00/year.
      (7)   Privately owned wild, exotic or non-domestic animals permit fee:
$260.00/year.
      (8)   Game bird farm permit fee: $115.00/year.
      (9)   Pet grooming parlor permit fee: $255.00/year.
      (10)   Pet shop permit fee: $240.00/year.
      (11)   Petting zoo permit fee: $265.00/year.
      (12)   Public aquarium permit fee: $115.00/year.
      (13)   Animal menagerie permit fee: $280.00/year.
      (14)   Miscellaneous animal auction/swap meet permit fee: $115.00/year.
      (15)   Hog ranch permit fee:
         (A)   10 to 2,500 hogs: $280.00/year.
         (B)   2,501 to 5,000 hogs: $485.00/year.
         (C)   5,001 to 10,000 hogs: $860.00/year.
         (D)   Over 10,000 hogs: $970.00/year.
      (16)   PVS Application fee: $170.00.
   (c)   Professional services: See Fee Schedule for the Department of Public
Health which is maintained in the Office of the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors and reflects fees for professional services established by the
Public Health Director in accordance with statutory requirements, actual costs
of providing the services, and/or prevailing rates. The fees are periodically
adjusted based on inflation and other criteria commonly used in standard
accounting practices.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0213B Health Services—Environmental.
   (a)   Administrative Services Fees:
      (1)   Delinquency provisions*:
         (A)   Thirty days after permit expiration, 25 percent shall be added
to each of the fees in §§ 16.0213B(b)(1) through (13), (15) through (16);
16.0213B(c)(1) through (2); 16.0213B(d)(1); 16.0213B(f)(1) through (3), (5)
through (8); 16.0213B(g)(1) through (2), (3)(A); 16.0213B(h)(1) through (4);
and 16.0213B(i)(1) and (2)(B).
            *The Delinquency provision may be waived at Department of Public
Health Director's discretion.
      (2)   Professional service fees (includes all subsequently listed hourly
rate fees): $245.00/hour.
         NOTE: Fee will be applied to those services the costs of which are not
recovered by other permit fees.
   (b)   Food/Recreational Health Program Fee:
      (1)   Public eating place (seating or customer capacity):
         (A)   0 - 24: $622.00/year.
         (B)   25 - 99: $731.00/year.
         (C)   100 - and up: $841.00/year.
         NOTE: In computing drive-in restaurant seating capacity, each parking
space shall be calculated as equivalent to a seating capacity of two persons.
      (2)   Special seasonal (seasonal operation totaling no more than 6
consecutive months per year only applies to a facility under §§ 16.0213B(b)(1),
16.0213B(b)(4), 16.0213B(b)(5)(B-D), and 16.0213B(b)(12)(A) through (C)): 50%
of permit fee.
      (3)   Schools:
         (A)   Pre-packaged food: $495.00/year.
         (B)   Limited food preparation: $533.00/year.
         (C)   Full service food preparation: $628.00/year.
         (D)   Distributor: $586.00/year.
         (E)   Wholesale processor 0 - 3,499 sq. ft.: $552.00/year.
         (F)   Wholesale processor 3,500 sq. ft. and up: $675.00/year.
      (4)   Convenience stores:
         (A)   (I)   0 - 499 sq. ft.: $521.00/year.
            (II)   500 - 2,499 sq. ft.: $590.00/year.
            (III)   2,500 sq. ft. and up: $643.00/year.
      (5)   Food handling places, wholesale, grocery, vegetable, meat markets,
and micro markets:
         (A)   Prepackaged Facility:
            (I)   0 - 499 sq. ft.: $348.00/year.
            (II)   500 - 2,499 sq. ft.: $383.00/year.
            (III)   2,500 sq. ft. and up: $468.00/year.
         (B)   Food processor/wholesale:
            (I)   0 - 3,499 sq. ft.: $666.00/year.
            (II)   3,500 - 49,999 sq. ft.: $792.00/year.
            (III)   50,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,060.00/year.
         (C)   Food distributors/wholesale:
            (I)   0 - 1,499 sq. ft.: $408.00/year.
            (II)   1,500 - 49,999 sq. ft.: $432.00/year.
            (III)   50,000 sq. ft. and up: $462.00/year.
         (D)   Food salvager wholesale: $643.00/year.
         NOTE: §§ 16.0213B(b)(1) through (5), and (16): Total square footage to
include the entire operation including, but not limited to, storage rooms,
display areas, toilets and dressing rooms, and any other space required by law
for operation of the facility.
         (E)   Satellite food distribution: $468.00/year.
         (F)   Limited charitable feeding registration: $213.00/year.
      (6)   Cottage food operations:
         (A)   Class A registration: $214.00/year.
         (B)   Class B health permit: $291.00/year.
      (7)   Mobile food facility: compact mobile food operation (CMFO).
         (A)   Low risk cart/CMFO: $259.00/year.
         (B)   Medium risk cart/CMFO: $391.00/year.
      (8)   Mobile food facility: vehicle.
         (A)   Low risk: $282.00/year.
         (B)   Medium risk: $537.00/year
         (C)   High risk: $827.00/year
      (9)   Each vending machine: $33.00/year
      (10)   Temporary food facility:
         (A)   Packaged food handling only:
            (I)   Single Event Up to 6 Months: $155.00.
            (II)   Annual permit: $394.00/year.
         (B)   Food preparation:
            (I)   Single Event Up to 6 Months: $217.00.
            (II)   Annual permit: $534.00/year.
         (C)   Event organizer permit: $361.00.
         (D)   If inspection and permitting of facility under §§ 16.0213B(b)
(10)(A)(I) through (C) are requested at event or less than 48 hours prior to
event for temporary food facility vendor, or less than 2 weeks for event
organizer: add $127.00.
      (11)   Certified farmer's market, annual event organizer, or host
facility: $619.00/year.
      (12)   Snack bar:
         (A)   Prepackaged food: $196.00.
         (B)   Limited food preparation: $231.00.
         (C)   Food preparation: $267.00.
      NOTE: The Director of Public Health is authorized to waive fees related
to temporary food facilities, snack bars, and charitable feeding organizations,
including food banks and soup kitchens for governmental agencies, and non-
profit charitable organizations as defined in the California Retail Food Code,
as set forth in §§ 16.0213B(b)(1)(A), 16.0213B(b)(1)(B), 16.0213B(b)(1)(C),
16.0213B(b)(5)(A)(I), 16.0213B(b)(5)(A)(II), 16.0213B(b)(5)(A)(III), 16.0213B
(b)(5)(B)(I), 16.0213B(b)(5)(B)(II), 16.0213B(b)(5)(B)(III), 16.0213B(b)(5)(C)
(I), 16.0213B(b)(5)(C)(II), 16.0213B(b)(5)(C)(III), 16.0213B(b)(5)(D), 16.0213B
(b)(5)(F), 16.0213B(b)(10)(A)(I), 16.0213B(b)(10)(A)(II), 16.0213B(b)(10)(B)
(I), 16.0213B(b)(10)(B)(II) 16.023B(b)(10)(C), 16.0231B(b)(10)(D), 16.0213B(b)
(12)(A), 16.0213B(b)(12)(B), and 16.0213B(b)(12)(C)
      (13)   Mobile support units: $328.00/year.
      (14)   Food worker certificate: $22.00 each.
      (15)   Soft serve:
         (A)   First machine on premises: $395.00/year.
         (B)   Each additional machine on premises: $70.00/year.
      NOTE: These fees are in addition to fees prescribed by the California
Department of Food & Agriculture. Fees pertaining to Section (15) may be
prorated on a quarterly basis, when applied to a newly established business
and/or a change of ownership.
      (16)   Food Recovery:
         (A)   Food Recovery Organizations & Services: $235.00.
         (B)   Tier 1 & Tier 2 Generators: $278.00.
      (17)   Swimming pools and recreational waters:
         (A)   Each public swimming pool, spa, or spray ground:
            (I)   Initial body of water: $546.00/year.
            (II)   Each additional body of water: $484.00/year.
         (B)   Drained public pool or spa: $267.00/year.
         (C)   Each public water slide or access devices: $320.00/year.
         (D)   Each natural/artificial bathing place and swimming lagoon:
$661.00/year.
         (E)   Public school pools: Exempt.
      (18)   Plan check and form review fees:
         (A)   Public eating establishments or school food preparation, new:
            (I)   0 - 1,499 sq. ft.: $1,534.00.
            (II)   1,500 - 5,999 sq. ft.: $1,739.00.
            (III)   6,000 sq. ft. - and up: $1,845.00.
         (B)   Convenience store, prepackaged, satellite food distribution, or
school cafeteria prepackaged food, new:
            (I)   0 - 2,499 sq. ft.: $1,273.00.
            (II)   2,500 - 19,999 sq. ft.: $1,431.00.
            (III)   20,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,508.00.
         (C)   Major remodel:
            (I)   Public eating facility or school cafeteria, food preparation:
               (i)   0 - 1,499 sq. ft.: $1,358.00.
               (ii)   1,500 - 5,999 sq. ft.: $1,530.00.
               (iii)   6,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,683.00.
            (II)   Convenience store, prepackaged, satellite food distribution,
or school cafeteria prepackaged food:
               (i)   0 - 2,499 sq. ft.: $1,233.00.
               (ii)   2,500 - 19,999 sq. ft.: $1,380.00.
               (iii)   20,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,456.00.
         (D)   Minor remodel:
            (I)   Public eating facility or school cafeteria, food preparation:
               (i)   0 - 1,499 sq. ft.: $1,144.00.
               (ii)   1,500 - 5,999 sq. ft.: $1,276.00.
               (iii)   6,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,360.00.
            (II)   Convenience store, prepackaged, satellite food distribution,
or school cafeteria prepackaged food:
               (i)   0 - 2,499 sq. ft.: $1,068.00.
               (ii)   2,500 - 19,999 sq. ft.: $1,182.00.
               (iii)   20,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,257.00.
         (E)   Changes to approved set of plans:
            (I)   Public eating facility or school cafeteria, food preparation:
               (i)   0 - 1,499 sq. ft.: $885.00.
               (ii)   1,500 - 5,999 sq. ft.: $961.00.
               (iii)   6,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,002.00.
            (II)   Convenience store, prepackaged, satellite food distribution,
or school cafeteria prepackaged food:
               (i)   0 - 2,499 sq. ft.: $792.00.
               (ii)   2,500 - 19,999 sq. ft.: $870.00.
               (iii)   20,000 sq. ft. and up: $902.00.
         (F)   Wholesale food distributor and salvagers, new:
            (I)   0 - 9,999 sq. ft.: $931.00.
            (II)   10,000 - 99,999 sq. ft.: $1,077.00.
            (III)   100,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,150.00.
         (G)   Wholesale food processors, new:
            (I)   0 - 9,999 sq. ft.: $1,053.00.
            (II)   10,000 - 99,999 sq. ft.: $1,223.00.
            (III)   100,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,312.00.
         (H)   Remodel existing permitted wholesale facility:
            (I)   Wholesale food distributor and salvagers:
               (i)   0 - 9,999 sq. ft.: $758.00.
               (ii)   10,000 - 99,999 sq. ft.: $876.00.
               (iii)   100,000 sq. ft. and up: $938.00.
            (II)   Wholesale food processors:
               (i)   0 - 9,999 sq. ft.: $845.00.
               (ii)   10,000 - 99,999 sq. ft.: $977.00.
               (iii)   100,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,042.00.
         (I)   Mobile support units:
            (I)   Plan Check New: $849.00.
            (II)   Plan Check Remodel: $806.00.
         (J)   Mobile food facility:
            (I)   Mobile food facility - low risk:
               (i)   New: $815.00.
               (ii)   Remodel: $754.00.
            (II)   Mobile food facility - medium risk:
               (i)   New: $901.00.
               (ii)   Remodel: $849.00.
            (III)   Mobile food facility - high risk:
               (i)   New: $928.00.
               (ii)   Remodel: $873.00.
         (K)   Swimming pools, spas, or spray ground:
            (I)   New 0 - 999 sq. ft.: $1,571.00.
            (II)   New 1,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,879.00.
            (III)   New water slides, access devices, swimming lagoons, and
artificial & natural bathing places: $2,047.00.
            (IV)   Major remodels:
               (i)   0 - 999 sq. ft.: $1,157.00.
               (ii)   1,000 sq. ft. and up: $1,369.00.
               (iii)   Water slides, access devices, swimming lagoons, and
artificial & natural bathing places: $1,878.00.
            (V)   Resurfacing and minor remodels: $637.00.
         (L)   Plan check and form review fees for §§ 16.0213B(b)(18)(A)
through (B), 16.0213B(b)(18)(F) through (G), 16.0213B(b)(18)(I)(I), 16.0213B(b)
(18)(J)(I)(i), 16.0213B(b)(18)(J)(II)(i), 16.0213B(b)(18)(J)(III)(i), and
16.0213B(b)(18)(K)(I-III) that are submitted electronically 95% of permit fee.
   (c)   Vector Control Program Fees:
      (1)   Riding academies: $255.00/year.
      (2)   Poultry ranch fees:
         (A)   Annual permit (all): $196.00/year plus fee for poultry
population.
         (B)   Poultry ranch (valley area only) poultry population fee: $19.00/
year per 1,000 birds.
         (C)   Poultry ranch San Bernardino County desert area: $6.00/year per
1,000 birds.
         (D)   Poultry ranch environmental houses poultry population fee:
$1.00/year per 1,000 birds.
         (E)   Green pool abatement: $266.00 plus hourly rate as specified in §
16.0213B(a)(2) for each additional hour over two hours.
         (F)   Underground water source: $345.00/year.
   (d)   Hazardous Waste/Toxics Control:
      (1)   Medical wastes:
         (A)   Large quantity generators:
            (I)   Hospitals:
               (i)   1 - 199 beds: $1,022.00/year.
               (ii)   200 - 250 beds: $1,522.00/year.
               (iii)   251 and up: $2,197.00/year.
                  Large quantity generators that treat medical wastes on-site
shall be required to obtain an additional permit as follows:
               (iv)   Hospital and skilled nursing facilities: $577.00/year.
            (II)   Skilled nursing facilities:
               (i)   1 - 199 beds: $450.00/year.
               (ii)   200 and up: $700.00/year.
            (III)   Dialysis clinics: $423.00/year.
            (IV)   Surgical clinics: $449.00/year.
            (V)   Community clinics: $334.00/year.
            (VI)   Psychiatric hospitals: $727.00/year.
            (VII)   Blood banks: $444.00/year.
            (VIII)   Laboratories: $633.00/year.
            (IX)   Family planning OPS clinics: $362.00/year.
            (X)   Health care services planning facility: $560.00/year.
            (XI)   Veterinary clinics/hospitals: $378.00/year.
            (XII)   Large quantity generator medical office: $416.00/year.
            (XIII)   Large quantity generators §§ 16.0213B(d)(1)(A) (III)
through (XIII) that treat medical wastes on-site shall be required to obtain an
additional permit as follows:$454.00/year.
         (B)   Small quantity generators:
            (I)   Small quantity medical waste: $168.00/year.
            (II)   Waste treatment on-site: $180.00/year.
            (III)   Common storage facility:
               (i)   1 generator and up: $653.00/year.
   (e)   Project Development Review Fees:
      (1)   Temporary special event application review and processing:
         (A)   Event (initial): $282.00.
         (B)   Event (renewal): $246.00.
      (2)   Planned development: $829.00.
      (3)   Conditional use permits: revision to approved action: $611.00.
      (4)   Tentative tract review: CUP/MUP/TUP: $976.00.
      (5)   Minor subdivision/tentative parcel map: $319.00.
      (6)   Application accepted and applicant voluntarily withdraws the
application during processing, the following will apply, except that portion
collected as a processing fee for which there will be no refund:
         (A)   Application accepted and referrals sent: 90% of Fee.
         (B)   Referral response period completed: 60% of Fee.
         (C)   Initial staff review or development review committee process has
been completed: 40% of Fee.
         (D)   Staff report prepared and notices of hearing sent or conditions
of approval prepared: 20% of Fee.
         (E)   Planning Commission consideration begun or staff/environmental
analysis action completed: No Refund.
   (f)   Water/Waste Water Program Fees:
      (1)   Wells:
         (A)   Well construction:
            (I)   Agricultural: $603.00.
            (II)   Community water supply and industrial: $772.00.
            (III)   Individual: $501.00.
            (IV)   Test/exploration/industrial/monitor/cathodic/boring:
$400.00.
            (V)   Geothermal: $949.00.
         (B)   Well destruction/reconstruction/modification: $366.00.
      (2)   Annual surveillance fees:
         (A)   State small system: $968.00/year.
         (B)   Non-community system:
            (I)   Surface water/ground Water under the influence of surface
water: $1,795.00/year.
            (II)   Transient
               (i)   Single well Tier 1: $1,185.00/year.
               (ii)   Single well Tier 2: $1,196.00/year.
            (III)   Non-transient: $1,510.00/year.
         (C)   Community system: $2,276.00/year.
      (3)   Well driller registration (renewable January 1): $65.00/year.
      (4)   Backflow prevention device tester certification:
         (A)   Competency examination: $245.00.
         (B)   General certification: $153.00.
      (5)   Liquid waste hauling and disposal:
         (A)   Each vehicle: $228.00/year.
         (B)   Application review: $733.00.
      (6)   Sewage disposal permits:
         (A)   Sewage holding tank operating permit: $143.00/year.
         (B)   Sewage holding application review: $344.00.
         (C)   Alternative treatment system: $176.00/year.
      (7)   Plan check form review fees:
         (A)   Sewage plans, reports, and permits:
            (I)   Plot plan: $241.00.
            (II)   Single family dwelling percolation test report review:
$448.00.
            (III)   Commercial development percolation test report review:
$514.00/system.
            (IV)   Subdivision percolation test report review:
               (i)   Minor subdivision: $453.00.
               (ii)   Tract: $453.00/5 lots.
                  (a)   Plus $196.00 each additional lot.
            (V)   Alternative/experimental sewage disposal system review:
$866.00.
            (VI)   Resubmittal-Perc report review (single family, commercial,
minor subdivision): $235.00.
            (VII)   Release from project conditional review: $175.00.
            (VIII)   Out of sequence well numbering: $384.00.
         (B)   Water plans well certification letter: $265.00.
      (8)   Designated maintenance areas Individual system permit fees
(biennial): $107.00.
   (g)   Housing Program Fees:
      (1)   Organized camps and boarding schools:
         (A)   0 - 99 camp capacity: $457.00/year.
         (B)   100 - 249 camp capacity: $523.00/year.
         (C)   250 camp capacity and up: $669.00/year.
         (D)   Camp public eating place: $592.00/year.
      (2)   Massage clinics: $362.00/year.
      (3)   Apartment, hotel, motel and rental dwelling unit regulations:
         (A)   Annual health permit:
            (I)   Hotels, motels and resort:
               (i)   1 - 40 units: $405.00/year.
               (ii)   41 - 80 units: $476.00/year.
               (iii)   81 units and up: $593.00/year.
            (II)   Apartment dwellings:
               (i)   1 - 4 units: $429.00/year.
               (ii)   5 - 20 units: $434.00/year.
               (iii)   21 - 59 units: $438.00/year.
               (iv)   60 units and up: $461.00/year.
            (III)   Bed and breakfast: $405.00/year.
         (B)   Certificate of use:
            (I)   Transfer or change in ownership: $230.00.
      (4)   Detention facility: $370.00.
      (5)   Rehabilitation:
         (A)   Annual case maintenance and inspection: $369.00/year.
         (B)   Case establishment (initial year): $802.00.
   (h)   Body Art:
      (1)   Facility: $458.00/year.
      (2)   Annual county registration - initial: $165.00.
      (3)   Annual county registration - renewal: $140.00.
      (4)   Mobile trucks: $367.00/year.
      (5)   Temporary facility: $166.00.
      (6)   Event organizer fee: $217.00.
      (7)   Facility transfer of ownership: $227.00.
      (8)   Plan check:
         (A)   Facility:
            (I)   New: $575.00.
            (II)   Remodel: $484.00.
         (B)   Mobile unit:
            (I)   New: $602.00.
            (II)   Remodel: $570.00.
   (i)   Local Enforcement Agency For Solid Waste Management Fees:
      (1)   Refuse collection and hauling:
         (A)   Health and safety:
            (I)   Vehicles: $99.00/year/vehicle.
            (II)   Roll-off refuse bins (20 cubic yards or more): $32.00/year/
bin.
      (2)   Solid waste facilities/operations:
         (A)   Permit application fees (new and revised applications requiring
CalRecycle concurrence):
            (I)   Full or standardized permit tier/permit revision/
modification: $4,500.00 minimum plus hourly rate as specified in § 16.0213B(a)
(2) for each additional hour over 30 hours.
            (II)   Standardized permit tier for non-hazardous petroleum
contaminated soil deposit facilities: $4,500.00 minimum plus hourly rate as
specified in § 16.0213B(a)(2) for each additional hour over 30 hours.
            (III)   Registration permit tier: $2,298.00minimum plus hourly rate
as specified in § 16.0213B(a)(2) for each additional hour over 15 hours.
            (IV)   Notification permit tier: $1,012.00 minimum plus hourly rate
as specified in § 16.0213B(a)(2) for each additional hour over 5 hours.
            (V)   Notification permit tier for non-hazardous petroleum
contaminated soil transfer/processing operations: $1,012.00 minimum plus hourly
rate as specified in § 16.0213B(a)(2) for each additional hour over 4 hours.
            (VI)   Request for exemption (from a full solid waste facilities
permit): $3,287.00 minimum plus hourly rate as specified in § 16.0213B(a)(2)
for each additional hour over 20 hours.
            (VII)   Special evaluation projects: $2,298.00 minimum plus hourly
rate as specified in § 16.0213B(a)(2) for each additional hour over 15 hours.
            (VIII)   Site closure plan final: $8,085.00 minimum plus hourly
rate as specified in § 16.0213B(a)(2) for each additional hour over 50 hours.
            (IX)   Preparation of permit review reports (PRR) (where required
for facilities and operations): $3,767.00 minimum plus hourly rate as specified
in § 16.0213B(a)(2) for each additional hour over 30 hours.
            (X)   Facilities/operations permit amendments/5 year permit review
for registration and standardized permit/preliminary site closure plan:
$2,298.00 minimum plus hourly rate as specified in § 16.0213B(a)(2) for each
additional hour over 15 hours.
         (B)   Annual regulatory inspection fees:
            (I)   Full solid waste facilities (per maximum permitted capacity):
               (i)   0 to 499 tons daily: $24,058.00.
               (ii)   500 to 5,999 tons daily: $38,553.00.
               (iii)   6,000 tons daily and up: $45,760.00.
            (II)   Transfer stations/material recovery facilities (MRFs)/medium
and large volume transfer/processing facilities (per maximum permitted
capacity):
               (i)   12 to 99 tons daily: $16,260.00.
               (ii)   100 to 4,999 tons daily: $21,113.00.
               (iii)   5,000 tons daily and up: $40,258.00.
            (III)   Full, standardized, or registration permit tier for waste
processing: $23,813.00.
            (IV)   Standardized permit tier for non-hazardous petroleum
contaminated soil disposal facilities: $37,091.00.
            (V)   Notification permit tier for transfer operations: $6,765.00.
            (VI)   Notification permit tier for non-hazardous petroleum
contaminated soil transfer/processing operations: $6,765.00.
            (VII)   Cogeneration and waste-to-energy facilities: $5,168.00.
            (VIII)   Closed/inactive/exempt (qualifying unclassified sites)
disposal facilities:
               (i)   Without control systems (4 inspections): $7,407.00.
               (ii)   Without control systems (biennial inspections):
$1,145.00.
               (iii)   Without control systems (1 inspection): $2,189.00.
               (iv)   Without control systems (2 inspections): $3,295.00.
               (v)   With control systems (12 inspections): $9,007.00.
               (vi)   With control systems (4 inspections): $5,208.00.
            (IX)   CDI transfer/processing/inert debris type A/nonhazardous ash
disposal/monofill facilities (all)/contaminated soil disposal facilities (all):
$11,214.00.
            (X)   Compostable materials handling: $15,476.00.
            (XI)   Engineered municipal solid waste conversion facility/in
vessel digestion facility: $18,927.00.
            (XII)   Enforcement Agency Notification (EAN) permit tier for
Chipping and Grinding Operations, Research Composting Operations, Green
Material Composting Operations, Biosolids Composting Operations at POTWs,
Agricultural Materials Composting Operations, In-Vessel Digestion Operations:
$13,673.00.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0214 Repealed.
§ 16.0215 Repealed.
§ 16.0215A Land Use Services Department—Development Review—Planning.
   All fees fixed by this section are for each identified process; additional
fees shall be for each required additional process.
   (a)   Agricultural Preserve and Land Conservation Contracts:
      (1)   (A)   Establish, disestablish or reduce an agricultural preserve
including a General Plan Amendment and establish or cancel a land conservation
contract: Actual Cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $7,724.00.
      (2)   (A)   Establish or cancel a land conservation contract within an
existing agricultural preserve: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $3,218.00.
      (3)   Non-renewal of a land conservation contract: $876.00.
   (b)   Certificate of Compliance:
      (1)   For property subdivided after March 4, 1972: $2,928.00.
      NOTE: See §
16.0215B(l)(1) for property subdivided before March 4, 1972.
      (2)   (A)   Subdivisions of 5 or more lots: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $6,436.00.
   (c)   Development Code Amendment - Applicant:
      (1)   Initiated: Actual cost.
      (2)   Initial deposit: $4,023.00.
   (d)   Environmental Review:
      (1)   (A)   Environmental impact report and related documents
(coordination, preparation, and processing): Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $16,200.00.
      (2)   (A)   Environmental review (non-land use application): Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $3,348.00.
      (3)   (A)   Environmental review (for exemptions): $280.00.
      (4)   (A)   Mitigation monitoring: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $3,510.00.
   (e)   Annual Mine Inspection and Report:
      (1)   (A)   Less than 50 acres disturbed: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $4,228.00.
      (2)   (A)   50 acres or more disturbed: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $5,500.00.
         NOTE: Fifty percent of the initial deposit is due on a date to be
determined by the Department. The remaining 50% of the initial deposit is due
on a date to be determined by the Department.
   (f)   Policy Plan Amendment/Specific Plan Amendment:
      (1)   (A)   Amendment to text or maps: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $10,800.00.
   (g)   Planned Development:
      (1)   (A)   Preliminary development plan: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $14,555.00.
      (2)   (A)   Final development plan: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $14,555.00.
   (h)   Development Project Review:
      (1)   (A)   Mining and land reclamation plan: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $11,610.00.
      (2)   (A)   Interim Management Plan: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $1,999.00.
      (3)   (A)   Conditional Use Permit: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $15,249.00.
      (4)   (A)   Minor Use Permit: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $7,797.00.
      (5)   Kaiser Center Specific Plan Site Development Review: Same as
Subsections (3) and (4) above depending on application's qualification for a
Minor Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit.
      (6)   Site Plan Review: $3,421.00.
      (7)   Adult Business Regulatory Permit: $2,928.00.
      NOTE: This permit fee is in addition to any other fees that may be
required by the Development Code.
      (8)   (A)   Glen Helen Specific Plan Special Use Permit for Interim use
operation: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $7,220.00.
      (9)   Speedway Commerce Center II Specific Plan Precise Development Plan
Review: Same as Subsection (j)(5) below depending on application's
qualification for a Minor or Major Revision to Approved Action.
      (10)   Bloomington Business Park Specific Plan Development Plan Review:
Same as Subsection (4) above depending on application's qualification for a
Minor Use Permit.
   (i)   Subdivision:
      (1)   Lot line adjustment: $2,683.00.
      (2)   (A)   Minor subdivision/tentative parcel map: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $9,784.00.
      (3)   (A)   Reversion to acreage: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $7,797.00.
      (4)   (A)   Tentative tract: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $15,249.00.
      (5)   (A)   Vesting tentative map: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $16,092.00.
      (6)   Lot merger: $1,615.00.
      NOTE: This fee is in addition to any fees charged by the Department of
Public Works under §
16.0215B(m).
   (j)   Other:
      (1)   Policy Plan and Development Code interpretation: $1,123.00.
      (2)   Landscape plans: Actual Cost.
         (A)   Initial deposit:
            (I)   Multi-family residential and nonresidential: $2,312.00.
            (II)   Single-family residential: $963.00.
      (3)   Licensing reviews:
         (A)   Record review: $279.00.
         (B)   ABC letter of convenience or necessity: $840.00.
      (4)   Variances:
         (A)   Major variance: $2,149.00.
         (B)   Minor variance: $856.00.
      (5)   Revisions to approved actions: Actual cost.
         (A)   Initial deposit:
            (I)   Major revisions: $3,456.00.
            (II)   Minor revisions: $1,188.00.
      (6)   (A)   Specific plan: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $25,912.00.
      (7)   Public hearing fee for average cost items only: $2,436.00.
      (8)   (A)   Condition compliance check: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $1,080.00.
      (9)   Temporary special event application review and processing:
         (A)   Minor event:
            (I)   Minor event (anticipated attendance of 500 to 5,000 persons
per day) or a community celebration regardless of anticipated attendance over
500 persons per day: Actual cost.
            (II)   Initial deposit: $643.00.
         (B)   Major event:
            (I)   Major event (anticipated attendance over 5,000 persons per
day, or an off-road vehicle race with anticipated attendance of over 500
persons per day): Actual cost.
            (II)   Initial deposit: $2,448.00.
         (C)   Renewal of a previously approved Local Community Sponsored
yearly event:
            (I)   Minor event: $629.00.
            (II)   Major event: $1,682.00.
      (10)   Transfer ownership for Mining Reclamation Plan and/or Conditional
Use Permit: $1,215.00.
      (11)   (A)   Accessory wind energy system review greater than 35 feet in
height: $1,330.00.
      (12)   (A)   Development agreement: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $3,596.00.
      (13)   Zoning certification: $104.00.
      (14)   Temporary use permits:
         (A)   Minor (sales office, design centers, model homes, interim
operation of outside storage display): $340.00.
         (B)   Major (interim operations of activities requiring a Conditional
Use Permit or Minor Use Permit): $2,108.00.
         (C)   Mining Activities:
            (I)   One acre limit and provided SMARA § 2714(d) is not exceeded:
Actual cost.
            (II)   Initial deposit: $1,804.00.
      (15)   Bond processing: $397.00.
      (16)   Compatibility determination: $178.00.
      (17)   Hillside grading: $561.00.
      (18)   Residential Care Facilities Permit: $561.00.
      (19)   (A)   Reasonable Accommodation for a Residential Care Facility:
Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $1,169.00.
      (20)   Sign permits:
         (A)   Reface existing sign: $207.00.
         (B)   Sign permits - single new sign: $421.00.
         (C)   Sign location plan - subdivisions and commercial complexes:
$622.00.
         (D)   Sign location plan - referred to the Planning Commission: Actual
Cost.
      (21)   (A)   Certificate of land use compliance: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $1,753.00.
   (k)   Concurrently Filed Applications:
      (1)   (A)   Any combination of concurrently filed applications pertaining
to the same project where one or more is an actual cost application: Actual
cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: Highest individual deposit plus 33% of all
other applications.
      (2)   Any combination of concurrently filed average cost applications:
Highest individual fee plus 75% of all other individual fees.
   (l)   Planning zoning verification: $88.00.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0215B Department of Public Works—Development.
   (a)   Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan Fees:
      (1)   High Desert Transportation Facilities Plan Fee:
         (A)   Single family residential: $1,935.00/D.U.
         (B)   Commercial/Industrial Average daily vehicle trip end: $193.55/
Trip.
      (2)   Oak Hills Area Transportation Facilities Plan Fees:
         (A)   Zone A categories:
            (I)   Commercial - gross leasable square feet: $0.39/S.F.
            (II)   Single family residential: $1,137.00/D.U.
            (III)   Single family mobile home residential (SFMHR): $1,137.00/
D.U.
         (B)   Zone B categories:
            (I)   Commercial - gross leasable square feet: $0.45/S.F.
            (II)   Single family residential: $1,312.00/D.U.
            (III)   Single family mobile home residential (SFMHR): $1,312.00/
D.U.
      (3)   Helendale/Oro Grande Area Transportation Facilities Plan Fees:
         (A)   Commercial - average daily vehicle trip end: $128.81/Trip.
         (B)   Single family residential: $1,288.00/D.U.
         (C)   Multiple family residential (MFR): $1,030.00/D.U.
         (D)   Industrial average daily vehicle trip end: $128.81/Trip.
      (4)   South/East Apple Valley Area Transportation Facilities Plan Fees:
         (A)   Single family residential: $1,785.00/D.U.
         (B)   Commercial - average daily vehicle trip end: $178.54/Trip.
         (C)   Industrial - average daily vehicle trip end: $178.54/Trip.
      (5)   Summit Valley Area Transportation Facilities Plan Fees:
         (A)   Industrial-average daily vehicle trip end: $272.16/Trip.
         (B)   Single Family Residential: $2,177.00/D.U.
      (6)   Lucerne Valley Area Transportation Facilities Plan Fees:
         (A)   Commercial-average daily vehicle trip end: $137.31/Trip.
         (B)   Single Family Residential: $1,373.00/D.U.
         (C)   Industrial-average daily vehicle trip end: $137.31/Trip.
      NOTE: Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU) are to be calculated proportional to
the square footage of the primary dwelling (square footage of new accessory
dwelling unit x Single Family Residential fee of subarea/square footage of
primary dwelling unit) for ADU's 750 square feet or greater.
   (b)   Regional Transportation Development Mitigation Plan (Plan) fees:
      (1)   Adelanto Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $0.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $0.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Commercial Retail: $0.00 per dwelling unit.
         (D)   Hotel/Motel: $0.00 per room/unit.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $0.00 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $0.00 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $0.00 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $0.00 per square foot.
      (2)   Apple Valley Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $2,770.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $1,925.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $1,528.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $5.97 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $3.82 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $2.11 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $0.64 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $2.59 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $13,334.66 per acre.
      (3)   Chino Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $7,022.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $4,880.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $3,873.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $15.14 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $9.69 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $5.35 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $1.62 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $6.56 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $33,249.20 per acre.
      (4)   Colton Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $4,409.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $3,064.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $2,432.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $9.51 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $6.08 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $3.36 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $1.01 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $4.12 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $23,062.11 per acre.
      (5)   Devore/Glen Helen Unincorporated Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $6,413.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $4,456.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $3,537.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $13.83 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $8.85 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $4.88 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $1.48 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $5.99 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $31,534.16 per acre.
      (6)   Fontana Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $6,723.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $4,671.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $3,708.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $14.49 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $9.28 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $5.12 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $1.55 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $6.28 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $31,575.81 per acre.
      (7)   Hesperia Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $10,060.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $6,991.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $5,549.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $21.69 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $13.88 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $7.66 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $2.32 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $9.40 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $49,223.75 per acre.
      (8)   Loma Linda Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $4,617.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $3,208.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $2,546.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $9.95 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $6.37 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $3.51 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $1.06 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $4.31 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $23,037.90 per acre.
      (9)   Montclair Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $3,668.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $2,549.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $2,023.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $7.91 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $5.06 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $2.79 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $0.84 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $3.43 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $17,587.64 per acre.
      (10)   Redlands Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $7,063.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $4,908.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $3,896.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $15.23 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $9.75 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $5.38 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $1.63 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $6.60 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $36,806.69 per acre.
      (11)   Redlands "Donut Hole" Unincorporated Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $3,163.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $2,198.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $1,745.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $6.82 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $4.36 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $2.41 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $0.73 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $2.95 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $16,296.82 per acre.
      (12)   Rialto Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $7,895.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $5,486.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $4,355.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $17.02 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $10.90 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $6.01 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $1.82 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $7.37 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $40,634.05 per acre.
      (13)   San Bernardino Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $2,489.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $1,729.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $1,373.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $5.37 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $3.43 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $1.89 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $0.57 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $2.32 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $13,116.06 per acre.
      (14)   Upland Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $1,155.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $802.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $637.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $2.49 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $1.59 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $0.88 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $0.27 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $1.08 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $5,479.71 per acre.
      (15)   Victorville Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $4,554.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $3,164.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $2,512.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $9.82 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $6.28 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $3.47 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $1.05 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $4.25 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $23,255.19 per acre.
      (16)   Yucaipa Sphere of Influence Subarea:
         (A)   Single Family Residence: $2,284.00 per dwelling unit.
         (B)   Multi Family Residence: $1,587.00 per dwelling unit.
         (C)   Hotel/Motel: $1,260.00 per room/unit.
         (D)   Commercial Retail: $4.92 per square foot.
         (E)   Commercial Office: $3.15 per square foot.
         (F)   Industrial: $1.74 per square foot.
         (G)   High-cube Warehouse: $0.53 per square foot.
         (H)   Institutional: $2.13 per square foot.
         (I)   Truck Storage/Drop Lot: $13,901.54 per acre.
      NOTE: Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU) are to be calculated proportional to
the square footage of the primary dwelling (square footage of new accessory
dwelling unit x Single Family Residence fee of subarea/square footage of
primary dwelling unit) for ADU's 750 square feet or greater.
      Unless otherwise provided by law, the Plan fees shall be computed in
accordance with the Plan fees in effect as of the date that the building plans
are submitted and the building permit is applied for, provided the permit
applied for has not expired. In the case of expired permits, including
cancelled, expired, reissued or renewed permits, the Plan fees shall be
computed in accordance with the Plan fees in effect on the date of application
for a new or reissued building permit. In the case of permits that will not
involve a building permit, payment of the Plan fees shall be recommended as a
condition of permitting to the decision-making body that would approve such
permit, and shall have Plan fees computed at the time that such conditions are
approved. For development projects approved prior to September 20, 2014, and
where the Conditions of Approval state the exact dollar amount of the Plan fee
to be collected, the Plan fee shall be the amount as stated in the Conditions
of Approval. Should the project expire, lapse, be extended, cancelled or
renewed, or there is any action that requires revision of the Conditions of
Approval, the project shall be considered a new project and fees shall be
computed in accordance with the Plan fee in effect on the date of the revision,
renewal or extension.
      NOTE: Fees are in addition to any fees that may be required by Land Use
Service Department under §
16.0204, or any other applicable fees identified in the County Code.
   (c)   Traffic Study Review:
      (1)   (A)   Traffic Study review: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial Deposit: $1,802.00.
      (2)   (A)   Traffic Letter Report review: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial Deposit: $375.00.
      NOTE: As part of the traffic study review, the applicant shall pay the
actual cost for all work associated with the traffic study review. "Review"
includes, but is not limited to, attendance at meetings, including any pre-
submittal meetings related to the traffic study review, review of the traffic
study itself, and the review of any modifications to the traffic study. The
Traffic Letter Report is a simpler version of a traffic study. As part of the
application process, the applicant will be informed when a letter report or
study is required.
   (d)   (1)   Water Quality Management Plan Inspection: Actual cost.
      (2)   Initial deposit: $3,600.00.
      NOTE: Fees are in addition to any fees that may be required by Land Use
Services Department under §
16.0204, or any other applicable fees identified in County Code.
   (e)   Subdivision Maps Review and Related Processing:
      (1)   Parcel Map:
         (A)   Review and related processing: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $3,150.00.
         NOTE: The County Surveyor has the authority, with agreement of the
applicant, to increase or decrease the required initial deposit amount based on
the complexity of the map submitted.
      (2)   Final Map:
         (A)   Review and related processing: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $8,000.00.
         NOTE: The County Surveyor has the authority, with agreement of the
applicant, to increase or decrease the required initial deposit amount based on
the complexity of the map submitted.
   (f)   Local Agency Formation Commission Related:
      (1)   (A)   Annexation, detachment, formation and reorganization of
cities and district: Actual cost
         (B)   Initial deposit: $760.00.
   (g)   Deferred Monumentation - cash bond deposit required:
      (1)   Mountain/hillside subdivisions:
         (A)   Property corners: $198.00/monument.
         (B)   Centerline with ties: $331.00/monument.
      (2)   Valley subdivisions:
         (A)   Property corners: $132.00/monument.
         (B)   Centerline with ties: $265.00/monument.
      NOTE: This is a cash bond deposit to provide security as required by
Government Code § 66496.
   (h)   Official Map Creation and Related:
      (1)   Official map: Actual cost.
      (2)   Initial deposit: $4,700.00.
      NOTE: The County Surveyor has the authority, with agreement of the
applicant, to increase or decrease the required initial deposit amount based on
the complexity of the map submitted.
   (i)   Corner Record Filing Fee: $17.00.
   (j)   Record of Survey:
      (1)   First sheet: $555.00.
      (2)   Each additional sheet: $320.00.
      NOTE: When fees for the survey review of a parcel map or final map have
been paid to the County Surveyor's Office and the tentative map has expired,
the survey control and exterior boundary may be shown on a record of survey and
the record of survey examination fee waived by the County Surveyor.
   (k)   Survey Monument Preservation: Fund (collected by Recorder): $10.00/
Grant Deed.
   NOTE: This fee shall be collected in accordance with County Code §§ 14.0601,
et seq. Exceptions to this fee are identified in County Code § 14.0603.
   (l)   Certificates of Compliance or Correction:
      (1)   Certificate of compliance for property subdivided on or before
March 4, 1972: $432.00.
      (2)   Certificate of compliance requested by public agency or public
utility: $225.00.
      (3)   Certificate of correction or an amending map of final parcel or
records of survey: $225.00.
   (m)   Lot Line Adjustment:
      (1)   Lot Line Adjustment: Actual Cost.
      (2)   Initial Deposit: $500.00.
      NOTE: This fee is in addition to any fees charged by the Land Use
Services Department under §
16.0215A(i)(1). The County Surveyor has the authority, with agreement of the
applicant, to increase or decrease the required initial deposit amount based on
the complexity of the map submitted.
   (n)   Construction Waste Management Plan Review and Approval including
Diversion/Disposal Evidence Review and Approval:
      (1)   Single Family Residential Dwelling including detached and attached
garages being built independently or concurrently, and additions and
alterations in which the building's conditioned area, volume, or size of the
structure increases: $159.00.
      (2)   Residential Multi-Family Structures; Tract Homes of Residential
Projects of up to eight homes on a single Construction Waste Management Plan;
Non-Residential solar projects; each Commercial and/or Industrial permit for
newly constructed structures, by phase; Non-Residential Alterations; Non-
Residential additions: $500.00
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4480,
passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483, passed - -2025; Am. Ord. 4499, passed - -2025)
§ 16.0215C Land Use Services Department—Development Review—Code Enforcement/
Fire Hazard Abatement.
    (a)   Enforcement Fees:
      (1)   Business and special licenses and regulations:
         (A)   Peddler and secondhand dealer: $356.00.
         (B)   Hotel/Motel Operator:
            (I)   Initial application and license: $113.00.
            (II)   Annual renewal: $105.00.
         (C)   Rental dwelling unit:
            (I)   Initial application and license: $87.00.
            (II)   Annual renewal: $87.00.
         (D)   Massage Clinics:
            (I)   Initial application and license: $115.00.
            (II)   Annual Renewal: $91.00.
         (E)   Bingo Games:
            (I)   Traditional Bingo (Initial application and initial license
and annual renewal): $50.00.
            (II)   Remote Caller Bingo:
               (i)   Initial application and license: $115.00.
               (ii)   Annual renewal: $91.00.
         (F)   Adult Business Performers and Non-Performers:
            (I)   Initial application and license: $115.00.
            (II)   Annual Renewal: $91.00.
            (III)   Relocation and/or second location: $75.00.
      (2)   On-site extension bond fee: $328.00.
      (3)   Permit appeals (§§ 16.0215C(a)(1) through (2) only): $388.00.
      (4)   Special use permits:
         (A)   Home occupation:
            (I)   Initial permit application: $594.00.
            (II)   Biennial renewal: $423.00.
         (B)   Keeping of exotic animals:
            (I)   Initial application: $594.00.
            (II)   Annual renewal: $395.00.
         (C)   Private kennels:
            (I)   Initial permit application: $594.00.
            (II)   Annual renewal: $395.00.
         (D)   Special uses (other):
            (I)   Initial application: $594.00.
            (II)   Annual renewal: $395.00.
         (E)   Short-term private home rental new or renewal with changes:
            (I)   Permit application: $600.00.
            (II)   Permit Fee: $285.00.
         (F)   Short-term private home rental renewal, no changes:
            (I)   Permit application: $550.00.
            (II)   Modifications to permit outside of renewal: $60.00.
         (G)   Surrounding property owner notification fee (applicable to new
and renewal permits or changes in management information or occupancy):
$259.00.
         (H)   Noise monitoring device one-time fee credit (credit to be
applied to fees in §
16.0215C(a)(4)(E)(I) and (F)(I) only): $150.00.
      (5)   Public request for vehicle abatement and removal plus actual cost
of removal: $370.00.
      (6)   Special inspection: $312.00/hour.
      (7)   Emergency abatements: Actual cost plus administrative cost.
      (8)   Appeal Fee - Written orders, surrounding property owner
notifications, and short-term rental approvals, denials, suspensions and
revocations: $100.00.
   (b)   Demolition/Rehabilitation Program Fees:
      (1)   Demolition/Rehabilitation Enforcement - Case Processing: $637.00.
         (A)   Demolition/Rehabilitation Enforcement Inspection: $260.00/hour.
         (B)   Demolition/Rehabilitation Enforcement - Annual Maintenance
Inspection: $280.00/inspection.
   (c)   Fire Hazard Abatement Fees:
      (1)   Inspection, Documentation and Processing of Non-Compliant Parcels:
$197.00/parcel.
      (2)   Contiguous Parcel Abatement - Non-Compliant Parcels: $79.00/parcel.
      (3)   Special Inspection or Case Closure Fee: $82.00/parcel.
      (4)   Contiguous Parcel Abatement - Request by Owner: $47.00/parcel.
      (5)   Abatement fieldwork by County crew:
         (A)   Two-person crew/minimum one hour: $294.00/hour.
         (B)   Three-person crew/minimum one hour: $382.00/hour.
         (C)   Four-person crew/minimum one hour: $469.00/hour.
      (6)   Warrant Procurement and Servicing: $298.00.
   (d)   Delinquency provisions:
      (1)   Immediately on delinquency, a $23.00 delinquency fee shall be added
to each of the Code Enforcement fees.
      (2)   Immediately on delinquency, a $23.00 delinquency fee shall be added
to Fire Hazard Abatement fees.
   (e)   Administrative Service Fees for Code Enforcement:
      (1)   Placement of lien or Notice of Action: $211.00/parcel.
      (2)   Escrow Demand Request, Title or property profile search, review,
and notification to interested parties: $142.00/hour plus actual cost of title
or property profile report.
   (f)   Administrative Services Fees for Fire Hazard Abatement:
      (1)   Placement of lien: $211.00/parcel.
      (2)   Appeals Hearing Filing Fee: $100.00.
      (3)   Escrow Demand Request, Title or property profile search, review and
notification to interested parties: $142.00/hour plus actual cost of title or
property profile report.
(Am. Ord. 4439, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470,
passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483, passed - -2025)
§ 16.0215D Land Use Services Department—Development Review—Land Development.
   All fees fixed by this section are for each identified process; additional
fees shall be for each required additional process.
   (a)   Street Improvement Plan:
      (1)   Plan review: Actual cost.
      Initial Deposit on sheet review:
         (A)   Single family: $1,827.00.
         (B)   Others: $2,686.00.
      NOTE: As part of the street improvement plan, the applicant shall pay the
actual cost for all work associated with the street improvement plan. "Review"
includes, but is not limited to, attendance at meetings, including any pre-
submittal meetings, related to the street improvement plan, review of the
street improvement plan itself, and the review of any modifications to the
street improvement plan. "Others" include, but are not limited to, any
subdivisions, Conditional Use Permit, Minor Use Permit, Site Plan Permit,
Planned Development, any public school or any state or federal related projects
that require an approved street improvement plan by Land Development. Actual
costs shall be deducted from the initial deposit.
      (2)   Request for waiver or modification of street dedication and/or
street improvements: $1,135.00.
      (3)   Appeal for request for waiver or modification of required street
dedication or street improvement plan: $1,479.00.
   (b)   Other Development Project Application Reviews:
      (1)   Single Family Residence Review:
         (A)   Drainage related requirements: $183.00.
         (B)   Road related requirements: $183.00.
      (2)   (A)   Drainage study plan review: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $810.00.
      (3)   (A)   Water Quality Management Plan Review: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial deposit: $2,862.00.
      (4)   (A)   Post Construction Measures Plan: Actual cost.
         (B)   Initial Deposit: $756.00.
      (5)   (A)   Elevation Certificate Review (per certificate): $788.00.
   (c)   Grading plan review fees: Any person requesting review of grading and
erosion plans or filing an application for a grading permit shall pay a fee at
the time of filing according to the schedule below together with the fee
required by §
16.0204(e). All grading plan review fees include one review and a re-check.
Additional reviews will be charged a plan review re-submittal fee. An intake
processing fee is already included in the grading permit fees listed below. The
fee for additional grading beyond that approved by a valid and current grading
permit or original plan review shall be the difference between the fee paid for
the original plan review and the fee required for the entire grading project.
   When there are both excavation (cut) and embankment (fill) grading
activities of one hundred (100) cubic yards or more on the same site, the fee
shall be based upon the total activity volume (cubic yardage).
   Separate permits and fees shall apply to retaining walls as indicated in §
16.0204(h). There shall be no separate charges for standard terrace drains and
similar facilities.
      (1)   Preliminary grading review fee: $608.00.
      (2)   Residential grading fees:
         (A)   Plan review fee:
            (I)   100 - 1,000 cubic yards: $599.00 for first 100 cubic yards
plus $10.80 for each additional 100 cubic yards or fraction thereof with a
maximum fee of $696.00.
            (II)   1,000.1 - 10,000 cubic yards: $696.00 for first 1,000 cubic
yards plus $21.72 for each additional 1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof
with a maximum fee of $892.00.
            (III)   10,000.1 - 100,000 cubic yards: $892.00 for first 10,000
cubic yards plus $32.64 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards or fraction
thereof with a maximum fee of $1,185.00.
            (IV)   Over 100,000 cubic yards: $1,185.00 for first 100,000 cubic
yards plus $43.44 for each additional 100,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof.
            NOTE: Less than 100 cubic yards has no charge.
      (3)   Non-Residential grading:
         (A)   Plan review fee:
            (I)   100 - 1,000 cubic yards: $844.00 for first 100 cubic yards
plus $10.80 for each additional 100 cubic yards or fraction thereof with a
maximum fee of $941.00.
            (II)   1,000.1 - 10,000 cubic yards: $941.00 for first 1,000 cubic
yards plus $21.72 for each additional 1,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof
with a maximum fee of $1,137.00.
            (III)   10,000.1 - 100,000 cubic yards: $1,137.00 for first 10,000
cubic yards plus $32.52 for each additional 10,000 cubic yards or fraction
thereof with a maximum fee of $1,429.00.
            (IV)   Over 100,000 cubic yards: $1,429.00 for first 100,000 cubic
yards plus $43.44 for each additional 100,000 cubic yards or fraction thereof.
            NOTE: Less than 100 cubic yards has no charge.
   (d)   Erosion and sediment control permit and fees: Land clearing or other
land disturbing activity without grading or building permit shall obtain an
erosion and sediment control permit. Plan review shall be paid at the time of
filing according to the following schedule together with the fee required by §
16.0204(f). All erosion and sediment control permits include two plan reviews
and two inspections. Additional inspections will be charged a re-inspection fee
and additional reviews will be charged a plan review re-submittal fee. An
intake processing fee is already included in the erosion and sediment control
permit fees listed below.
      (1)   Residential:
         (A)   Plan review: $355.00.
      (2)   Non-Residential:
         (A)   Plan review: $452.00.
   (e)   Miscellaneous permit, inspection and plan review fees: Schedule of
fees not otherwise provided for are located in this section. An intake
processing fee, set forth in § 16.0215D(e)(1), shall be applied to each
miscellaneous permit.
      (1)   Intake processing fee: $61.00.
      (2)   Additional plan review, re-submittals: 1/4 of the original fee per
submittal.
      (3)   Revision to approved plan (includes one plan check and a recheck):
1/4 of the original fee per submittal.
      (4)   Expedited plan review: 1.5 times the cost of regular plan review.
(Ord. 4483, passed - -2025)
§ 16.0216 Library.
   (a)   Overdue Fines:
      (1)   Books, audio books/compact disc:
         (A)   Adult materials: up to $0.25/day (fees apply to both library and
bookmobile). Maximum fine may accrue up to $10.00/item.
         (B)   Children's materials: up to $0.10/day (fees apply to both
library and bookmobile). Maximum fine may accrue up to $10.00/item.
      NOTE: The County Librarian shall set the fee amount from zero to $0.10/
day on Children's materials and zero to $.25/day on Adult materials on an
annual basis.
      (2)   Videos/DVDs/Blu-Rays: up to $1.50/day. Maximum fine may accrue up
to $10.00/item.
      NOTE: DVD/BluRay seven day loan period, excluding TV series, is not
charged a fee.
   (b)   Lost Items:
      (1)   Any item lost will be charged to the library card holder at the
full cost of replacement.
      (2)   Collection costs: $11.00/patron.
   (c)   Fees:
      (1)   Videos/DVDs/Blu-Rays: up to $1.50/loan period.
      (2)   Out-of-state residents: $10.00/year per card holder.
      (3)   Interlibrary loan search: $3.00/request.
      (4)   Library card replacement: $2.00/card.
      (5)   Option Card/Promotional Card: $5.00/card.
      (6)   Black and White Copier Usage: $0.15/copy.
      (7)   Black and White Computer printing: $0.10/page.
      (8)   Color printing/Copier Usage: $0.50/page.
      (9)   Computer related media (flash drives, ear buds, digital audiobooks,
rewritable CDs) County Librarian shall set the fee based on actual cost
recovery.
      (10)   Program related consumables: County Librarian shall set the fee
based on actual cost recovery.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0217 Repealed.
§ 16.0218 Museum.
   (a)   Environmental, Cultural or Natural Review Services:
      (1)   Professional, curatorial and supervisory personnel minimum hourly
rate: Actual cost.
      (2)   Paleontologic record search (per quad): $250.00/each.
      NOTE: If report exceeds 4 quads, the Professional, curatorial and
supervisory personnel fee will be incurred.
   (b)   Rental of Museum or Historic Site Spaces:
      (1)   Nonprofit community groups annual use (per room): $610.00/year.
      NOTE: Annual use limited to 12 reservations per calendar year.
      (2)   Event/meeting during business hours (per space): $125.00/hour.
      (3)   Event/meeting after hours (per space): $325.00/hour.
      (4)   Security Services: (One security officer per 50 people).
         (A)   Security: Actual Cost.
      (5)   Damages/cleaning charge for rooms left in poor condition: Cost of
damages/cleanup
      NOTE: There is no rental fee for Museum-sponsored events.
   (c)   Curation and Storage of Cultural or Natural Resources:
      NOTE: Curatorial services, if required, will be charged.
      (1)   Storage: $2,575.00/cubic foot.
   (d)   Educational Programs:
      (1)   Lectures and Presentations:
         (A)   Various topics: $150.00 first hour $125.00 each additional hour
plus mileage per IRS allowable rate.
      (2)   Museum Camp program:
         (A)   Daily Rate: $27.00 (members) $31.00 (non-members).
   (e)   Copying/Printing of Historic Photographs (File):
      (1)   Commercial use fee for archival photographs and historic artifact
photography: $50.00/item.
      (2)   Scanned image, commercial use: $33.00.
      (3)   Scanned image, nonprofit or scholarly use: $15.00.
   (f)   Admission to main museum & branch sites:
   NOTE: Director may waive admission for historic sites.
      (1)   Adults: $10.00.
      (2)   Seniors (60 and over): $8.00.
      (3)   Active military (with ID): $8.00.
      (4)   Students (13 and over with ID): $7.00.
      (5)   Children (6 - 12, 5 and under free): $5.00.
      (6)   School Groups:
         (A)   Students: $4.00.
         (B)   Chaperones and Teachers: $5.00.
         (C)   School Group Cancellation Fee within 15 business days: 50% of
reservation payment.
      (7)   Members of Museum Association: Free general admission.
      (8)   Special advertising/promotional events: up to 50% off admission.
      (9)   Special event: Actual cost of regular admission plus vendors,
supplies, staff salaries, indirect costs.
      (10)   Museums for All Program: $1.00 (recipients must present
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), Electronic Benefits Transfer
(EBT) card, and a valid form of photo ID, discount applies to each person in
the party up to 9).
      (11)   Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day admission for a
San Bernardino County resident who is a veteran, active-duty personnel in the
United States Armed Services, National Guard member, or reservist: Free.
   (g)   Loan program (two-week loan basis):
      (1)   Teacher (Single Kit): $35.00/each.
      (2)   Teacher (Single Item): $10.00/item.
      (3)   Commercial, for-profit organizations: $300.00/per item.
   (h)   Museum Store: Director shall establish prices for merchandise sold at
the main museum and its branches.
   (i)   Commercial filming location and staff fees at main museum and
branches:
      (1)   Location fees for all visual recording processes (two hour
minimum): $400.00/hour.
      (2)   Supervisor staff fee (two hour minimum): Actual cost plus overhead.
   (j)   Returned checks due to non sufficient funds or closed accounts:
$25.00.
   (k)   Annual Memberships:
      (1)   Student (with ID): $25.00.
      (2)   Senior (60+): $25.00.
      (3)   Dual Seniors (60+): $35.00.
      (4)   Individual: $40.00.
      (5)   Household (up to four adults with all children in the household):
$60.00.
      (6)   Contributing: $100.00.
      (7)   Premium Household: $150.00.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0219 Repealed by Ord. 4403, passed - -2021.
§ 16.0220 Real Estate Services Department.
   (a)   Use Permit: County Location or Parking Lot: $167.00/day.
   (b)   Use Permit: County Agricultural Preserve Property: $389.00/day.
   NOTE: These fees are used for the sole purpose of allowing a non-County
entity the use of a County location, parking lot, or County Agricultural
Preserve Property if not addressed in another section of the County Fee
Ordinance or County Code. These fees do not include services provided by the
County, such as, but not limited to, special security services, set-up, break-
down, or clean-up. Provision of these services is required as a condition of
granting the use permit and are the sole responsibility of the entity seeking
the use permit.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0220A Reserved.
§ 16.0220B Children and Family Services.
   (a)   Adoptions Division:
      (1)   Stepparent Adoption Fee (Maximum): $700.00.
      (2)   Guardianship Investigation Fee: $250.00.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0220C Human Services Administration.
   (a)   Personnel Division:
      (1)   Live Scan Fingerprinting: $32.00.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0221 Repealed.
§ 16.0222 Refuse Disposal.
   (a)   Solid Waste Management Disposal Site Fees for Sites which Charge a Fee
Upon Entrance:
      Fees
      (1)   (A)   Ordinary refuse: $48.80/ton.
         (B)   Ordinary refuse subject to the Comprehensive Disposal Site
Diversion Program (AB 939 Fee): $12.00/ton. (This fee is charged in addition to
the per ton gate fee set forth in Subsection (a)(1)(A) above. This fee is
charged on solid waste brought to a facility at which the Comprehensive
Disposal Site Diversion Program has been implemented, unless such solid waste
is: waste from a franchised or permitted waste hauler (or from a city, if the
city collects its citizens' waste) and is brought in a front-, rear-, or side-
loading refuse vehicle (i.e., packer truck); or waste brought from a Materials
Recovery Facility or where collection or processing includes a recycling
component and the waste contains only an incidental amount of inseparable
recyclable materials; or waste generated by a commercial enterprise that has
been reviewed and determined by the San Bernardino County Department of Public
Works-Solid Waste Management Division to be sufficiently source separated as to
not contain more than an incidental amount of inseparable recyclable
materials.)
         (C)   For loads in excess of one ton, the per ton charge shall be
prorated for any fraction of a ton of the total weight of the load.
      (2)   Uncovered/Unsecured Loads: To encourage the entrance into County
waste facilities of loads that are properly secured or covered pursuant to
applicable State or local laws and in deflection of the additional costs
incurred because of waste escaping such vehicles, loads brought to such
facilities which are not properly secured or covered will be required to pay an
additional Solid Waste Management Disposal Site Fee equal to the normal
applicable disposal gate fee (including any applicable perchlorate add-on fee)
for such waste. This will apply to both minimum and per ton loads, and also
loads which would otherwise pay no gate fee, given the payment of a Land Use
Fee pursuant to the provisions of § 16.0222(c).
   (b)   Fee Adjustments: Whenever use of a disposal site financed by land use
fees is restricted by order of the Board of Supervisors and refuse is thereby
hauled to other sites, the Board of Supervisors may permit acceptance of such
refuse without charge at the receiving sites.
   (c)   Solid Waste Management Disposal Facility Fees:
      (1)   The following annual refuse disposal land use fees, based on the
County Assessor's Land Use Codes, shall apply in the following areas. Where the
Land Use Fee for any Use Code contains a schedule of fees based on the building
size or number of dwelling units per parcel, but the relevant data base does
not disclose sufficient building size or unit information to determine the
correct category for a particular parcel, said parcel shall be charged as
though it were the third smallest sized category if there are five or six size
categories. If paid, such land use fees shall constitute, relative to ordinary
refuse (excluding demolition waste, tires and hard to handle and special
handling items) generated on the parcel of property for which the fee is paid,
payment of the ordinary refuse per ton fee as set forth in § 16.0222(a)(1), and
the passenger/light use vehicle and trailer fee as set forth in § 16.0222(h)
(1), which may be otherwise due:
         (A)   West Mountain and East Mountain described as follows:
            (I)   West Mountain Area includes all land uses found in areas
within Assessor's Books Nos. 295, 296, and 326-345.
            (II)   East Mountain Area includes all land uses found in areas
within Assessor's Books Nos. 304-315, 446, 447, 2328, and 2350.
Use Codes Description Fees
Use Codes Description                                          Fees
0510      Single family residence (suitable for permanent use) $85.14
0511      Recreation cabin (unsuitable as permanent residence) $42.57
0520      Mobile home on fee land, not in subdivision          $85.14
0525      Mobile home on fee land, in subdivision              $85.14
0526      Mobile home on permanent foundation                  $85.14
0533      Time share                                           $85.14
0534      Attached single family residence (common wall)       $85.14
0535      Zero lot line single family residence                $85.14
0599      Miscellaneous residential structure                  $85.14
0600      Two single-family residences                         $170.28
0601      Three single-family residences                       $255.42
0602      Four single-family residences                        $340.56
0603      Duplex                                               $170.28
0604      Triplex                                              $255.42
0605      Quad                                                 $340.56
0610      Multi single-family residences (5 to 14 units)       $425.70
9999      No services provided                                 $0.00
 
         (B)   Trona and Baker areas include the following land uses found in
areas within Assessor's Books Nos. 483, 485, 486, 503, 543, pp. 23 28
inclusive, and 544, pp. 21-39 inclusive, pp. 44-49 inclusive.
Use Codes Description Fees
Use Codes Description                                              Fees
0100      Storage warehouse                                        $510.84
0111      Industrial Condominiums:
            (I)   Up to 500 sq. ft.                         $85.14
            (II)   501 to 1,000 sq. ft.                     $170.28
            (III)   1,001 to 1,500 sq. ft.                  $255.42
            (IV)   1,501 to 2,000 sq. ft.                   $340.56
            (V)   2,001 to 4,000 sq. ft.                    $425.70
            (VI)   4,001 plus sq. ft.                       $510.84
0113      Light industrial:
            (I)   Up to 4,000 sq. ft.                       $1,021.68
            (II)   4,001 to 8,000 sq. ft.                   $1,532.52
            (III)   8,001 to 11,000 sq. ft.                 $1,873.08
            (IV)   11,001 to 15,000 sq. ft.                 $2,213.64
            (V)   15,001 to 20,000 sq. ft.                  $2,724.48
            (VI)   20,001 plus sq. ft.                      $3,746.16
0114      Heavy industrial:
            (I)   Up to 4,000 sq. ft.                       $2,469.06
            (II)   4,001 to 8,000 sq. ft.                   $2,979.90
            (III)   8,001 to 11,000 sq. ft.                 $3,320.46
            (IV)   11,001 to 15,000 sq. ft.                 $3,661.02
            (V)   15,001 to 20,000 sq. ft.                  $4,171.86
            (VI)   20,001 plus sq. ft.                      $6,640.92
0115      Food processing                                          $255.42
0140      Rock, sand and gravel production                         $936.54
0142      Oil and gas production                                   $340.56
0143      Chemicals production                                     $425.70
0150      Mining metals                                            $851.40
0151      Mining nonmetals                                         $340.56
0152      Mineral rights                                           $425.70
0160      Electric power transmitter:
            (I)   Up to 4,000 sq. ft.                       $1,021.68
            (II)   4,001 to 8,000 sq. ft.                   $1,532.52
            (III)   8,001 to 11,000 sq. ft.                 $1,873.08
            (IV)   11,001 to 15,000 sq. ft.                 $2,213.64
            (V)   15,001 to 20,000 sq. ft.                  $2,724.48
            (VI)   20,001 plus sq. ft.                      $3,746.16
0171      Water distribution systems                               $340.56
0210      General office:
            (I)   Up to 1,000 sq. ft.                       $255.42
            (II)   1,001 to 4,000 sq. ft.                   $425.70
            (III)   4,001 to 6,000 sq. ft.                  $510.84
            (IV)   6,001 to 9,000 sq. ft.                   $595.98
            (V)   9,001 to 12,000 sq. ft.                   $766.26
            (VI)   12,001 plus sq. ft.                      $1,021.68
0211      Banks, savings and loans                                 $340.56
0212      Office condominiums:
            (I)   Up to 1,000 sq. ft.                       $255.42
            (II)   1,001 to 4,000 sq. ft.                   $425.70
            (III)   4,001 to 6,000 sq. ft.                  $510.84
            (IV)   6,001 to 9,000 sq. ft.                   $595.98
            (V)   9,001 to 12,000 sq. ft.                   $766.26
            (VI)   12,001 plus sq. ft.                      $1,021.68
0230      Medical office:
            (I)   Up to 500 sq. ft.                         $85.14
            (II)   501 to 1,000 sq. ft.                     $170.28
            (III)   1,001 to 1,500 sq. ft.                  $255.42
            (IV)   1,501 to 2,000 sq. ft.                   $340.56
            (V)   2,001 to 4,000 sq. ft.                    $425.70
            (VI)   4,001 plus sq. ft.                       $510.84
0231      Dental office:
            (I)   Up to 500 sq. ft.                         $85.14
            (II)   501 to 1,000 sq. ft.                     $170.28
            (III)   1,001 to 1,500 sq. ft.                  $255.42
            (IV)   1,501 to 2,000 sq. ft.                   $340.56
            (V)   2,001 to 4,000 sq. ft.                    $425.70
            (VI)   4,001 plus sq. ft.                       $510.84
0233      Medical condominiums:
            (I)   Up to 500 sq. ft.                         $85.14
            (II)   501 to 1,000 sq. ft.                     $170.28
            (III)   1,001 to 1,500 sq. ft.                  $255.42
            (IV)   1,501 to 2,000 sq. ft.                   $340.56
            (V)   2,001 to 4,000 sq. ft.                    $425.70
            (VI)   4,001 plus sq. ft.                       $510.84
0236      General hospital or retirement facilities, rest and care $11,068.20
          homes (without on-site medical facilities or services):
            0510   (1 room or dwelling unit)                $85.14
            0603   (2 rooms or dwelling units)              $170.28
            0604   (3 rooms or dwelling units)              $255.42
            0605   (4 rooms or dwelling units)              $340.56
            0611   (5 rooms or dwelling units and above)    $425.70
0253      Mortuaries                                               $340.56
0300      Retail stores:
            (I)   Up to 1,000 sq. ft.                       $425.70
            (II)   1,001 to 4,000 sq. ft.                   $595.98
            (III)   4,001 to 6,000 sq. ft.                  $681.12
            (IV)   6,001 to 9,000 sq. ft.                   $766.26
            (V)   9,001 to 12,000 sq. ft.                   $936.54
            (VI)   12,001 plus sq. ft.                      $1,362.24
0304      Retail strips:
            (I)   Up to 1,000 sq. ft.                       $170.28
            (II)   1,001 to 4,000 sq. ft.                   $340.56
            (II)   4,001 to 6,000 sq. ft.                   $425.70
            (IV)   6,001 to 9,000 sq. ft.                   $510.84
            (V)   9,001 to 12,000 sq. ft.                   $681.12
            (VI)   12,001 plus sq. ft.                      $851.40
0305      Shopping centers:
            (I)   Up to 10,000 sq. ft.                      $1,277.10
            (II)   10,001 to 20,000 sq. ft.                 $1,702.80
            (III)   20,001 to 25,000 sq. ft.                $2,554.20
            (IV)   25,001 to 35,000 sq. ft.                 $3,405.60
            (V)   35,001 plus sq. ft.                       $5,108.40
0307      Commercial condominiums:
            (I)   Up to 500 sq. ft.                         $85.14
            (II)   501 to 1,000 sq. ft.                     $170.28
            (III)   1,001 to 1,500 sq. ft.                  $255.42
            (IV)   1,501 to 2,000 sq. ft.                   $340.56
            (V)   2,001 to 4,000 sq. ft.                    $425.70
            (VI)   4,001 plus sq. ft.                       $510.84
            Motels and hotels:
            0510      (1 room or dwelling unit)          $85.14
            0603      (2 rooms or dwelling units)        $170.28
            0604      (3 rooms or dwelling units)        $255.42
            0605      (4 rooms or dwelling units)        $340.56
            0611      (5 rooms or dwelling units and abov$425.70
0343      Service stations                                         $340.56
0344      Service garages                                          $340.56
0360      Airports                                                 $851.40
0388      Clubhouse                                                $425.70
0389      Fraternal/veterans’ organizations                      $340.56
0391      Amusement/theme park                                     $1,447.38
0400      Church                                                   $170.28
0410      Cemetery                                                 $340.56
0420      Library                                                  $3,575.88
0421      Museums                                                  $255.42
0430      Government building                                      $851.40
0470      Educational                                              $510.84
0474      College                                                  $2,809.62
0510      Single family residence (suitable for permanent use)     $85.14
0511      Recreation cabin (unsuitable as permanent residence)     $42.57
0520      Mobile home on fee land, not in subdivision              $85.14
0522      Mobile home in park (leased land)                        $85.14
0525      Mobile home on fee land, in subdivision                  $85.14
0526      Mobile home on permanent foundation                      $85.14
0530      Condominium                                              $85.14
0533      Time share                                               $85.14
0534      Attached single family residence (common wall)           $85.14
0535      Zero lot line single family residence                    $85.14
0599      Miscellaneous residential structure                      $85.14
0600      Two single-family residences                             $170.28
0601      Three single-family residences                           $255.42
0602      Four single-family residences                            $340.56
0603      Duplex                                                   $170.28
0604      Triplex                                                  $255.42
0605      Quad                                                     $340.56
0610      Multi single-family residences (5 to 14 units)           $425.70
0611      Apartments (5 to 14 units)                               $425.70
0612      Townhouse apartments (5 to 14 units)                     $681.12
0621      Apartments (15 units and above)                          $425.70
0622      Townhouse apartments (15 units and above)                $681.12
0630      Condominiums used as apartments                          $85.14
0631      Government assisted apartment (HUD 236, etc.)            $6,470.64
0650      Manufactured home park                                   $170.28
0701      Grazing                                                  $340.56
0710      Dry farm (grain)                                         $340.56
0711      Row crops                                                $340.56
0712      Field crops                                              $340.56
0720      Vines                                                    $340.56
0730      Citrus                                                   $340.56
0735      Deciduous                                                $340.56
0750      Dairy                                                    $340.56
0751      Poultry                                                  $340.56
0752      Livestock                                                $340.56
0753      Bees/Worms                                               $340.56
9999      No services provided                                     $0.00
 
      (2)   The following annual refuse disposal land use fees, based on the
County Assessor's Land Use Codes shall apply in the Desert Area. If paid, such
land use fees shall constitute, relative to ordinary refuse (excluding
demolition waste, tires and hard to handle and special handling items)
generated on the parcel of property for which the fee is paid, payment of the
ordinary refuse per ton fee as set forth in § 16.0222(a)(1), and the passenger/
light-use vehicle and trailer fee as set forth in § 16.0222(h)(1).
         The Desert Area excludes the areas set forth in § 16.0222(c)(1), and
excludes those parcels contained in the incorporated boundary of the Helendale
Community Services District and Wrightwood Community Services District. The
Desert Area includes the following land uses found in areas within Assessor's
Books No. 181-183, 351, 355 357, 394 428, 432 445, 448 470, 472, 473, 475, 477
482, 488 498, 512, 515 517, 521, 527 533, 537 540, 580 635, 3036 3039, 3046,
3057, 3064-3072, 3080, 3087-3088, 3090 3106, 3112, 3128-3136, 3200, 3210.
Use Codes Description Fees
Use Codes Description                                          Fees
0510      Single family residence (suitable for permanent use) $85.14
0511      Recreation cabin (unsuitable as permanent residence) $42.57
0520      Mobile home on fee land, not in subdivision          $85.14
0525      Mobile home on fee land, in subdivision              $85.14
0526      Mobile home on permanent foundation                  $85.14
0533      Time share                                           $85.14
0534      Attached single family residence (common wall)       $85.14
0535      Zero lot line single family residence                $85.14
0599      Miscellaneous residential structure                  $85.14
0600      Two single-family residences                         $170.28
0601      Three single-family residences                       $255.42
0602      Four single-family residences                        $340.56
0603      Duplex                                               $170.28
0604      Triplex                                              $255.42
0605      Quad                                                 $340.56
0610      Multi single-family residences (5 to 14 units)       $425.70
9999      No services provided                                 $0.00
 
      (3)   The Desert Area, Area B, excludes the areas set forth in § 16.0222
(c)(1)(B) and 16.0222(c)(2) and includes the following land uses found in areas
within Assessor's Book Nos. 661 and 662. The refuse disposal land use fee for
this area is for post-closure maintenance of the Parker Dam Disposal Site,
which previously served area residents. The fee is assessed due to the long
term post-closure responsibility of the County, and will continue to be
assessed for the duration of such responsibility.
Use Codes Description Fees
Use Codes Description                                          Fees
0510      Single family residence (suitable for permanent use) $12.64
0511      Recreation cabin (unsuitable as permanent residence) $6.32
0520      Mobile home, on fee land, not in subdivision         $12.64
0525      Mobile home on fee land, in subdivision              $12.64
0526      Mobile home on permanent foundation                  $12.64
0533      Time share                                           $12.64
0534      Attached single family residence (common wall)       $12.64
0535      Zero lot line single family residence                $12.64
0599      Miscellaneous residential structure                  $12.64
0600      Two single-family residences                         $25.28
0601      Three single-family residences                       $37.92
0602      Four single-family residences                        $50.56
0603      Duplex                                               $25.28
0604      Triplex                                              $37.92
0605      Quad                                                 $50.56
0610      Multi single-family residences (5 to 14 units)       $63.20
9999      No services provided                                 $0.00
 
      (4)   Solid waste management disposal site fee for sites which do not
charge a fee upon entrance. Disposal facility users who have not paid a
disposal facility usage fee as a part of a Land Use Fee, contract arrangement
with the Solid Waste Management Division, or through refuse hauler permit fee
shall pay a fee equal to the respective ordinary refuse, tires, and other fees
(as applicable) as set forth in § 16.0222(a), and to the extent applicable, any
surcharges as set forth in § 16.0222(h).
   (d)   Contracts with Cities or Other Users of the Refuse Disposal Sites:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this § 16.0222, the method of
calculation of the disposal facility usage fee owed by a city or any other user
of a refuse disposal site may be established by written agreement between such
city (or other user, as the case may be) and the County. Upon expiration or
termination of any such written agreement, the disposal facility usage fee
otherwise set forth in the appropriate subsection of this § 16.0222 shall again
be applicable.
   (e)   Septic Tank Pumping: Any permitted cesspool septic tank pumper in San
Bernardino County who disposes of authorized liquids at any approved disposal
facility which is equipped to accept said liquids shall pay a fee to the Solid
Waste Management Division for such disposed liquid based upon the gallon
capacity of the septic vehicle. Said fee shall be $10.29 per 100 gallons.
   (f)   Disposal Fee: Each refuse hauler using a County disposal facility that
does not levy a fee at entry by weight, shall pay a permit fee based upon a per
capita per month rate applicable to the specific incorporated city served. Per
capita rates shall be established consistent with either:
      (1)   The number of Equivalent Single Family Residential ("ESFR") units
contained within the municipal boundary and computed at the current ESFR rate
applicable to the unincorporated area of the County surrounding said city; or
      (2)   By measured estimates of annual tonnage delivered to County
landfills and computed at the current rate per ton charged at the refuse
disposal site located nearest to said city.
      Current California Department of Finance population estimates for each
city shall be used as a basis for determining the population of each city. Per
capita rates, when requested, shall be available only to haulers serving cities
having contract use agreements with the Solid Waste Management Division.
Payment of the permit fee shall not constitute payment of any fee required in §
16.0222 for the disposal of tires or the handling of hard-to-handle or special
handling items.
   (g)   Contractually Set Disposal Fee: Notwithstanding the provisions of §
16.0222(f), the method of calculation of the permit fee set forth in § 16.0222
(f) and the entity obligated for the payment thereof may be established by
written agreement between any city and the County. Upon expiration or
termination of any such written agreement, the permit fee as provided in §
16.0222(f) shall again be applicable.
   (h)   Alternative Charges and Surcharges to the Per Ton Solid Waste
Management Disposal Site Fees and the Land Use Solid Waste Disposal Facility
Fees:
      (1)   (A)   Passenger and light use vehicles and trailers containing no
more than 300 pounds of refuse (excluding tires) for disposal shall pay a Solid
Waste Management Disposal Facility Usage fee of $10.34/load instead of the per
ton disposal fee set forth in § 16.0222(a)(1)(A). (The $11.14 per vehicle gate
fee collected at landfill entry stations is comprised of the above $10.34/load
(which includes the perchlorate add-on fee of $0.17/load) and the $.80/vehicle
per the applicable San Bernardino County Fire Protection District 2025-26 fee
schedule, Section L(3).
         (B)   Passenger and light use vehicles and trailers containing no more
than 300 pounds of refuse (excluding tires) for disposal shall pay a Solid
Waste Management Disposal Facility Usage fee of $2.40/load added-on to the
minimum load fee set forth in Subsection (h)(1)(A) instead of the AB 939 fee
set forth in § 16.0222(a)(1)(B).
         (C)   Passenger and light use vehicles and trailers containing more
than 300 pounds but less than one ton of refuse (excluding tires) for disposal
shall pay a prorated Solid Waste Management Disposal Facility Usage fee (§
16.0222(a)(1)(A)), perchlorate add-on fee (§ 16.0222(h)(2)(D)) and AB 939 Fee
(§ 16.0222(a)(1)(B)) in accordance with the Tipping Fee Proration chart
maintained by the San Bernardino County Department of Public Works - Solid
Waste Management Division.
      (2)   In addition to the fee imposed for ordinary refuse in either §
16.0222(a)(1) or § 16.0222(c), the indicated surcharge shall apply to the
following special items at all landfill and transfer station sites:
         (A)   Tires - unshredded: $5.31/tire.
         (B)   Hard-to-handle - items which weigh one ton or more and whose
dimensions exceed four feet in either width, length or height, and which
require special attention: $53.14/ton.
         (C)   Special handling - items which weigh one ton or more and which
come with a special request by customers, or County determination of the need,
for immediate burial or destruction while the landfill user observes the
disposal activity: $53.14/ton.
         (D)   Perchlorate mitigation - applicable to all per ton loads except
processed green waste, septic waste, clean dirt, mildly contaminated non-
hazardous soil (as allowed by the approved Waste Acceptance Plan specific for
the landfill site receiving the soil), and waste brought in and covered under §
16.0222(c): $0.69/ton.
      (3)   In addition to the fee imposed for ordinary refuse in either §
16.0222(c) or 16.0222(h)(1), the indicated surcharge shall apply to vehicles
containing the following special refuse items for disposal:
         (A)   Tires - unshredded: $5.31/tire.
         (B)   Hard-to-Handle - items which weigh less than one ton and whose
dimensions exceed four feet in either, width, length, or height and which
require special attention: $26.57/load.
         (C)   Special Handling - items which weigh less than one ton and come
with a special request by customers, or County determination of the need, for
immediate burial or destruction of items while the landfill user observes the
disposal activity: $26.57/load.
      (4)   Clean dirt when pre-approved by Solid Waste Management Division
personnel: $9.00/ton.
      (5)   Contaminated Soil - mildly contaminated non-hazardous soil
acceptable for beneficial reuse at Class III Sanitary Landfills (as allowed by
the approved Waste Acceptance Plan specific for the landfill site receiving the
soil), when pre-approved by Solid Waste Management Division personnel: $28.00/
ton.
      (6)   Contaminated Soil - moderately contaminated non-hazardous soil
acceptable for disposal at Class III Sanitary Landfills (as allowed by the
approved Waste Acceptance Plan specific for the landfill site receiving the
soil), when pre-approved by Solid Waste Management Division personnel: $48.80/
ton.
   (i)   Charge On A Volume Basis: At any disposal facility where fees are
charged at entry and weight scales are unavailable or inoperative, disposal
facility fees shall be based upon the volume of refuse for each vehicle using
the facility. The Solid Waste Management Division shall prepare a schedule
outlining the charge for such volume and shall post those schedules at each
facility. Such charges shall be:
      (1)   At disposal facilities:
         (A)   For non-compacted refuse: $5.49/cu.yd.
         (B)   For compacted refuse (including refuse collection packers) and
moderately contaminated soil (as allowed by the approved Waste Acceptance Plan
specific for the landfill site receiving the soil), when pre-approved by Solid
Waste Management Division personnel: $18.28/cu.yd.
         (C)   Perchlorate mitigation (non-compacted refuse): $0.08/cu.yd.
         (D)   Perchlorate mitigation (compacted refuse): $0.26/cu.yd.
         (E)   AB 939 Fee (for non-compacted refuse): $1.35/cu.yd.
         (F)   AB 939 Fee (for compacted refuse): $4.50/cu.yd.
   (j)   Administrative Fees: Except where a valid written agreement shall
provide otherwise, the following administrative fees shall be imposed to cover
departmental costs incurred:
      (1)   Outside Vendor Reproduction Fee: Actual Vendor Cost.
      (2)   Replacement of landfill pass (damaged, stolen, lost): $12.00/pass.
      (3)   Delinquent Charge - non-payment after 30 days (assess on unpaid
balance per month, not to exceed 18% per annum): 1.5%.
      (4)   Requests for Special Programmed Reports or Electronic File
Retrieval: Actual Cost.*
      (5)   Uniform Handling Exemption Application Fee: $16.00/application.
      (6)   Immediate Hauler Lien Release: $372.00.
      *Actual cost to be calculated based on County personnel's hourly salary
rate(s) and computed benefits, and any additional materials costs.
   (k)   Gate collections: All fees collected in cash at landfill entry
stations shall be rounded to the nearest full dollar. Fees collected at
landfill entry stations include both applicable Refuse Disposal fees set forth
in this § 16.0222 and applicable San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
2025-26 fee schedule, Section L(3).
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0222A Refuse Franchise Fee.
   (a)   Each grantee providing solid waste handling services under a franchise
agreement entered into pursuant to the provisions of
Division 6 of Title 4 of this Code shall pay a franchise fee to the County. The
franchise fee shall be as specified in the individual franchise agreement or by
multiplying the gross receipts less disposal charges collected by each grantee
under its franchise agreement by ten percent, whichever is greater.
   (b)   The franchise fee as required under this section shall be paid to the
County for each month within 30 days after the end of said month.
   (c)   As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
set forth in
Division 6 of Title 4 of the San Bernardino County Code, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
      (1)   Franchise agreement;
      (2)   Franchise fee;
      (3)   Grantee; and
      (4)   Solid waste handling services.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4460, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470,
passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483, passed - -2025)
§ 16.0222B Refuse Hauling Class A Permit Fees.
   It is unlawful for any refuse hauler to operate a refuse collection,
transportation, or disposal activity, except where exempted by §
33.0843 (Permits), without possessing the applicable unexpired, unsuspended,
unrevoked Class A Permit to do so. This Class A Permit must be approved by the
Board of Supervisors, and be issued by the San Bernardino County Department of
Public Works - Solid Waste Management Division.
   Issuance of a Class A Permit requires prior payment of the appropriate fee
(s) to the Solid Waste Management Division. The following fees apply to Class A
Permits:
      (1)   Application Review: $180.00/permit(*).
      (2)   Transfer of Ownership: $300.00/transfer.
      (3)   Appeal to the Board of Supervisors: $175.00/appeal.
(*) A separate Class A Permit is required for each refuse collection area.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0223 Regional Parks.
   (a)   Calico Ghost Town.
      (1)   Entrance Fees:
         (A)   Entrance fee per person (Does not include attractions):
            (I)   Adults: $8.00.
            (II)   Youths (4-11): $5.00.
            (III)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
            (IV)   Bus - tour: $5.00.
            (V)   School/youth function 20+ people;
            NOTE: Must include one adult per each 12 youths (1/12 ratio):
$4.00.
            (VI)   Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day admission
for a San Bernardino County resident who is a veteran, active-duty personnel in
the United States Armed Services, National Guard member, or reservist: Free.
         (B)   Annual family entrance pass (4 persons):
            (I)   Valid at Calico: $50.00
            NOTE: Annual entrance passes are valid daily, except special
events, for twelve months from date of purchase and are not transferrable.
         (C)   Dogs (except assistance dogs for qualified individuals with a
disability) park entry or camping: $1.00/dog.
         (D)   Special Events/Enhanced Weekends: The Director of Regional Parks
shall designate special events and enhanced weekends on non-peak weekends to
encourage increased patronage. Special events and enhanced weekend fees shall
be set as follows:
            Non San Bernardino County Residents:
            (I)   Adults: $15.00/person.
            (II)   Youths (4-11): $10.00/person.
            (III)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
            (IV)   Groups: $10.00/person (including busses).
            San Bernardino County Residents*
            (V)   Adults: $10.00/person.
            (VI)   Youths (4-11): $5.00/person.
            (VII)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
         *Proof of Residency Required
      (2)   Camping Fees:
         (A)   Weekday Camping (Monday - Thursday) Camping fee includes park
entry and is per site per night up to four people (excluding special events).
Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays. Maximum
stay is 14 days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be made up to one year in
advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup: $35.00.
               (i)   Each additional tent: $5.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water and sewer): $45.00.
            (III)   Partial hookup (electric): $40.00.
            (IV)   In excess of 4 people per site: $8.00/person.
            (V)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allowed one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00/vehicle.
            (VI)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site per reservation):
$10.00.
         (B)   Weekend Camping (Friday-Sunday) Camping fee includes Park entry
and is per site per night up to four people excluding special events). Add
$10.00 to regular camping Rates (two night minimum) for holidays. Maximum stay
is 14 days in 30-day period. Reservations may be made up to one year in
advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup: $45.00.
               (i)   Each additional tent: $5.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water, and sewer): $55.00.
            (III)   Partial hookup (electric): $50.00.
            (IV)   In excess of 4 people per site: $8.00/person.
            (V)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allowed one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00/vehicle.
            (VI)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site per reservation):
$10.00.
         (C)   Special Event/Concert Camping Fees: Fee to be determined on a
case by case basis.
         (D)   Groups with 20 or more persons are eligible for a group rate
provided a reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance and paid in
full prior to arrival: $5.00/person.
         (E)   Non-refundable group reservation fee: $20.00.
         (F)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (G)   Cabin rentals: Pets with additional pet deposit only. Equipped
with one double bed, one bunk bed, air conditioning and heating, porch with
bench and service counter. NO LINENS.
            Per night (up to 4 people): $75.00
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $50. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $100. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (H)   Bunk house rentals: Pets with additional pet deposit only. Two
night minimum on weekends (Friday, Saturday, Sunday). Equipped with 10 bunk
beds, air conditioning, and adjacent restroom. NO LINENS.
            Per night (20 person maximum): $160.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $100. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (I)   Mini Bunkhouse rental: Pets with additional pet deposit only.
            Two night minimum on weekends (Friday, Saturday, Sunday). Includes
kitchenette and private restroom. NO LINENS. Per night (up to 6 people):
$160.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $100. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (J)   30ft RV Rental: Pets with additional pet deposit only. Two night
minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, private bedroom with RV queen bed,
sofa, booth dinette, living/kitchen area, full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night
(up to 8 people): $160.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (K)   28ft RV Rental: Pets with additional pet deposit only. Two night
minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, sofa, booth dinette, living/kitchen
area, full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night (up to 6 people): $150.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (L)   22ft RV Rental: Pets with additional pet deposit only. Two night
minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, booth dinette, living/kitchen area,
full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night (up to 6 people): $140.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
      (3)   Regional Parks Sponsored Special Event camping fees: Two night
minimum stay includes lodging and two days of special event entrance for up to
four people. Total fees and charges must be paid when making the reservation.
         (A)   Camping:
            (I)   Without hookup per site/night: $80.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water and sewer) per site/night:
$90.00.
            (III)   Partial hookup (electric) per site/night: $85.00.
            (IV)   In excess of 4 people per site/night: $20.00/person.
         (B)   Cabin rental: Pets with additional pet deposit only. Equipped
with one double bed, one bunk bed, air conditioning and heating, porch with
bench and service counter. NO LINENS.
            Per night (up to 4 people maximum): $160.00.
         (C)   Bunk house rental: Pets with additional pet deposit only.
Equipped with 10 bunk beds, air conditioning and adjacent restroom. NO LINENS:
Per night (up to 20 people maximum): $250.00.
         (D)   Mini Bunkhouse rental: Pets with additional pet deposit only.
            Includes kitchenette and full-private restroom. NO LINENS. Per
night (up to 6 people maximum): $250.00.
         (E)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site per reservation):
$10.00.
      (4)   Area Use Fee: (fees due at time of reservation). Silver Bowl,
Livery Stage, School House or Campground Amphitheater.
         (A)   Campground: $150.00/use.
         (B)   School House: $250.00/use.
         (C)   Silver Bowl and Livery Stage: $350.00/use.
      (5)   Other Fees:
         (A)   Replacement of lost or stolen pass/card: $10.00.
         (B)   Billing fee: $30.00.
         (C)   Tally fee: $30.00.
      (6)   Wedding Program Fees: depends on location, hours, number of people,
and other amenities requested; specific fee to be determined by the Director of
Regional Parks or his/her designee.
      (7)   Calico Cemetery (Burial Fee): $150.00.
      (8)   Calico After-Hours Funeral Fee: $169.00/hour.
   (b)   Moabi.
      (1)   Entrance Fees:
         (A)   Vehicle/motorized cycle:
            (I)   Daily (plus 1 watercraft or toy): $20.00.
            (II)   Each additional watercraft or toy: $10.00.
            (III)   Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day admission
for each vehicle with a San Bernardino County resident who is a veteran,
active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, National Guard
member, or reservist: Free.
         (B)   Visitor Vehicle:
            (I)   Day Use: $20.00.
            (II)   Overnight: $25.00.
         (C)   Pedestrian, equestrian, non-motorized cycle, each person on a
bus: $7.00.
         (D)   Beach Parking Fee (per watercraft): $20.00.
         (E)   Dogs (except assistance dogs for qualified individuals with a
disability) park entry or camping: $7.00/dog (maximum of 2 dogs per campsite).
      (2)   Camping Fees: Add $10.00 to regular camping fees for holidays and
special events.
         (A)   General Policies:
            (I)   Camping fee includes one vehicle park entry and is per unit
per night (excluding special events).
            (II)   All rates are based on up to 6 persons per campsite (minimum
of 2 adults per campsite).
            (III)   Reservations may be made up to one year in advance.
               (i)   Daily Rate - will require a deposit equal to the daily
rate times the number of nights or days reserved plus the reservation fee.
               (ii)   Monthly Rate - will require a deposit equal to the
monthly rate times the number of months plus the reservation fee.
               (iii)   Holidays - Three-night minimum for the following
holidays: New Year's Eve, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, 4th of July, Labor Day
and Thanksgiving. Two night minimum for Easter, Mother's Day, and Father's Day.
         (B)   RV Camping: All RVs must be Recreational Vehicle Industry
Association (RVIA) approved with self-contained restroom and holding tank.
            (I)   Non Peninsula - Nightly rate (2-night minimum):
               (i)   With full hookup/50 AMP (sites 1-9): $60.00.
               (ii)   With full hookup/30 AMP (sites 22-34): $55.00.
               (iii)   With full hookup/50 AMP (sites 10-21 seasonal only)
(Available November thru February only): $60.00.
               (iv)   With partial hookup/water & 30 AMP/no sewer (sites 35-
45): $55.00.
            (II)   Peninsula area - Nightly rate (2-night minimum):
               (i)   With full hookup/50 AMP: $70.00.
            (III)   RV Camping - Monthly Rate:
               (i)   Monthly rates are available, in addition to the nightly
rates, during November 1st - the end of February.
                  (a)   Full hookup (sites 1-21): $700.00.
                  (b)   Partial hookup (sites 22-45): $600.00.
               (c)   Other vehicle, storage trailer, watercraft or "toy":
$25.00.
            (IV)   Dry Camping: RV must be RVIA approved with self-contained
restroom and holding tank (no tents or campers allowed).
                  (i)   Overflow parking area:
                     (a)   Day Use-vehicle, trailer or RV temporary parking:
$10.00.
                     (b)   Overnight use: $15.00.
         (C)   Tent Camping: (No vehicles or vehicular campers with tents
allowed).
            (I)   Tent Camping: Family Campground (General Public):
               (i)   Daily (excluding holidays): $35.00.
               (ii)   Holidays: $45.00.
            (II)   Group Tent Camping Fee (Gowan Cove & Scout Cove):
               (i)   Daily Camping Fee per person: $7.00.
               (ii)   RV per unit: $30.00.
               (iii)   Vehicle per unit: $20.00.
               (iv)   Non-refundable group reservation fee: $20.00.
         (D)   Other Fees:
            (I)   RV pump out fee: $25.00.
            (II)   Electric fee per night: $5.00.
            (III)   Reservation Fee (non-refundable): $10.00.
            (IV)   Cancellation Fee: $15.00.
            (V)   In excess of 6 people per rental space: $3.00/person (maximum
of 6-8 people per specific campsite).
      (3)   Mobile Home Site Fees:
         (A)   Lots 1, 2, 30, 39-43, 56-58, 62, 63, 70, 74-77: $360.00/month.
         (B)   Lots 4-29, 31-38, 44-47, 49-55, 59-61, 64-69, 71-73, 78-105:
$380.00/month.
         (C)   Utility charges for mobile home sites: as set by P.U.C.
         (D)   Mobile Home Clubhouse: $25.00/hour.
      (4)   Boat, trailer and recreational vehicle storage fees (occupancy
prohibited without park permit; concession fees may differ):
         (A)   Dry storage, monthly fee: $40.00.
         (B)   Dry storage, weekly fee: $20.00.
         (C)   Dry storage, daily fee: $5.00.
         (D)   Marina Boat Slip Rental:
            (I)   "B" & "C" Docks (no water or electric):
               (i)   Monthly fee: $200.00.
               (ii)   Weekly fee: $100.00.
               (iii)   Daily fee: $15.00.
            (II)   "A" Dock (includes water & electric):
               (i)   Monthly fee: $250.00.
               (ii)   Weekly fee: $150.00.
               (iii)   Daily fee: $25.00.
      (5)   Picnic site reservation fees, per day:
         (A)   Large picnic site with shelter: $250.00.
         (B)   Small picnic site with shelter: $25.00.
      (6)   Other Fees:
         (A)   Replacement of lost or stolen entrance pass: $5.00.
         (B)   Replacement of lost or stolen permit: $15.00.
         (C)   Damage Fees:
            (I)   Campsite clean-up fee: $75.00.
            (II)   Disable/damage electric pedestal fee: Actual cost in an
amount not to exceed $750.00.
            (III)   Hose bib fee: $250.00.
            (IV)   Sewer cleanout fee: $250.00.
      (7)   Cancellation Policy:
         (A)   Campsites - Daily Rates:
            (I)   Non-Holidays:
               (i)   31 days or more prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee
of $15.00.
               (ii)   30-15 days prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee plus
50 percent of first night regular price fee.
               (iii)   14-1 days prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee plus
first night regular price fee.
            (II)   Holidays:
               (i)   31 days or more prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee
of $15.00.
               (ii)   30-15 days prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee plus
first night holiday rate.
               (iii)   14-1 days prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee plus
first three nights holiday rate.
         (B)   Campsites - Monthly Rates:
            (I)   31 days or more prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee of
$15.00.
            (II)   30-15 days prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee plus 50
percent of monthly rate.
            (III)   14-1 days prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee plus 100
percent of monthly rate.
         (C)   Picnic Pavilions:
            (I)   Non-Holidays:
               (i)   30-15 days prior to reservation date - Cancellation fee of
$15.00.
               (ii)   14-1 days prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee plus
50 percent of daily rate.
            (II)   Holidays:
               (i)   30-15 days prior to reservation date - Cancellation fee of
$15.00.
               (ii)   14-1 days prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee plus
100 percent of daily rate.
         (D)   Change of dates will incur a $15.00 Cancellation Fee plus a
$10.00 new Reservation Fee.
         (E)   Early Departures - there is no refund for daily rate early
departures. Monthly rate early departures will be charged a penalty fee in the
amount of 50 percent of the monthly rate fee.
   (c)   Glen Helen.
      (1)   Entrance Fees:
         (A)   Vehicle/motorized cycle (limited re-entry):
            (I)   Weekdays (Mon-Fri): $10.00.
            (II)   Weekends (Sat-Sun): $15.00.
            (III)   Summer Pass valid at Glen Helen Regional Park only: $40.00.
            (IV)   Summer Pass valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi, and Calico: $60.00.
            (V)   Holidays (New Year's Day, Presidents Day, Easter, Memorial
Day, Labor Day, 4th of July and Thanksgiving Day; weekends - Fri, Sat, Sun and
Mon where applicable) (excluding special events): $20.00.
            (VI)   Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day admission
for each vehicle with a San Bernardino County resident who is a veteran,
active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, National Guard
member, or reservist: Free.
            NOTE: §§ 16.0223(c)(1)(A)(I) through 16.0223(c)(1)(A)(IV) exclude
holidays and special events.
         (B)   Pedestrian, equestrian, non-motorized cycle, each person on a
bus: $3.00.
         (C)   Annual vehicle entrance pass (per carload):
            (I)   Valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi, and
Calico: $125.00.
            (II)   Valid at Glen Helen Regional Park only: $80.00.
         (D)   Senior citizens, qualified individuals with a disability,
veterans, and active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, annual
vehicle entrance pass (per carload). Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi and Calico: $100.00.
         (E)   Annual walking entrance pass (per person) includes one dog.
Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and Calico: $25.00.
         NOTE: Annual entrance passes are valid daily, except holidays and
special events, for 12 months from date of purchase and are not transferable.
         (F)   Dogs (except assistance dogs for qualified individuals with a
disability) park entry or camping: $1.00/dog.
      (2)   Camping Fees:
         (A)   Weekday Camping (Monday-Thursday). Camping fee includes park
entry and is per site, per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays and special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup: $35.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water and sewer): $45.00.
            (III)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (IV)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00.
            (V)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site): $10.00.
            (VI)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (B)   Weekend Camping (Friday-Sunday) Camping fee includes park entry
and is per site, per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays and special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup: $45.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water and sewer): $55.00.
            (III)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (IV)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00.
            (V)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site): $10.00.
            (VI)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (C)   Special Event/Concert Camping Fees:
            (I)   Fee to be negotiated on a case by case basis.
         (D)   Groups with 20 or more persons are eligible for a group rate
provided reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance and paid in full
prior to arrival:
            (I)   Per adult/youth (minimum 20 persons): $5.00.
            (II)   Non-refundable group reservation fee: $20.00.
         (E)   Bundle of wood: $7.00 each.
      (3)   Day Use Education Excursion Program: Groups with 20 or more youths
sponsored by established public or private institutions (such as schools,
churches, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, YMCA, YWCA) are eligible for a group rate
providing a confirmed reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance of
arrival:
         (A)   Entrance fee (cannot be used with any other discount): $3.00/
person.
      (4)   Shelter site fees, per day (fees due at time of reservation):
         (A)   Pine Hill or Ash Cove: $100.00.
         (B)   Coyote or Meadow Lark: $400.00.
         (C)   Non-refundable shelter site reservation fee: $10.00. If the
shelter is cancelled less than 30 days before reservation dates, all fees will
be non-refundable. A damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual costs
for damage and required clean-up) will be a minimum of $100 and/or be
determined by the size and nature of the event. A deposit made does not relieve
any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed the
amount of the deposit.
      (5)   Fishing Fees Daily:
         (A)   Adults: $15.00.
         (B)   Child (4-12): $5.00.
         (C)   Holidays (all ages): $20.00.
         (D)   12 Fishing Passes: $125.00.
         (E)   Fishing Derby: $20.00/person.
         NOTE: §§ 16.0223(c)(5)(A), 16.0223(c)(5)(B), and 16.0223(c)(5)(D)
exclude holidays and special events.
      (6)   Swimming Fees:
         (A)   Swim Admission:
            (I)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
            (II)   Daily (excluding holidays, holiday weekends, and special
events): $15.00.
            (III)   Daily- Holidays, holiday weekends (Fri, Sat, Sun, & Mon
where applicable) and special events: $20.00.
            (IV)   Family Pass (4 people)(excludes holidays and special
events): $55.00.
            (V)   After Hours events (swim area and waterslide) 5:30 p.m. - 7:
30 p.m., Daily:
               (i)   Minimum of 100 adult/youths:
                  (a)   Adults and youths (4 and over): $15.00.
                  (b)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
               (ii)   Operation fee: $300.00.
               (iii)   Cleaning fee (refundable): $100.00.
            (VI)   Cabana Rental Fees:
               (i)   Daily fees (excluding holidays, holiday weekends and
special events): $50.00.
               (ii)   Daily fees - Holidays, holiday weekends (Fri, Sat, Sun,
and Mon where applicable) and special events: $100.00.
               (iii)   Cabana reservation fee, non-refundable: $10.00.
         (B)   School group swim area and waterslide - swim season with 24
hours minimum advance reservation, 4 hours maximum during park operation hours:
$5.00/per person includes park entry.
      (7)   Other Fees:
         (A)   Replacement of lost or stolen pass/card: $10.00.
         (B)   Billing fee: $30.00.
         (C)   Utility access fee (each meter): $100.00.
            (I)   Actual costs based on meter reading: Actual cost.
         (D)   Area Use Fee (non-reservable area): $500.00/acre.
         (E)   Tally fee: $30.00.
         (F)   Race course fee: $100.00/hour.
         (G)   Lake Use Fees:
            (I)   Big Lake: $225.00/day.
            (II)   Small Lake: $50.00/day.
         (H)   Disc Golf course rental: $500.00/day.
         (I)   Full park rental (exclusive use of the park, excluding Swim
Facility): $25,000.00/day.
   (d)   Mojave Narrows.
      (1)   Entrance Fees:
         (A)   Vehicle/motorized cycle (limited re-entry):
            (I)   Weekdays (Mon-Fri): $10.00.
            (II)   Weekends (Sat-Sun): $15.00.
            (III)   Summer Pass valid at Mojave Narrows Regional Park only:
$40.00.
            (IV)   Summer Pass valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi, and Calico: $60.00.
            (V)   Holidays (New Year's Day, Presidents Day, Easter, Memorial
Day, Labor Day, 4th of July and Thanksgiving Day; weekends - Fri, Sat, Sun and
Mon where applicable) (excluding special events): $20.00.
            (VI)   Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day admission
for each vehicle with a San Bernardino County resident who is a veteran,
active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, National Guard
member, or reservist: Free.
               NOTE: §§ 16.0223(d)(1)(A)(I) through 16.0223(d)(1)(A)(IV)
exclude holidays and special events.
         (B)   Pedestrian, non-motorized cycle, each person on a bus: $3.00.
         (C)   Equestrian Day Use (one person/one horse): $8.00.
            (I)   Each additional horse: $3.00.
         (D)   Annual vehicle entrance pass (per carload):
            (I)   Valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and
Calico: $125.00.
            (II)   Valid at Mojave Narrows Regional Park only: $80.00.
         (E)   Senior citizens, qualified individuals with a disability,
veterans, and active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, annual
vehicle entrance pass (per carload). Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi and Calico: $100.00.
         (F)   Annual walking entrance pass (per person) includes one dog.
Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and Calico: $25.00.
         NOTE: Annual entrance passes are valid daily, except holidays and
special events, for 12 months from date of purchase and are not transferable.
         (G)   Dogs (except assistance dogs for qualified individuals with a
disability) park entry or camping: $1.00/dog.
      (2)   Camping Fees:
         (A)   Weekday Camping (Monday - Thursday). Camping fee includes park
entry and is per site per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays and special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup: $35.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water and sewer): $45.00.
            (III)   Extra tent: $10.00.
            (IV)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (V)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one (1)
additional vehicle): $10.00.
            (VI)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site): $10.00.
            (VII)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (B)   Weekend Camping (Friday-Sunday). Camping fee includes park entry
and is per site, per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays and special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup: $45.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water and sewer): $55.00.
            (III)   Extra tent: $10.00.
            (IV)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (V)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one (1)
additional vehicle): $10.00.
            (VI)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site): $10.00.
            (VII)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (C)   Special Event/Concert Camping Fees:
            (I)   Fee to be determined on a case by case basis.
         (D)   Groups with 20 or more persons are eligible for a group rate
provided reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance and paid in full
prior to arrival.
            (I)   Per adult/youth (minimum 20 persons): $5.00. (Includes all
campsites or cabins)
            (II)   Non-refundable group reservation fee: $20.00.
         (E)   Bundle of Wood: $7.00 each.
         (F)   30ft RV Rental: Pets with additional pet deposit only. Two night
minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, private bedroom with RV queen bed,
sofa, booth dinette, living/kitchen area, full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night
(up to 8 people): $160.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (G)   28ft RV Rental: Pets with an additional pet deposit only. Two
night minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, sofa, booth dinette, living/
kitchen area, full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night (up to 6 people): $150.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (H)   22ft RV Rental: Pets with an additional pet deposit only. Two
night minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, booth dinette, living/kitchen
area, full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night (up to 6 people): $140.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
      (3)   Day Use Education Excursion Program: Groups with 20 or more youths
sponsored by established public or private institutions (such as schools,
churches, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, YMCA, YWCA) are eligible for a group rate
providing a confirmed reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance of
arrival:
         (A)   Entrance fee (cannot be used with any other discount): $3.00/
person.
      (4)   Shelter site fees, per day (fees due at time of reservation):
         (A)   Shelter 2: $100.00.
         (B)   Shelters 1 and 6: $150.00.
         (C)   Shelters 3 and 4: $200.00.
         (D)   Shelter 5: $400.00.
         (E)   Non-refundable Shelter site reservation fee: $10.00. If the
shelter is cancelled less than 30 days before reservation dates, all fees will
be non-refundable. A damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual costs
for damage and required clean-up) will be a minimum of $100 and/or be
determined by the size and nature of the event. A deposit made does not relieve
any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed the
amount of the deposit.
      (5)   Fishing Fees Daily:
         (A)   Adults: $15.00.
         (B)   Child (4-14): $5.00.
         (C)   Holidays (all ages): $20.00.
         (D)   12 Fishing Passes: $125.00.
         (E)   Fishing Derby: $20.00/person.
         NOTE: §§ 16.0223(d)(5)(A), 16.0223(d)(5)(B), and 16.0223(d)(5)(D)
exclude holidays and special events.
      (6)   Other Fees:
         (A)   Replacement of lost or stolen pass/card: $10.00.
         (B)   Billing fee: $30.00.
         (C)   Utility Access Fee (each meter): $100.00.
            (I)   Actual costs based on meter reading: Actual cost.
         (D)   Area Use Fee (non-reservable area): $500.00/acre.
         (E)   Tally fee: $30.00.
         (F)   Race course fee: $100.00/hour.
         (G)   Lake Use Fees:
            (I)   Pelican Lake: $100.00/day.
            (II)   Horseshoe Lake: $1,000.00/day.
         (H)   Disc Golf course rental: $500.00/day.
         (I)   Full park rental (exclusive use of the park): $10,000.00/day.
   (e)   Prado.
      (1)   Entrance Fees:
         (A)   Vehicle/motorized cycle (limited re-entry):
            (I)   Weekdays (Mon-Fri): $10.00.
            (II)   Weekends (Sat-Sun): $15.00.
            (III)   Summer Pass valid at Prado Regional Park only: $40.00.
            (IV)   Summer Pass valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi, and Calico: $60.00.
            (V)   Holidays (New Year's Day, Presidents Day, Easter, Memorial
Day, Labor Day, 4th of July and Thanksgiving Day; weekends - Fri, Sat, Sun and
Mon where applicable) (excluding special events): $20.00.
            (VI)   Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day admission
for each vehicle with a San Bernardino County resident who is a veteran,
active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, National Guard
member, or reservist: Free.
            NOTE: §§ 16.0223(e)(1)(A)(I) through 16.0223(e)(1)(A)(IV) exclude
holidays and special events.
         (B)   Pedestrian, equestrian, non-motorized cycle, each person on a
bus: $3.00.
         (C)   Annual vehicle entrance pass (per carload):
            (I)   Valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and
Calico: $125.00.
            (II)   Valid at Prado Regional Park only: $80.00.
         (D)   Senior citizens, qualified individuals with a disability,
veterans, and active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, annual
vehicle entrance pass (per carload). Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi and Calico: $100.00.
         (E)   Annual walking entrance pass (per person) includes one dog.
Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and Calico: $25.00.
         NOTE: Annual entrance passes are valid daily, except holidays and
special events, for 12 months from date of purchase and are not transferable.
         (F)   Dogs (except assistance dogs for qualified individuals with a
disability) park entry or camping: $1.00/dog.
      (2)   Camping Fees:
         (A)   Weekday Camping (Monday-Thursday). Camping fee includes park
entry and is per site per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays and special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30 day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   With full hookup (sites 1 through 75) (electric, water and
sewer): $45.00.
            (II)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (III)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00.
            (IV)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site): $10.00.
            (V)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (B)   Weekend Camping (Friday-Sunday) Camping fee includes park entry
and is per site, per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays and special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   With full hookup (sites 1 through 75) (electric, water, and
sewer): $55.00.
            (II)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (III)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00.
            (IV)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site): $10.00.
            (V)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (C)   Groups with 20 or more persons are eligible for a group rate
provided reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance and paid in full
prior to arrival.
            (I)   Per adult/youth (minimum 20 persons): $5.00.
            (II)   Non-refundable group reservation fee: $20.00.
         (D)   Bundle of wood: $7.00 each.
         (E)   30ft RV Rental: Pets with additional deposit only. Two night
minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, private bedroom with RV queen bed,
sofa, booth dinette, living/kitchen area, full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night
(up to 8 people): $160.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (F)   28ft RV Rental: Pets with additional deposit only. Two night
minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, sofa, booth dinette, living/kitchen
area, full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night (up to 6 people): $150.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (G)   22ft RV Rental: Pets with additional deposit only. Two night
minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, booth dinette, living/kitchen area,
full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night (up to 6 people): $140.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
      (3)   Day Use Education Excursion Program. Groups with 20 or more youths
sponsored by established public or private institutions (such as schools,
churches, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, YMCA, YWCA) are eligible for a group rate
providing a confirmed group reservation is made with the park 48 hours in
advance of arrival:
         (A)   Entrance fee (cannot be used with any other discount): $3.00/
person.
      (4)   Picnic site fees, per day (fees due at time of reservation):
         (A)   Red Tables/Green Tables: $125.00.
      (5)   Shelter site fees, per day (fees due at time of reservation):
         (A)   Peacock, Red Tail Hawk, Blue Heron: $250.00.
         (B)   Osprey, Mallard: $400.00.
         (C)   Non-refundable shelter site reservation fee: $10.00. If the
shelter is cancelled less than 30 days before reservation dates, all fees will
be non-refundable. A damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual costs
for damage and required clean-up) will be a minimum of $100 and/or be
determined by the size and nature of the event. A deposit made does not relieve
any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed the
amount of the deposit.
      (6)   Fishing Fees Daily:
         (A)   Adults: $15.00
         (B)   Child (4-14): $5.00
         (C)   Holidays (all ages): $20.00.
         (D)   12 Fishing Passes: $125.00.
         (E)   Fishing Derby: $20.00/person.
         NOTE: §§ 16.0223(e)(6)(A), 16.0223(e)(6)(B), and 16.0223(e)(6)(D)
exclude holidays and special events.
      (7)   Boat launch fees: $5.00/day.
      (8)   Facilities Rental (by reservation only, during normal park
operations hours):
         (A)   Playing fields (use of fields restricted to sports use only, all
other usage subject to Area Use Fee):
            (I)   Softball/baseball fields (each): $10.00/hour (2 hr. min., 4
hr. max).
            (II)   Soccer fields (each): $10.00/hour (2 hr. min., 4 hr. max).
            (III)   Organized - all day (more than 4 hours):
               (i)   Soccer/baseball - each field: $80.00.
         (B)   Multi-purpose building:
            (I)   Regular park operating hours: $75.00/hour with 2 hour
minimum, plus park entry fee.
            (II)   All day usage: $500.00.
            (III)   Outside normal park operating hours: $150.00/hour.
            (IV)   Refundable security deposit required for all multi-purpose
building rentals: $100.00.
         (C)   Non-refundable reservation fee required for all multi-purpose
building rentals: $20.00.
      (9)   Other Fees:
         (A)   Replacement of lost or stolen pass/card: $10.00.
         (B)   Billing fee: $30.00.
         (C)   Utility access fee (each meter): $100.00.
            (I)   Actual costs based on meter reading: Actual cost.
         (D)   Area Use Fee (non-reservable): $500.00/acre.
         (E)   Tally fee: $30.00.
         (F)   Race course fee: $100.00/hour.
         (G)   Lake Use Fee: $1,500.00/day.
         (H)   Disc Golf course rental: $500.00/day.
         (I)   Full park rental (exclusive use of the park): $50,000.00/day.
   (f)   Cucamonga - Guasti.
      (1)   Entrance Fees:
         (A)   Vehicle/motorized cycle (limited re-entry):
            (I)   Weekdays (Mon-Fri): $10.00.
            (II)   Weekends (Sat-Sun) : $15.00.
            (III)   Summer Pass valid at Guasti Regional Park only: $40.00.
            (IV)   Summer Pass valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi, and Calico: $60.00.
            (V)   Holidays (New Year's Day, Presidents Day, Easter, Memorial
Day, Labor Day, 4th of July and Thanksgiving Day; weekends - Fri, Sat, Sun and
Mon where applicable) (excluding special events): $20.00.
            (VI)   Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day admission
for each vehicle with a San Bernardino County resident who is a veteran,
active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, National Guard
member, or reservist: Free.
            NOTE: §§ 16.0223(f)(1)(A)(I) through 16.0223(f)(1)(A)(IV) exclude
holidays and special events.
         (B)   Pedestrian, equestrian, non-motorized cycle, each person on a
bus: $3.00.
         (C)   Annual vehicle entrance pass (per carload):
            (I)   Valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and
Calico: $125.00.
            (II)   Valid at Guasti Regional Park only: $80.00.
         (D)   Senior citizens, qualified individuals with a disability,
veterans, and active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, annual
vehicle entrance pass (per carload): Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi and Calico: $100.00.
         (E)   Annual walking entrance pass (per person) includes one dog:
Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and Calico: $25.00.
         NOTE: Annual entrance passes are valid daily, except holidays and
special events, for 12 months from date of purchase and are not transferable.
         (F)   Dogs (except assistance dogs for qualified individuals with a
disability) park entry: $1.00/dog.
      (2)   Camping Fees:
         (A)   Weekday Camping (Monday-Thursday). Camping fee includes park
entry and is per site, per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays and special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup: $35.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water and sewer): $45.00.
            (III)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (IV)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00.
            (V)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site): $10.00.
         (B)   Weekend Camping (Friday-Sunday). Camping fee includes park entry
and is per site, per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays and special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup: $45.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water, and sewer): $55.00.
            (III)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (IV)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00.
            (V)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site): $10.00.
         (C)   Groups with 20 or more persons are eligible for a group rate
provided a reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance and paid in
full prior to arrival:
            (I)   Per adult/youth (minimum 20 persons): $5.00.
            (II)   Non-refundable group reservation fee: $20.00.
      (3)   Day Use Education Excursion Program. Groups with 20 or more youths
sponsored by established public or private institutions (such as schools,
churches, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, YMCA, YWCA) are eligible for a group rate
providing a confirmed reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance of
arrival:
         (A)   Entrance fee (cannot be used with any other discount): $3.00/
person.
         (B)   Swimming fee, weekdays only, except holidays and special events:
            (I)   Per person:
               (i)   Adults and youths: $3.00.
               (ii)   Children (3 years and under): No charge.
      (4)   Shelter site fees, per day (fees due at time of reservation):
         (A)   Secundo, Catfish Cove, Kingfisher: $100.00.
         (B)   Grapevine, Mountain View, Orchard, Great Horned Owl: $400.00.
         (C)   Non-refundable shelter site reservation fee: $10.00. If the
shelter is cancelled less than 30 days before reservation dates, all fees will
be non-refundable. A damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual costs
for damage and required clean-up) will be a minimum of $100 and/or be
determined by the size and nature of the event. A deposit made does not relieve
any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed the
amount of the deposit.
      (5)   Fishing Fees Daily:
         (A)   Adults: $15.00.
         (B)   Child (4-14): $5.00.
         (C)   Holidays (all ages): $20.00.
         (D)   12 Fishing Passes: $125.00.
         (E)   Fishing Derby: $20.00/person.
         NOTE: §§ 16.0223(f)(5)(A), 16.0223(f)(5)(B), and 16.0223(f)(5)(D)
exclude holidays and special events.
      (6)   Other Fees:
         (A)   Replacement of lost or stolen pass/card: $10.00.
         (B)   Billing fee: $30.00.
         (C)   Utility access fee (each meter): $100.00.
            (I)   Actual costs based on meter reading: Actual cost.
         (D)   Area Use Fee (non-reservable area): $500.00/acre.
         (E)   Tally fee: $30.00.
         (F)   Race course fee: $100.00/hour.
         (G)   Lake Use Fees:
            (I)   Small Lake: $50.00/day.
            (II)   Big Lake*: $150.00/day.
            *NOTE: Usage of Big Lake must be cleared with Pedal Boat
Concessionaire.
         (H)   Full park rental (exclusive use of the park, excluding Swim
Facility): $25,000.00/day.
   (g)   Yucaipa.
      (1)   Entrance Fees:
         (A)   Vehicle/motorized cycle (limited re-entry):
            (I)   Weekdays (Mon-Fri): $10.00.
            (II)   Weekends (Sat-Sun): $15.00.
            (III)   Summer Pass valid at Yucaipa Regional Park only: $40.00.
            (IV)   Summer Pass valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi, and Calico: $60.00.
            (V)   Holidays (New Year's Day, Presidents Day, Easter, Memorial
Day, Labor Day, 4th of July and Thanksgiving Day; weekends - Fri, Sat, Sun and
Mon where applicable) (excluding special events): $20.00.
            (VI)   Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day admission
for each vehicle with a San Bernardino County resident who is a veteran,
active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, National Guard
member, or reservist: Free.
            NOTE: §§ 16.0223(g)(1)(A)(I) through 16.0223(g)(1)(A)(IV) exclude
holidays and special events.
         (B)   Pedestrian, equestrian, non-motorized cycle, each person on a
bus: $3.00.
         (C)   Annual vehicle entrance pass (per carload).
            (I)   Valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and
Calico: $125.00.
            (II)   Valid at Yucaipa Regional Park only: $80.00.
         (D)   Senior citizens, qualified individuals with a disability,
veterans, and active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, annual
vehicle entrance pass (per carload). Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi and Calico: $100.00.
         (E)   Annual walking entrance pass (per person) includes one dog.
Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and Calico: $25.00.
         NOTE: Annual entrance passes are valid daily, except holidays and
special events, for 12 months from date of purchase and are not transferable.
         (F)   Dogs (except assistance dogs for qualified individuals with a
disability) park entry or camping: $1.00/dog.
      (2)   Camping Fees:
         (A)   Weekday Camping (Monday - Thursday). Camping fee includes park
entry and is per site per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays/special
events). Add $10.00 to the regular camping rates (two night minimum) for
holidays/special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30 day period.
Reservations may be made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full
upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup: $35.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water and sewer): $45.00.
            (III)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (IV)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle: $10.00.
            (V)   Reservation fee, non-refundable: $10.00.
            (VI)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (B)   Weekend Camping (Friday-Sunday). Camping fee includes park entry
and is per site, per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays and special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30 day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup: $45.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water, and sewer): $55.00.
            (III)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (IV)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00.
            (V)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site): $10.00.
            (VI)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (C)   Groups with 20 or more persons are eligible for a group rate
provided reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance and paid in full
prior to arrival:
            (I)   Per adult/youth (minimum 20 persons): $5.00.
            (II)   Non-refundable group reservation fee: $20.00.
         (D)   Group RV sites (three consecutive sites) includes park entry and
is per night (excluding Holidays/Special Events). Holidays/Special Events add
$10.00 to the regular camping rates (two night minimum). Maximum stay is 14
days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be made up to one year in advance.
All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Per night: $120.00.
         (E)   Bundle of wood: $7.00 each.
         (F)   30ft RV Rental: Pets with additional deposit only. Two night
minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, private bedroom with RV queen bed,
sofa, booth dinette, living/kitchen area, full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night
(up to 8 people): $160.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (G)   28ft RV Rental: Pets with additional deposit only. Two night
minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, sofa, booth dinette, living/kitchen
area, full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night (up to 6 people): $150.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (H)   22ft RV Rental: Pets with additional deposit only. Two night
minimum. Equipped with double-size bunks, booth dinette, living/kitchen area,
full bath, and NO LINENS. Per night (up to 6 people): $140.00.
            (I)   The damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus any actual
costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $300. The deposit made does not
relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed
the amount of the deposit.
            (II)   An additional pet damage/clean-up deposit (refundable minus
any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be $200. The deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
      (3)   Day Use Education Excursion Program: Groups with 20 or more youths
sponsored by established public or private institutions (such as schools,
churches, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, YMCA, YWCA) are eligible for a group rate
providing a confirmed reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance of
arrival:
         (A)   Entrance fee (cannot be used with any other discount): $3.00/
person.
      (4)   Shelter site fees, per day (fees due at time of reservation):
         (A)   Small shelters (1 picnic table including within the swim area):
$100.00.
         (B)   Shelters 1, 2, 3: $400.00.
         (C)   Non-refundable shelter site reservation fee: $10.00.
         NOTE: If the shelter is cancelled less than 30 days before reservation
dates, all fees will be non-refundable. A damage/clean-up deposit (refundable
minus any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be a minimum of
$100 and/or be determined by the size and nature of the event. A deposit made
does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up
that exceed the amount of the deposit.
      (5)   Fishing Fees Daily:
         (A)   Adults: $15.00.
         (B)   Child (4-14): $5.00.
         (C)   Holidays (all ages): $20.00.
         (D)   12 Fishing Passes: $125.00.
         (E)   Fishing Derby: $20.00/person.
         NOTE: §§ 16.0223(g)(5)(A), 16.0223(g)(5)(B), and 16.0223(g)(5)(D)
exclude holidays and special events.
      (6)   Swimming Fees:
         (A)   Swim Admission:
            (I)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
            (II)   Daily (excluding holidays, holiday weekends and special
events): $15.00.
            (III)   Daily- Holidays, holiday weekends (Fri, Sat, Sun, & Mon
where applicable) and special events: $20.00.
            (IV)   Family Pass (4 people)(excludes holidays and special
events): $55.00.
            (V)   After Hours Events (swim area & waterslide) 5:30 p.m. - 7:30
p.m., Daily:
               (i)   Minimum of 100 adult/youths:
                  (a)   Adults and youths (4 and over): $15.00.
                  (b)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
               (ii)   Operation fee: $300.00.
               (iii)   Cleaning fee (refundable): $100.00.
            (VI)   Cabana Rental Fees:
               (i)   Daily fees (excluding holidays, holiday weekends and
special events): $50.00.
               (ii)   Daily fees - Holidays, holiday weekends (Fri, Sat, Sun
and Mon where applicable) and special events: $100.00.
               (iii)   Cabana reservation fee, non-refundable: $10.00.
         (B)   School group swim area and waterslide - swim season with 24
hours minimum advance reservation, 4 hours maximum or less during park
operation hours: $5.00/per person includes park entry.
         (C)   School group swim area and waterslide - swim season without
reservations - will use swim/slide 10 punch cards ($85.00): $8.50/per person
includes park entry.
      (7)   Other Fees:
         (A)   Replacement of lost or stolen pass/card: $10.00.
         (B)   Billing fee: $30.00.
         (C)   Stage Use: $100.00.
         (D)   Utility access fee (each meter): $100.00.
            (I)   Actual costs based on meter reading: Actual cost.
         (E)   Area Use Fee (non-reservable area): $500.00/acre.
         (F)   Tally fee: $30.00.
         (G)   Race course fee: $100.00/hour.
         (H)   Lake Use Fees:
            (I)   Upper Lake: $90.00/day.
            (II)   Middle Lake*: $220.00/day.
            *NOTE: Usage of Middle Lake must be cleared with Pedal Boat
Concessionaire.
            (III)   Lower Lake: $175.00/day.
         (I)   Disc Golf course rental: $500.00/day.
         (J)   Full park rental (exclusive use of the park, excluding Swim
Facility): $50,000.00/day.
   (h)   Lake Gregory.
      (1)   Entrance Fees:
         (A)   Entrance fee per person (including entrance, swimming, and zero-
depth water park; does not include waterslides or inflatable water park):
            (I)   Adults and youths (4-61): $15.00.
            (II)   Seniors (62 and older): $9.00.
            (III)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
            (IV)   Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day admission
for a San Bernardino County resident who is a veteran, active-duty personnel in
the United States Armed Services, National Guard member, or reservist: Free.
         (B)   All Access Individual Day Pass. Includes entrance, swimming,
zero depth water park, waterslides, and inflatable water park.   
            (I)   Adults and youths (4-61): $30.00.
            (II)   Seniors (62 and older): $24.00.
            (III)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
      (2)   Day Use Education Excursion Program. Groups with 20 or more youths
sponsored by established public or private institutions (such as schools,
churches, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, YMCA, YWCA) are eligible for a group rate
providing a confirmed, paid (if applicable) reservation is made with the park
48 hours in advance of arrival; subject to availability:
         (A)   Entry Fee: Monday - Friday only, except holidays and special
events (does not include Waterslides/Floating):
            (I)   Adults and youths: $8.00.
            (II)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
         (B)   Entry Fee: Except holidays and special events (includes
Waterslides/Inflatable Water Park:
            (I)   Adults and youths: $15.00.
            (II)   Children (3 and under): No charge.
      (3)   Memberships:
         (A)   Annual Individual Value Package. Includes parking, fishing,
entrance, one hour per day non-motorized boat rental available Monday through
Friday, 10% discount on the Lake Gregory Community Recreation Company (LGCRC)
Special Event tickets, 3% off private event bookings (excludes weddings), one
buddy ticket per month during summer season, Off-Season Buddy Pass, early
registration access to select special events, and 10% discount on prepackaged
and prepared items and merchandise.
            (I)   Billed annually: $590.00/year.
            (II)   Billed month to month: $54.00/month ($648.00/year).
         (B)   Annual Individual Deluxe Package. Includes parking, fishing,
entrance, 20% discount on LGCRC Special Event tickets, 6% off private event
bookings (excludes weddings), one buddy ticket per month during summer season,
Off-Season Buddy Pass, 20% discount on prepackaged and prepared items and
merchandise, waterslides and inflatable water park, two hours per day non-
motorized boat rental available Monday through Friday, one hour per month Duffy
boat rental, 1 hour per month e-bike rental, early registration access to
select special events.
            (I)   Billed annually: $845.00/year.
            (II)   Billed month to month: $74.00/month ($888.00/year).
         (C)   Annual Individual VIP Package. Includes parking, fishing
entrance, 30% discount on LGCRC Special Event tickets, 9% off private event
bookings (excludes weddings), one buddy ticket per month during summer season,
Off-Season Buddy Pass, 30% discount on prepackaged and prepared items and
merchandise, waterslides and inflatable water park, two hours per day non-
motorized boat rental, two hours per month Duffy boat rental, 2 hours per month
e-bike rental, early registration access to select special events.
            (I)   Billed annually: $1,198.00/year.
            (II)   Billed month to month: $108.00/month ($1,296.00/year).
         (D)   Summer Individual Value Package. Valid Memorial Day weekend to
Labor Day. Includes parking, fishing, entrance, one hour per day non-motorized
boat rental available Monday through Friday, 10% discount on LGCRC Special
Event tickets, 3% off private event bookings (excludes weddings), one buddy
ticket per month during summer season, Off-Season Buddy Pass, early
registration access to select special events, and 10% discount on prepackaged
and prepared items and merchandise.
            (I)   Membership: $189.00.
         (E)   Summer Individual Deluxe Package. Valid though Memorial Day
weekend to Labor Day. Includes parking, fishing, entrance, 20% discount on
LGCRC Special Event tickets, 6% off private event bookings (excludes weddings),
Off-Season Buddy Pass, 20% discount on prepackaged and prepared items and
merchandise, waterslides and inflatable water park, two hours per day non-
motorized boat rental available Monday through Friday, one hour per month Duffy
boat rental, early registration access to select special events.
            (I)   Membership: $219.00.
         (F)   Summer Individual VIP package. Valid Memorial Day weekend to
Labor Day. Includes parking, fishing, entrance, 30% discount on LGCRC Special
Event tickets, 9% off private event bookings (excludes weddings), one buddy
ticket per month during summer season, Off-Season Buddy Pass, 30% discount on
prepackaged and prepared items and merchandise, waterslides and inflatable
water park, two hours per day non-motorized boat rental, two hours per month
Duffy boat rental, 2 hours per month e-bike rental, early registration access
to select special events.
            (I)   Membership: $249.00.
         (G)   Annual Corporate Membership. Includes parking and entrance,
except holidays and special events. Must purchase 10 or more.
            (I)   Membership: $125.00/person.
      (4)   Watercraft Launch:
         (A)   Launch Fee (does not include parking): $10.00/day.
         (B)   Launch Pass-Yearly (January-December): $89.00.
      (5)   San Moritz Lodge Facility Rental Fees:
         (A)   Full facility rental, both - Fireside and Lakeview rooms
(maximum capacity 400 people). Includes full day and rehearsal on space
available basis.
            (I)   Class I (non-profit) use: $1,200.00/day.
            (II)   Class II (non-commercial) use: $2,400.00/day.
            (III)   Class III (commercial) use: $4,800.00/day.
            NOTE: Complimentary set up, teardown, and parking included for (5)
(A) above.
         (B)   Lawn: Without room rental - Includes chairs and set up - up to 5
hours.
            (I)   Class I (non-profit) use: $400.00.
            (II)   Class II, III (all other entities) use: $800.00.
         (C)   San Moritz Overtime Fee (outside of contracted time):
            (I)   Class I (non-profit) use: $150.00/hour.
            (II)   Class II (non-commercial) use: $300.00/hour.
            (III)   Class III (commercial) use: $600.00/hour.
         (D)   Reservation Fees (Lodge Area), non-refundable:
            (I)   Class I, II (non-profit, non-commercial) use: $100.00.
            (II)   Class III (commercial) use: $200.00.
         (E)   Deposits (refundable upon return in set up condition):
            (I)   Security deposit: $500.00.
         (F)   San Moritz Cancellation Policy: All event fees are due in
advance. A deposit of 100 percent of the facility use fee will be due at the
time of booking to hold the reserved date. Full fees are due per the contract
30 days in advance of the reserved date including additional rentals, catering
and beverage minimums and any upgraded rentals. The full facility use fee will
be forfeited for cancellations received 120 days or less before the reserved
event date. Fifty percent of the facility use fee is forfeited for cancellation
between 121 days and 180 days before the reserved event date. Twenty-five
percent of the facility use fee is forfeited for cancellation between 181 days
and 240 days before the reserved event date. An administrative fee of $200.00
will be charged for any cancellation of the reserved date over 240 days.
      (6)   Outdoor - Swim Area:
         (A)   Large picnic shelter:
            (I)   During park hours: $350.00.
            (II)   After hours (2 hour minimum): $65.00/hour.
            (III)   After hours cleaning deposit (refundable): $225.00.
         (B)   Small picnic shelter:
            (I)   During park hours: $150.00.
            (II)   Cleaning deposit (refundable): $100.00.
         (C)   Lake View Terrace:
            (I)   During park hours: $800.00.
            (II)   After park hours (2 hour minimum): $100.00/hour.
            (III)   Cleaning deposit (refundable): $250.00.
         (D)   Reservation fee (Outdoor-Swim Area), non-refundable: $20.00.
         (E)   Shoreline Only: Maximum 50 guests; over 50 guests should use one
of the above spaces. Per 100 linear feet of shoreline. Subject to availability.
Lifeguard required at additional cost if entering water. Setup, teardown, and
parking not included.
            (I)   During park hours: $25.00/hour.
            (II)   After hours: $50.00/hour.
            (III)   Cleaning deposit (refundable): $100.00.
      (7)   Other Fees:
         (A)   Boathouse locker rental: (payable in advance - no billing, no
refund).
            (I)   April 15 to October 31: $65.00.
            (II)   Whole calendar year: $85.00.
         (B)   Replacement of lost or stolen pass/card: Actual cost.
         (C)   Special event application processing fee: $200.00.
         (D)   Concession proposal application fee: $250.00.
         (E)   First hour parking fee: All parking lots, North Beach, South
Beach, and San Moritz (unless otherwise permitted by contract). Does not apply
to special event days, Memorial Day, July 4th, and Labor Day: $2.00/first hour.
         (F)   Hourly parking fee from second hour to ninth hour: All parking
lots, North Beach, South Beach, and San Moritz (unless otherwise permitted by
contract). Full day parking not to exceed $10.00. Does not apply to special
event days, Memorial Day, July 4th, and Labor Day: $1.00/hour.
         (G)   Annual Parking Pass (excludes special event days). Space
availability not guaranteed: $89.00.
         (H)   Special Event Parking (includes Memorial Day, July 4th, and
Labor Day): $20.00/day.
         (I)   Sport Courts Reservation (per court per hour or seasonal rate
subject to negotiation) Use of the sport courts is restricted to the intended
sport, all other events and/or activities are subject to other event and
activity fees: $15.00.
         (J)   Field Events: Subject to seasonal availability. Parking not
included.
            (I)   Youth event sponsored by established public or private
institutions (such as schools, churches, organized camps, Boy Scouts, Girl
Scouts, YMCA, YWCA): $320.00.
            (II)   All other event use, excludes weddings and wedding
receptions (other fees/deposit may apply): $640.00.
            (III)   Field Restoration deposit (refundable): $200.00.
         (K)   Fishing Access Pass (per day): $10.00.
         (L)   Annual Fishing Access Pass: $89.00.
         (M)   Fishing Derby: $25.00/person.
         (N)   Lifeguard: Subject to availability. Minimum 4 hours required to
book. Maximum of 25 persons per lifeguard. Additional lifeguard required if
over 4 hours: Actual Cost.
         (O)   Filming. Daily rate subject to negotiation dependent upon
seasonal impact.
         (P)   Family Special Discount. Buy three annual passes or memberships
and get one at equal or lesser value. No Charge.
         NOTE: If any space is cancelled less than 30 days before reservation
dates, all fees will be non-refundable. A damage/cleanup deposit (refundable
minus any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be a minimum of
$100.00 and/or be determined by the size and nature of the event. A deposit
made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-
up that exceed the amount of the deposit.
         (Q)   Extended Park Hours. Subject to availability. Daylight hours
only. Includes one use type only (waterslides, inflatable splash islands, or
swim area). Additional areas subject to availability with fees to be determined
on a case by case basis.
            (I)   Class I (non-profit) use:
               (a)   Up to 75 attendees: $200.00/hour.
               (b)   Per 50 attendees over initial 75: $133.00/hour.
            (II)   Class II (non-commercial) use:
               (a)   Up to 75 attendees: $400.00/hour.
               (b)   Per 50 attendees over initial 75: $266.00/hour.
         (R)   Lakeside cabin rental:
            (I)   Two night minimum per stay. Maximum stay of 14 days per
calendar year. Secluded cabin equipped with double headed stone shower in
private restroom, alarm system, fridge, microwave, dishes and cutlery, luxury
bedding and towels, king size bed, private parking area, AC/heating, large TV,
outdoor deck with bistro lighting, outdoor fire pit, WiFi, security cameras,
welcome charcuterie spread on arrival, complimentary wine glasses to take home,
outdoor pillows/blankets, smores kit for fire pit, clothes iron, hair dryer,
first aid kit, keypad access, sofa, coffee maker with coffee/tea and gift
basket provided, dinette, and outdoor dining area. Includes a 25% discount
towards a boat rental during stay. No pets. Per night (up to 2 adults, no
children): $425.00
            (II)   Cleaning fee per stay. The cleaning fee does not relieve any
party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceeds the
cleaning fee. Must have a card on file for excess damages: $100.00.
            (III)   Holidays - Three-night minimum for the following holidays:
New Year's Eve, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, 4th of July, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving, and Christmas.
            (IV)   Cancellation. A deposit of 100 percent of the facility fee
will be due at the time of booking to hold the reserved date. The full facility
fee will be forfeited for cancellations received 14 days or less before the
reserved date. Fifty percent of the facility use fee is forfeited for
cancellation between 15 days and 30 days before the reserved event date. One
hundred percent refund if cancelled more than 30 days prior to the reserved
date.
         (S)   Vessel Wet Storage: (payable in advance - no billing, no
refund). Limited availability. Access limited to normal operating hours daily.
May 1 to October 31: $250.00.
   (i)   Mojave River Forks:
      (1)   Entrance Fees:
         (A)   Vehicle/motorized cycle (limited re-entry):
            (I)   Weekdays (Mon-Fri): $10.00.
            (II)   Weekends (Sat-Sun): $15.00.
            (III)   Summer Pass valid at Mojave River Forks Regional Park:
$40.00.
            (IV)   Summer Pass valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi, and Calico: $60.00.
            (V)   Holidays (New Year's Day, Presidents Day, Easter, Memorial
Day, Labor Day, 4th of July and Thanksgiving Day; weekends - Fri, Sat, Sun and
Mon where applicable) (excluding special events): $20.00.
            (VI)   Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day admission
for each vehicle with a San Bernardino County resident who is a veteran,
active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, National Guard
member, or reservist: Free.
            NOTE: §§ 16.0223(i)(1)(A)(I) through 16.0223(i)(1)(A)(IV) exclude
holidays and special events.
         (B)   Pedestrian, non-motorized cycle, each person on a bus: $3.00.
         (C)   Equestrian Day Use (one person/one horse): $8.00.
            (I)   Each additional horse: $3.00.
         (D)   Annual vehicle entrance pass (per carload):
            (I)   Valid at all Regional Parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and
Calico: $125.00.
            (II)   Valid at Mojave River Forks Regional Park only: $8.00.
         (E)   Senior citizens, qualified individuals with a disability,
veterans, and active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, annual
vehicle entrance pass (per carload): Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory,
Moabi and Calico: $100.00.
         (F)   Annual walking entrance pass (per person) includes one dog.
Valid at all parks except Lake Gregory, Moabi and Calico: $25.00.
         NOTE: Annual entrance passes are valid daily, except holidays and
special events, for 12 months from date of purchase and are not transferable.
         (G)   Dogs (except assistance dogs for qualified individuals with a
disability) park entry or camping: $1.00/dog.
      (2)   Camping Fees:
         (A)   Weekday Camping (Monday - Thursday). Camping fee includes park
entry and is per site per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays/special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup including walk-in tent sites: $35.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water and sewer or electric and
water): $45.00.
            (III)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (IV)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00/vehicle.
            (V)   Reservation fee, non-refundable: $10.00.
            (VI)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (B)   Weekend Camping (Friday-Sunday). Camping fee includes park entry
and is per site, per night up to 6 people (excluding holidays and special
events). Add $10.00 to regular camping rates (two night minimum) for holidays/
special events. Maximum stay is 14 days in a 30-day period. Reservations may be
made up to one year in advance. All fees are due in full upon reservation.
            (I)   Without hookup including walk-in tent sites: $45.00.
            (II)   With hookup (electric, water, and sewer or electric and
water): $55.00.
            (III)   In excess of 6 people per site: $5.00/person.
            (IV)   Extra vehicle per site (RV sites allow one (1) RV and one
(1) additional vehicle): $10.00/vehicle.
            (V)   Reservation fee, non-refundable (per site): $10.00.
            (VI)   Use of dump station when not paying camp fees: $15.00.
         (C)   Groups with 20 or more persons are eligible for a group rate
provided a reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance and paid in
full prior arrival.
            (I)   Per adult/youth (minimum 20 persons): $5.00.
            (II)   Non-refundable group reservation fee: $20.00.
         (D)   Bundle of wood: $7.00 each.
      (3)   Day Use Education Excursion Program: Groups with 20 or more youths
sponsored by established public or private institutions (such as schools,
churches, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, YMCA, YWCA) are eligible for a group rate
providing a confirmed reservation is made with the park 48 hours in advance of
arrival:
         (A)   Entrance fee (cannot be used with any other discount): $3.00/
person.
      (4)   Shelter site fees, per day (fees due at time of reservation):
         (A)   Shelter 1: $100.00.
         (B)   Non-refundable shelter site reservation fee: $10.00.
         NOTE: If the shelter is cancelled less than 30 days before reservation
dates, all fees will be non-refundable. A damage/clean-up deposit (refundable
minus any actual costs for damage and required clean-up) will be a minimum of
$100 and/or be determined by the size and nature of the event. A deposit made
does not relieve any party from liability for the cost of damage or clean-up
that exceed the amount of the deposit.
      (5)   Other Fees:
         (A)   Replacement of lost or stolen pass/card: $10.00.
         (B)   Billing fee: $30.00.
         (C)   Utility Access Fee (each meter): $100.00.
            (I)   Actual costs based on meter reading: Actual cost.
         (D)   Area Use Fee (non-reservable area): $500.00/acre.
         (E)   Tally fee: $30.00.
         (F)   Race course fee: $100.00/hour.
         (G)   Full park rental (exclusive use of the park): $10,000.00/day.
ALL PARKS:
   (j)   Admission Without Fees:
      (1)   Volunteers: The Director, Regional Parks Department, or any park
superintendent designated by the Director, may allow Regional Parks volunteers
to use any Regional Park without imposition of a fee, so long as the fee
otherwise applicable to such use(s) does not, in the aggregate, exceed a
maximum of $500.00 per person or group per calendar year.
      (2)   Vendors: Vendors, concessionaires or permittees of Regional Parks
will not be charged the entrance fee when entering a regional park for the
purpose of operating a concession or working on a special event pursuant to a
special event license or permit and having paid the required vendor fee.
      (3)   Veterans: Qualified service-connected disabled veterans, former
prisoners of war and medal of honor recipients may be entitled to a Veteran
Pass which entitles the holder to free day use at the County Regional Parks. To
qualify for the pass, the disabled veteran must be a San Bernardino County
resident and provide proof of the following eligibility criteria:
         (A)   Disabled Veteran: (1) A certificate or letter from the United
States Department of Veterans Affairs stating that the veteran was honorably
discharged and that the compensable service-connected disability is rated above
50 percent, or that the veteran is in receipt of non-service-connected pension
benefits; and (2) Proof of service during wartime; and (3) A copy of his/her
valid California Driver License or Identification Card as proof of residency.
         (B)   Prisoner of War: (1) A letter from the United States Department
of Veterans Affairs or copy of personnel records from the appropriate United
States military branch verifying former prisoner of war status and honorable
discharge; and (2) copy of his/her valid California Driver License or
Identification Card as proof of residency.
         (C)   Medal of Honor Recipient: (1) Certificate or letter from the
United States Department of Veterans Affairs verifying that the veteran is a
Medal of Honor recipient; and (2) a copy of his/her valid California Driver's
License or Identification Card as proof of residency.
         The County Veterans Affairs Office will verify eligibility and issue a
letter to the Regional Parks Department. Upon receipt of the pass, pass holders
are advised that the following rules and restrictions apply:
            The pass is valid unless revoked.
            The pass may be used any day of the week, excluding holidays and
special events.
            The pass is non-transferrable and non-refundable, and cannot be
used in conjunction with any other pass and/or discount. Upon suitable proof, a
lost or damaged pass may be replaced through reapplication.
            The pass may be used for entry of one vehicle with a capacity of 6
persons or less. The pass may be used for boating for one vessel associated
with this vehicle. When a park requires a "per person" entry only the pass
holder may enter at no fee.
            Cost: Free except for holidays and special events.
   (k)   Admission With Fees:
      (1)   The Director of the Regional Parks Department may waive fees for
County-sponsored or co-sponsored events.
      (2)   The Director, in consultation with the applicable supervisorial
district office(s), may, in his or her discretion, discount fees for any
qualified non-profits if such discount serves a public purpose. Any such
discount, if provided, will not exceed 50 percent of the admission fee.
      (3)   The Director may, in his or her discretion, discount fees in
special circumstances for other persons or entities. Any such discount, if
provided, will not exceed 50 percent.
      (4)   The Director shall set special event entrance fees for Department-
sponsored events.
      (5)   All special event entrance fees set by the Director shall take into
account all costs incurred in connection with the special event, specifically
including, but not limited to, any increased park security, supplies, services,
labor and administrative overhead.
      (6)   Senior citizens, qualified individuals with a disability, veterans,
and active-duty personnel in the United States Armed Services, camping Sunday
through Thursday night only for up to four people (excluding holidays and
special events) $5.00 discount per night.
   (l)   Other Fees/Deposits:
      (1)   Concession proposal application fee (non-refundable): $250.00.
      (2)   Contract processing fee: $200.00.
      (3)   Special event contract damage/cleanup deposit (refundable minus any
damages or cleanup required), the amount of which shall be determined by the
size and nature of the event. A deposit made does not relieve any party from
liability for the cost of damage or clean-up that exceed the amount of the
deposit.
      (4)   Ground disturbance damage/cleanup deposit (refundable minus any
damages or cleanup required). In addition to standard deposit for any special
event that requires digging, trenching, or any type of major disturbance to the
ground. A deposit made does not relieve any party from liability for the cost
of damage or clean-up that exceed the amount of the deposit: $5,000.00.
      (5)   Special event contract amendment fee (due if changes are required
after the execution of the contract): $100.00.
      (6)   Special event contract cancellation fee: 10% of contract total,
excluding damage deposit (waived if cancelled at least 4 months prior to event
date).
      (7)   Post-event cleaning fee: $200.00/first 500 participants $40.00 for
each additional 100 participants.
      (8)   Special Event Dumpster Fees: In the event that a permittee does not
provide adequate dumpsters for their event, Regional Parks will invoice
permittee for actual costs of all needed dumpsters, plus $50.00 each dumpster
for administrative costs: Actual cost, plus $50.00/each.
      (9)   General and/or administrative request (including commercial filming
and photography): Actual cost.
      (10)   Special Event Vendor Fees: The Director, Regional Parks
Department, shall set special event vendor fees within the following ranges:
         (A)   Special Events:
            (I)   Arts and crafts: $25.00/day to $150.00/event.
            (II)   Food/amusement: $50.00/day to $150.00/event.
            (III)   Other licensed commercial businesses: $25.00 to $150.00/
event.
      (11)   Fishing Workshops: Attendees are also responsible for paying
vehicle entrance fee at park.
         (A)   Participants (ages 7 to 15): $10.00.
         (B)   Participants (ages 16 and older): $12.00.
      (12)   Environmental Science Camp: Fee for attendees to be determined on
a case by case basis.
      (13)   Fee for copy of map of recreational shooting areas in San
Bernardino County:
         (A)   Single purchase with logo: $8.00 each.
      (14)   Application Fee (Special Event): $50.00 each.
      (15)   Event Staffing Fee: Actual Cost (Staff Billing Rates).
      (16)   Filming Fees:
         (A)   Stills 1-10 people: $250.00/day.
         (B)   Stills 11-30 people: $500.00/day.
         (C)   Stills 31+ people: $600.00/day.
         (D)   Motion 1-30 people: $1,000.00/day.
         (E)   Motion 31+ people: $2,500.00/day.
      (17)   Pre-sold Vehicle Day-Pass Tickets (available for use at all parks
except Moabi, Calico, and Lake Gregory. Must be purchased in advance and cannot
be used the day of purchase or used for admission on Holidays or for Special
Events):
         (A)   Weekday pass: $8.00/ticket.
         (B)   Weekend pass: $10.00/ticket.
   (m)   Definitions: Within the context of this section, unless otherwise
noted, the following meanings apply:
      (1)   Family - a collective body of persons living together, but not
exceeding a total of 4 adults/youths.
      (2)   Group - 20 or more adults/youths.
      (3)   Senior citizen - a person 62 years of age or older.
      (4)   Adult - a person 12 years of age or older. For camping, adult must
be at least 18 years of age.
      (5)   Youth - a person at least 4 years of age and under 12 years of age,
except where a different age is specified.
      (6)   Child - a person 3 years of age and under, except where a different
age is specified.
      (7)   Individual with a qualifying disability - a person who has a
disability under Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, or
who has been certified by the State of California as having a qualified
disability or who has a disability rating of 50 percent or more by the
Department of Veterans Affairs.
      (8)   Class I - bona fide non-profit, charitable and public
organizations.
      (9)   Class II - private parties, receptions, banquets, assemblies for
all other entities.
      (10)   Volunteer - a person or group working at any of the County's
regional parks under the Regional Parks volunteer program. (A minimum of 8
hours in a 90-day period).
      (11)   Unit - Extra vehicle at campsite. A single motorized vehicle not
being towed.
      (12)   Area - An area is 1 acre.
      (13)   Special Event - An event held at a regional park that is projected
to attract a large number of people any one day and/or is outside normal
recreational use.
      (14)   Holidays - New Year's Day, Presidents Day, Easter, Memorial Day,
Labor Day, 4th of July and Thanksgiving Day. Recognized/ approved holiday rates
are applicable to the entire holiday weekend, Friday, Saturday, Sunday and
Monday, as applicable, and Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday for
Thanksgiving.
      (15)   Off Highway Vehicle or "OHV" - means an "all-terrain vehicle" as
defined by California Vehicle Code § 111.
      (16)   Proposal and application processing fees - are for review and
processing and are non-refundable.
      (17)   Carload - up to 6 people in one vehicle.
      (18)   Toy - Golf cart, ATV, Quad, etc.
      (19)   Enhanced Weekend - value added activities at a regional park to
increase patronage.
      (20)   Non-Profit Organization - an organization exempt from federal
income tax pursuant to 501(c)(3) such as an organization operated exclusively
for one or more of the following purposes; religious, charitable, scientific,
testing for public safety, literary, educational, fostering national or
international sports competition, or the prevention of cruelty of children or
animals. Veteran organizations created before 1880 under § 501(c)(23) may also
qualify. See IRS publication 557.
      (21)   Cancellation Policy (excluding Lake Gregory and Moabi): When
"Transferring a site on the same date at the same park":
         •   No charge, regardless of the date.
         When "Transferring a site to a different date at the same park":
         •   31 days or more prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee of $10
plus the original reservation fee.*
         •   30-11 days prior to arrival date - 50 percent of the first night
fee will be charged. Holidays/Special Events - first full night on 2-night
minimum reservations.
         •   10-1 days prior to arrival date - full first night fee will be
charged. Holidays/Special Events - first 2 full nights on 2-night minimum
reservations.
         When "Cancelling a site with no rebooking":
         •   31 days or more prior to arrival date - Cancellation fee of $10
plus the original reservation fee.*
         •   30-11 days prior to arrival date - 50 percent of the first night
fee plus the original reservation fee will be charged. Holidays/Special Events
- first full night plus the original reservation fee will be charged.
         •   10-1 days prior to arrival date - full first night fee plus the
original reservation fee will be charged. Holidays/Special Events - first 2
full nights on 2-night minimum reservation plus the original reservation fee
will be charged.
         Mid-reservation nights stayed plus first full remaining night.
         *Original Reservation fee - This is the original reservation fee that
was charged when the customer made the original reservation. No additional
reservation fee should be charged.
      (22)   Billing Fees - A fee will be assessed if a group or individual
must receive an invoice for services rendered during their use of the facility.
      (23)   Tally Fees - A fee is assessed if County staff have to count the
number of cars or individuals which come into a special event.
      (24)   Summer Pass Fee - A fee for vehicle entrance between the dates of
May 20th to September 10th. Maximum occupancy is six people per vehicle with no
re-entry.
      (25)   Limited Re-entry - Each vehicle is allowed a single re-entry into
the park. If the vehicle leaves the park more than once a new entry assessed
upon return.
   (n)   NSF Checks. Returned checks due to non-sufficient funds or closed
accounts: $25.00.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0224 Registrar of Voters.
   (a)   Fee to conduct an election: Actual cost plus overhead.
   (b)   Fee for a printed candidate statement in a Voter Information Guide:
Actual cost plus overhead.
   (c)   Fee to conduct a recount: Actual cost without overhead.
   (d)   Signature verification and certification of petitions: Actual cost
plus overhead.
   (e)   Filing fee for County initiative petitions Elections Code § 9103:
$200.00 (Refundable if certified sufficient within one year).
   (f)   Certification of document copies of voter affidavit Elections Code §
2167: $1.50 each.
   (g)   Uncertified copies of campaign statements Government Code § 81008:
      (1)   Photo copies: $0.10/page.
      (2)   Retrieval fee if 5 years or older (per request): $5.00 each.
   (h)   Research services: Actual cost plus overhead.
   (i)   Computer Generated Maps:
      (1)   Setup: $50.44 each.
      (2)   11" x 17" Printed Map: $0.17 each plus setup.
      (3)   34" x 44" Plotted Map: $34.46 each plus setup.
      (4)   Compact Disc: $6.13/CD plus setup.
      (5)   Customized Map: $165.40/hour.
   (j)   Voter file on electronic media:
      (1)   Up to 80,000 voters: $37.70 each.
      (2)   80,001 to 250,000 voters: $84.19 each.
      (3)   250,001 and above voters: $90.48 each.
      (4)   Custom Precinct File: $83.33 each.
      (5)   Countywide Pre-Election Recurring Vote by Mail File: $104.17 each.
      (6)   Customized Pre-Election Vote by Mail File: $35.00 each.
      (7)   Customized Report: $164.22/hour.
   (k)   Labels:
      (1)   Setup fee: $31.40 each.
      (2)   Printed Labels: $13.58/thousand plus setup fee.
      (3)   Hard Copy: $0.10/page plus setup fee.
      (4)   Thumb Drive: $5.76/Drive plus setup fee.
   (l)   Automated reports/indexes:
      (1)   Setup fee: $31.40 each.
      (2)   Hard copy: $0.10/page plus setup fee.
      (3)   Thumb Drive: $5.76/Drive plus setup fee.
   (m)   Postage/handling: Actual cost plus overhead.
   (n)   Equipment rental:
      (1)   Election Management Software/Hardware: $1,074.18 each.
      (2)   Ballot Marking Device: $13.62 each.
      (3)   Central Ballot Scanning: $514.36 each.
      (4)   Mobile Ballot Printer: $287.86 each.
      (5)   Mobile Ballot Printer Consumables: Actual cost.
      (6)   Electronic Poll Books: $18.84 each.
      (7)   Precinct Ballot Scanner: $56.07 each.
      (8)   Mail Ballot Sorter: $0.11 per scan.
      (9)   Voting Booth (ADA): $75.66 each.
      (10)   Voting Booth (Standard): $29.40 each.
      (11)   Polling Place Supply Bag: $26.24 each.
      (12)   Ballot Boxes: $6.23 each.
      (13)   Tables: $19.92 each.
      (14)   Chairs: $4.55 each.
      (15)   Traffic Cones: $5.12 each.
   (o)   Returned check fee: $25.00 each.
   (p)   The Registrar of Voters, in consultation with the County
Administrative Office, may discount or waive fees for media organizations,
qualified non-profits, and educational institutions if such waiver or discount
serves a public purpose.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0225 Public Works.
   (a)   Highway Permits:
      (1)   Plan Review: Actual cost.
         (A)   Initial deposit (per sheet): $387.00.
         NOTE: The plan review fee does not include the application and
issuance fee or the cost of inspection. Plan review includes development of any
necessary agreements when applicable. The applicant shall pay the actual cost
of the plan review plus any application, issuance and inspection fees pursuant
to § 16.0225(a)(2) and 16.0225(a)(3).
      (2)   Application and issuance:
      NOTE: All flat fee permit issuance is non-refundable.
         (A)   Special Event:
            (I)   Event (no field review): $95.00.
            (II)   Event (meetings and/or field review required - see § 16.0225
(a)(3)): $71.00.
            (III)   Annual Permit (1 venue, events specified): $151.00.
            NOTE: The application and issuance fee for a Special Event permit
does not include the cost of inspection. The applicant shall pay the
application and issuance fee for a Special Event permit plus any inspection
fees charged pursuant to § 16.0225(a)(3).
         (B)   Moving Permit:
            (I)   Single Trip (overweight and over dimension): $16.00.
            (II)   Variance Load: $46.00.
            (III)   Annual or repetitive moving (not for variance loads):
$90.00.
            (IV)   Rider to moving permit: $16.00.
         (C)   Construction: $302.00.
         (D)   Encroachment: $264.00.
         (E)   Minor encroachment with a value under $1,000: $95.00.
         (F)   Special Encroachment (field review required): $196.00.
In addition to § 16.0225(a)(2)(D), an additional fee of $196.00 will be charged
for permits that require a field review prior to issuance.
         (G)   Tract: $477.00.
         (H)   Excavations: $208.00.
         (I)   Tree Trimming/Removal and/or Sidewalk Repair/Replacement: No
fee.
         (J)   Filming permit: $228.00.
         (K)   Road closure permit: $732.00.
         (L)   Rider to permit (except moving permit): $79.00.
         (M)   Pavement Structural Section Analysis: $173.00/core/soil sample.
         (N)   Conditional Utility Work Authorization: $221.00.
         (O)   Adopt-a-Road Program or Neighborhood Watch:
            (I)   Application: No fee.
            (II)   Pole placement with sign: $215.00.
            (III)   Pole placement without sign: $170.00.
            (IV)   Sign only: $54.00.
      (3)   Inspection Fees:
         (A)   Open trench excavation:
            (I)   0 to 25 linear feet (LF) of trench: $130.00.
            (II)   26 to 1,000 LF of trench: $352.00.
            (III)   1,001 LF or higher: $418.00.
         (B)   Miscellaneous encroachments:
            (I)   Residential driveway: $159.00.
            (II)   Commercial driveway: $212.00.
            (III)   Other encroachments with a value under $4,000: $371.00.
            (IV)   Minor encroachments with a value under $1,000: $127.00.
         (C)   Special Event: Actual cost.
            (I)   Initial Deposit: $848.00.
            NOTE: The inspection fee for a Special Event permit does not
include the cost of the permit application and issuance. The applicant shall
pay the permit application and issuance fee for a Special Event permit pursuant
to § 16.0225(a)(2)(A).
         (D)   Minor Inspections Under Annual Permit: $65.00.
         (E)   Public Road Improvements Required:
            (I)   Non-Tract Commercial Inspection fees: Actual cost.
               (i)   Initial Deposit: $1,080.00.
            (II)   Non-Tract Residential Inspection fees: Actual cost.
               (i)   Initial Deposit: $544.00.
            (III)   Tract Inspection fees: Actual cost.
               (i)   Initial Deposit: 3/4 of 1% of value of work.
         (F)   Filming Inspection: $58.00 per day.
         (G)   Road Closure Inspection: $63.00 per day.
   (b)   Road Abandonment Fee: Actual cost.
      (1)   Initial Deposit: $3,200.00.
   (c)   Street Name Change: Actual cost.
      (1)   Initial Deposit: $1,052.00.
   (d)   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Inspection Fees:
      (1)   Santa Ana Region:
         (A)   Site Inspection: $290.00 per inspection.
         (B)   Follow-up Site Inspection: $150.00 per inspection.
   (e)   Public Works Reproduction Services:
      (1)   Miscellaneous documents:
         (A)   Color copies:
            (I)   8-1/2 inches x 11 inches: $1.30/page.
            (II)   8-1/2 inches x 14 inches: $1.40/page.
            (III)   11 inches x 17 inches: $1.50/page.
      (2)   County road maps:
         (A)   Bound paper copy: $146.00.
      (3)   Unless a different fee is authorized in this County Code or by law,
a fee shall be charged for the scanning of architectural plans, or similar
plans or drawings, for the purpose of submitting electronic plans or drawings
to the County for plan review purposes as part of a development permit
application or similar application.
         (A)   First scanned page: $10.00.
         (B)   Each additional scanned page: $5.00.
   (f)   Agency Sign Production:
      (1)   Sign only: $110.00+$10.00 per square foot.
      (2)   Pole: $98.00.
      (3)   Installation of Sign and Pole: $260.00.
   (g)   Sale of Surplus Property: Actual cost.
      (1)   Initial Deposit: $1,000.00.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0226 Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator.
   (a)   Locker rental: $0.75.
   (b)   Record clearance letter: $38.00.
   (c)   Photocopies:
      (1)   Records: $1.25/page.
      (2)   Medical records: $16.00/hour. In addition, there is a flat rate of
$6.00 per report mailed, for the cost of supplies and postage or in accordance
with Health and Safety Code § 123110(d)(1).
   (d)   Photographs:
      (1)   Mug shots: $14.00.
      (2)   Video/audio copy to digital format: $78.57.
      (3)   Digital images up to 10 images: $96.70.
      (4)   Each additional digital image over 10: $5.00.
      (5)   3D images copy to digital format: $146.83.
   (e)   Concealed weapon permits (reservists exempt):
      (1)   License, new:
         (A)   Standard - two year: $158.00.
         (B)   Judicial - three year: $158.00.
      (2)   License, renewal:
         (A)   Standard - two year: $80.00.
         (B)   Judicial - three year: $80.00.
         NOTE: The first 50% of the license fee shall be collected upon filing
of the initial or renewal application. The balance of the fee shall be
collected upon issuance of the license.
      (3)   Concealed weapon permit, new - 16-hour training: $90.00.
      (4)   Concealed weapon permit, renewal - 8-hour training: $45.00. In
addition to license and training fees, concealed weapon permit applicants are
required to pay applicable Department of Justice and fingerprinting live scan
fees (Penal Code § 26190).
      (5)   Concealed weapon permit, modification - additional weapon,
duplicate, or address change: $16.00.
      NOTE: A pass-through processing fee of $5.00 will be charged for both new
and renewal applications. This fee is not retained by the County.
   (f)   Fingerprinting live scan: $32.00.
   (g)   Response to subpoena duces tecum: $15.00.
   (h)   C.A.D. record search: $83.00/hour.
      (1)   Government background check: $33.00.
   (i)   Public Records Act requests requiring programming and computer
services (Government Code § 7922.575). Actual costs to construct a record and
the cost of programming and computer services necessary to produce a copy of
the record, when the record is electronic and only produced at regularly
scheduled intervals or the request would require data compilation, extraction,
or programing to produce the record.
   (j)   In-custody letters for bail bondsmen: $30.00.
   (k)   Aircraft fees:
      (1)   Helicopter (UH-1H): $3,236.00/hour.
      (2)   Helicopter (B-212): $3,735.00/hour.
      (3)   Helicopter (Airbus H125): $2,839.00/hour.
      (4)   Helicopter (B-412): $3,223.00/hour.
      (5)   Airplane (Grand Renaissance): $2,258.00/hour.
      (6)   Airplane (King Air): $2,126.00/hour.
      (7)   Airplane (Airvan GA8): $1,034.00/hour.
   (l)   Private policing by Sheriff's Department:
      (1)   Sheriff Reserve Deputy: $63.50/hour.
      (2)   Sheriff Deputy: $145.79/hour.
      (3)   Sheriff Detective: $160.87/hour.
      (4)   Sheriff Sergeant: $190.73/hour.
   (m)   Administrative charges for explosive permits:
      (1)   Permit application: $86.00.
      (2)   Permit:
         (A)   100 lbs. explosive or less: $2.00.
         (B)   Over 100 lbs.: $10.00.
      (3)   Magazine/site inspection:
         (A)   Retail outlets of black sporting powder and smokeless powder:
$203.00.
         (B)   Manufacturer's wholesale/retail outlets of other explosives:
$250.00.
         (C)   All other storage magazines/sites: $167.00.
   (n)   Verification of vehicle equipment citation correction: $25.00.
   (o)   Vehicle releases: $155.00. Fee will be waived upon presentation of
sufficient proof that the vehicle was stolen. Sufficient proof includes
evidence that the owner timely reported to law enforcement that the vehicle was
stolen.
   (p)   Repossession recovery fee: $15.00.
   (q)   Contract polygraph exams:
      (1)   Criminal exams: $356.00.
      (2)   Pre-employment exams: $219.00.
   (r)   Correctional education programs - Bakery and food services: Actual
cost of materials.
   (s)   Firearm storage and related expenses (per Family Code § 6389):
      (1)   First firearm: $80.00.
      (2)   Each additional firearm: $39.00.
      (3)   Per day storage: $2.00.
   (t)   Coroner fees:
      (1)   Coroner report of death: $12.00.
      (2)   Private autopsy: $3,734.00.
      (3)   Storage fee for human remains in morgue in excess of 10 calendar
days of Coroner notification of release (fee may be waived based on ability to
pay): $24.00/day, not to exceed $100.00 total.
      (4)   Archive retrieval: $108.00.
      (5)   Body removal: $348.00.
      (6)   Collection of specimens:
         (A)   DNA sample (does not include cost of tests): $219.00.
         (B)   Blood/vitreous sample (does not include cost of tests): $203.00.
      (7)   Digital images:
         (A)   Digital images up to 10 images: $61.00.
         (B)   Each additional digital image over 10: $3.00.
      (8)   Paraffin block re-cuts processing:
         (A)   Micro slides - regular: $82.00/each.
         (B)   Micro slides - special stains: Actual cost.
      (9)   Protective wear:
         (A)   Observer: $43.00 each.
         (B)   Autopsy: $49.00 each.
      (10)   Digital x-ray duplication: $132.00 each.
   (u)   Bail bond company advertising:
      (1)   Type 1 detention facilities: $22.00/month.
      (2)   Type 2 detention facilities: $28.00/month.
   (v)   Background investigations required for County issued business license/
operator permit (new or renewal): $325.00.
   (w)   Business licensing:
      (1)   Gun dealer permit: $69.00.
      (2)   State pawnbroker permit: $35.00.
      (3)   State secondhand dealer permit: $35.00.
      (4)   Taxicab driver permit: $37.00.
      (5)   Taxicab service:
         (A)   Application: $33.00.
         (B)   Initial license: $64.00.
         (C)   Annual renewal: $94.00.
   (x)   Peace Officer witness deposit: $275.00 each.
      NOTE: Additional costs, if any, over the initial $275.00 are due and
payable after all Peace Officer witness fees have been calculated.
   (y)   En route housing fee: $239.00/day.
   (z)   Training course/class: Actual cost.
   (aa)   Stop payment fee: $10.00 each.
   (bb)   Credit card processing fee: Actual cost.
   (cc)   Body-worn camera (redacted video footage): Actual cost.
      NOTE: Fee will be charged based on actual staff time (estimated at $55.00
per minute of video footage) and supplies required to produce redacted video
footage.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0227 Repealed.
§ 16.0228 Land Use Services Department—Miscellaneous Services.
   (a)   Appeals:
      NOTE: These fees apply to average cost jobs, or for appeals filed by
someone other than the applicant. Appeals by the applicant of actual cost jobs
will be charged to the actual cost job. When an appeal of an actual cost
application is filed by someone other than the applicant, the appellant will
file the stated fee and actual costs in excess of the appeal fee will be
charged to the actual cost job.
      (1)   Appeals to the Planning Commission: $1,615.00.
      (2)   Appeals to the Board of Supervisors - Planning Division: $1,287.00.
      (3)   Appeals to Building and Safety Board of Appeal: $1,331.00.
      (4)   Appeals to Physically Disabled Access Board of Appeal: $1,416.00.
   (b)   Copying:
      (1)   Map and building construction plan copies: Based on private vendor
charges.
      (2)   Certification under seal: $10.00/document.
      (3)   CD (compact disc) (i.e., Planning Commission): $5.00 each.
      (4)   Postage: Based on post office charges per ounce.
      (5)   Microfiche and microfilm prints or electronic images of maps:
         (A)   8½ inches x 11 inches: $2.00/page.
         (B)   Greater than 8½ inches x 11 inches: $3.00/page.
         (C)   Each map size page: $3.00/page.
         (D)   Electronic map images: $1.25/image.
      NOTE: Sales tax to be applied when applicable.
   (c)   Returned check fee: $25.00.
   (d)   Professional consultation appointment fee: $178.00 per hour.
   (e)   Other:
      (1)   Special projects (projects which do not fit into any other defined
service and/or for which no fee is established elsewhere in this code): Actual
cost.
         (A)   Initial deposit: 100% of actual cost as estimated by the
Department.
      (2)   Collection and processing of fees for other agencies: $33.00.
      (3)   Extensions of approved average cost applications: $448.00.
         (A)   Extension of approved actual cost application: Actual cost.
            (I)   Initial deposit: $1,000.00.
      NOTE: No additional fees will be charged for review of extension request
for concurrent applications that are part of the same development project.
      NOTE: Whenever an approval or a permit extension is requested and the
project delay was caused solely by reason of the application of a governmental
law, regulation, ruling, or judgment which legally prevented that further
carrying on of the project, then Land Use Services Director may waive any
extension request fee upon proof of facts submitted in writing which satisfy
the conditions set forth above. Any such waiver shall have no bearing on the
determination of the merits of the extension request.
      (4)   (A)   Research for requested information: $10.00/first parcel.
         (B)   Additional parcel(s): $5.00/parcel.
      (5)   (A)   Research land use designation provided in writing: $10.00/
first parcel.
         (B)   Additional parcel(s): $5.00/parcel.
      (6)   Special mailing, delivery and handling: Based on courier charges.
      (7)   Notification research and mailing labels: $15.00.
      (8)   Electronic storage archive fee: Actual cost.
   (f)   Security Management Program:
      (1)   Subdivision security management:
         (A)   New Securities per project: Actual Cost as defined in § 16.0228B
(a).
         (B)   Initial Deposit: $7,492.00.
      (2)   Modification to Subdivision securities accepted prior to July 1,
2011:
         (A)   Management including but not limited to time extensions, partial
releases, security reductions, and final releases: Actual Cost.
         (B)   Initial Deposit: $3,333.00.
      (3)   Foreclosure costs: Projects which have foreclosure authorization
will have actual costs tracked by work order. These costs may be recovered as a
part of a legal action.
      (4)   Delayed improvement security management: Improvement Deferral
Security Management Fee: $1,360.00.
   (g)   Scanning:
      (1)   First scanned page: $10.00.
      (2)   Each additional scanned page: $5.00.
      NOTE: Unless a different fee is authorized in this County Code or by law,
a fee shall be charged for the scanning of architectural plans, or similar
plans or drawings, for the purpose of submitting electronic plans or drawings
to the County for plan review purposes as part of a development permit
application or similar application.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0228A Repealed by Ord. 4483, passed - -2025.
§ 16.0228B Land Use Services Department and Department of Public Works—Actual
Costs, Deposits, Collection of Applicant’s Obligations and Refunds.
   This section applies to actual cost projects identified in §§
16.0204,
16.0215A,
16.0215B,
16.0215C,
16.0225 and
16.0228.
   (a)   Actual cost calculation: Actual cost is the sum of:
      (1)   The products of multiplying the time spent on the project by County
personnel by the applicable hourly charge rates; and
      (2)   Mileage and word processing charges; and
      (3)   Any other costs incurred by the County in processing the project.
   (b)   Rates: Hourly charge rates and mileage rates are as follows:
      (1)   SCHEDULE OF CHARGES - Land Use Services Department:
 Personnel Classification Hourly Charge Rate
    Personnel Classification               Hourly Charge Rate
(A) Planner I                              $144.00
(B) Planner II                             $153.00
(C) Planner III                            $186.00
(D) Supervising Planner                    $220.00
(E) Building Inspector II                  $147.00
(F) Building Inspector III                 $165.00
(G) Regional Building Inspector Supervisor $203.00
(H) Code Enforcement Officer II            $132.00
(I) Code Enforcement Officer III           $159.00
(J) Code Enforcement Supervisor            $195.00
(K) Fire Hazard Abatement Officer          $85.00
(L) Engineering Technician IV              $146.00
(M) Engineering Technician V               $183.00
(N) Engineer III                           $180.00
(O) Supervising Engineer                   $247.00
(P) Engineering Manager                    $319.00
(Q) Engineering Geologist                  $229.00
(R) Environmental Compliance Manager       $282.00
(S) Land Use Technician                    $114.00
(T) Senior Land Use Technician             $136.00
(U) Office Assistant III                   $84.00
(V) Land Use Technician Supervisor         $157.00
(W) Administrative Supervisor I            $175.00
 
      (2)   SCHEDULE OF CHARGES—Department of Public Works:
         (A)   Surveyor:
 Personnel Classification Hourly Charge Rate
       Personnel Classification   Hourly Charge Rate
(I)    Engineering Technician II  $92.00
(II)   Engineering Technician III $110.00
(III)  Engineering Technician IV  $133.00
(IV)   Engineering Technician V   $157.00
(V)    Land Surveyor              $168.00
(VI)   Office Assistant III       $80.00
(VII)  Supervising Land Surveyor  $191.00
(VIII) Survey Division Chief      $263.00
(IX)   Survey Party Chief         $153.00
 
         (B)   Transportation:
 Personnel Classification Hourly Charge Rate
        Personnel Classification                   Hourly Charge Rate
(I)     Administrative Assistant                   $80.00
(II)    Construction Equipment Worker              $92.00
(III)   Engineer Trainee                           $102.00
(IV)    Engineer I                                 $150.00
(V)     Engineer II                                $160.00
(VI)    Engineer III                               $158.00
(VII)   Engineering Manager                        $246.00
(VIII)  Engineering Technician II                  $89.00
(IX)    Engineering Technician III                 $115.00
(X)     Engineering Technician IV                  $129.00
(XI)    Engineering Technician V                   $161.00
(XII)   Equipment Operator                         $93.00
(XIII)  Maintenance and Construction Supervisor I  $98.00
(XIV)   Maintenance and Construction Supervisor II $131.00
(XV)    Office Assistant II                        $60.00
(XVI)   Office Assistant III                       $67.00
(XVII)  Office Specialist                          $69.00
(XVIII) Public Works Operations Superintendent     $159.00
(XIX)   Public Works Operations Supervisor         $146.00
(XX)    Senior Equipment Operator                  $125.00
(XXI)   Supervising Engineer                       $198.00
(XXII)  Supervising Land Surveyor                  $191.00
(XXIII) Supervising Public Works Project Manager   $163.00
 
         (C)   Solid waste management:
 Personnel Classification Hourly Charge Rate
       Personnel Classification                 Hourly Charge Rate
(I)    Engineer III                             $146.00
(II)   Engineer Manager                         $237.00
(III)  Engineering Technician III               $106.00
(IV)   Engineering Technician IV                $120.00
(V)    Engineering Technician V                 $145.00
(VI)   Office Assistant II                      $56.00
(VII)  Office Specialist                        $67.00
(VIII) Public Works Operations Superintendent   $153.00
(IX)   Public Works Operations Supervisor       $133.00
(X)    Recycling Specialist                     $81.00
(XI)   Solid Waste Programs Administrator       $136.00
(XII)  Staff Analyst I                          $81.00
(XIII) Staff Analyst II                         $99.00
(XIV)  Supervising Engineer                     $184.00
(XV)   Supervising Public Works Project Manager $138.00
 
      (3)   Consultant fees: Based on actual charges.
      (4)   Inspection fees: Based on actual charges.
      (5)   Mileage rate - Department of Public Works: Current IRS standard
mileage rate/mile.
   (c)   Deposits for Developer Deposit Accounts and Project Trust Accounts -
Land Use Services Department and Department of Public Works (collectively
referred to in this subsection as "Department"): An initial deposit is required
for each actual cost service or process. The initial deposit is as specified in
the code. If no amount is specified, the initial deposit is the Department's
initial estimate of the actual cost of the service or process. The Department
may revise its estimate at any time during the processing of the project. If a
revised estimate is higher than a previous estimate, the Department may require
an additional deposit. Notice of any required additional deposit shall be
mailed (including e-mail) to the applicant. The notice shall include the date
by which the deposit must be made, and shall inform the applicant that unless
provision for payment is made by the date specified, the application will be
deemed denied without prejudice, without further action by the County.
Notwithstanding §
86.08.010, any such denial without prejudice is not appealable. Each estimate
shall be a good faith attempt to determine the probable actual cost of the
service or process, based on the nature of the project, the Department's
experience in processing similar services or processes, and applicable rates.
Initial deposits and any additional deposits for all services or processes
related to a project shall be placed and combined into a Project Trust Account.
Such combined deposited funds will be utilized as the source of payment for any
flat fee service, security deposit, or actual cost service on that project. In
addition, deposits may also be placed in a Developer Deposit Account. Deposited
funds in a Developer Deposit Account may be used by an individual or entity to
fund various Project Trust Accounts.
   (d)   Applicant's obligation to pay actual cost - Land Use Services
Department and Department of Public Works: The applicant shall pay the actual
cost of the project, regardless of any estimate; except that the applicant is
not obligated for costs incurred after the applicant delivers to the Department
of Public Works and/or the Land Use Services Department either an unconditional
written withdrawal of the application, or a written notice to stop work which
includes a waiver of any applicable time limits for processing the application.
   (e)   Amounts of $10.00 or less: Pursuant to Government Code § 29373.1, the
applicant shall not be required to pay a balance of $10.00 or less.
   (f)   Additional invoices necessitated by lack of response by the applicant
will be charged to the actual cost application.
   (g)   Refunds: Refunds of fees collected by the Land Use Services Department
and the Department of Public Works shall be made as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any fee collected in
error shall be refunded.
      (2)   Unused deposit monies on actual cost projects shall be refunded
when all charges for the project have been recorded.
      (3)   Pursuant to Government Code § 29375.1, the County shall not be
required to pay a refund of $10.00 or less.
      (4)   Planning refunds:
         (A)   If an application, filed in error due to erroneous staff advice,
is later required to be withdrawn, processing fees shall be refunded regardless
of the extent of work done in processing the application.
         (B)   If the applicant fails to submit required information within the
allocated time, or voluntarily withdraws the application before acceptance and
before staff work on the projects has commenced, any fee paid, less $60.00,
shall be refunded.
         (C)   If the applicant withdraws a Land Use Services Department
application during processing, any fee paid, less $60.00, shall be refunded,
except as follows:
            (I)   Actual cost applications. All actual costs incurred on an
actual cost application shall be deducted from the refund.
            (II)   Average cost application. For average cost applications, the
following percentages of the fee paid shall be refunded, depending on the state
of processing at the time of the withdrawal:
               (i)   Application accepted and referrals sent: 85%.
               (ii)   Referral response period completed: 45%.
               (iii)   Initial staff review or Development Review Committee
process completed: 25%.
               (iv)   Staff report prepared and notices of hearing sent or
conditions of approval prepared: 10%.
               (v)   Planning Commission consideration begun or staff/
environmental analysis action completed: No refund.
      (5)   Building and Safety refunds:
         (A)   The Building Official will authorize no refund for any project
after work has been initiated.
         (B)   The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any
fee paid except upon request by the original permittee not later than one year
after the date of fee payment. Any fee paid shall be refunded, less fees paid
for any portion of work already initiated and $60.00 for administration
processing time.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
§ 16.0229 Repealed.
§ 16.0230 Repealed.
§ 16.0231 Waiver/Refund of Fees.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided by law, the Board of Supervisors, by
Board action, can defer, waive, or refund any fee set forth in this chapter or
any other fee levied by the County provided one of the following conditions is
met:
      (1)   The service for which the fee was levied has not and will not be
performed; or
      (2)   The fee was collected in error; or
      (3)   For other good cause shown, provided such deferral/waiver/refund
would serve a public purpose and is lawful.
   (b)   In the event of a disaster, or other good cause shown to serve a
public purpose, a Department Head may defer payment of, waive, or refund any
fee set forth in this chapter or any other fee levied by the County provided
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   Exigent conditions exist whereby obtaining Board approval of the
fee waiver/refund/deferral would not be immediately feasible; and
      (2)   The Department receives concurrence from the County Chief Executive
Officer.
(Am. Ord. 4457, passed - -2023; Am. Ord. 4470, passed - -2024; Am. Ord. 4483,
passed - -2025)
DIVISION 7: PROJECT REVIEW
CHAPTER 1: PROJECT REVIEW COMMISSION
Section
   
17.0101   Definitions.
   
17.0102   Projects Within Policy.
   
17.0103   Project Review Commission.
   
17.0104   Project Administration.
   
17.0105   Assessment District Liability.
   
17.0106   General Review Criteria.
   
17.0107   New Development Improvement Project Criteria.
§ 17.0101   Definitions.
   AUTHORITY. The Industrial Development Authority of the County of San
Bernardino.
   BOARD. Depending upon the context in which used, means the Board of
Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino acting as such or as the governing
body of some other entity.
   COMMISSION. The Project Review Commission created and functioning pursuant
to this Division.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino.
   IMPROVEMENT PROJECT. A project for construction or acquisition of
infrastructure such as roads, sewers, and/or water systems or other public
improvements financed pursuant to the provisions of the 1911 Act, the 1913 Act,
the 1915 Act, and includes New Development Improvement Projects where
applicable.
   INDUSTRIAL PROJECT. All projects or proposals which are referred to the
Commission by the Industrial Development Authority of the County of San
Bernardino to be evaluated by the Commission pursuant to this Division.
   INVESTIGATION ACT OF 1931. The Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation
and Majority Protest Act of 1931 set forth in Streets and Highways Code §§ 2800
et seq., as amended.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENT PROJECT. Improvement projects proposed for the
purpose of subdividing or otherwise developing unimproved land, except
Improvement Projects conducted by a special district where based upon a showing
of community support.
   1911 ACT. The Improvement Act of 1911 set forth in Streets and Highways Code
§§ 5000 et seq., as amended.
   1915 ACT. The Improvement Bond Act of 1915 set forth in Streets and Highways
Code §§ 8500 et seq., as amended.
   1913 ACT. The Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 set forth in Streets and
Highways Code §§ 10000 et seq., as amended.
   REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY. The Redevelopment Agency of the County of San
Bernardino.
   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Any project or proposal which is referred to the
Commission by the Redevelopment Agency of the County of San Bernardino to be
evaluated by the Commission pursuant to this Division. Unless the particular
provision or the context requires otherwise, the foregoing definitions shall
govern the construction of this Division.
(Am. Ord. 1919, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2799, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3121,
passed - -1987)
§ 17.0102   Projects Within Policy.
   Unless specifically excepted herefrom, the following projects shall be
subject to the proceedings set forth in this Division and shall be presented to
the Commission as set forth in §
17.0103:
   (a)   Any improvement project initiated by the Board of Supervisors,
including those improvement projects initiated by property owner petitions;
   (b)   Any improvement project proposed by a special district governed by the
Board;
   (c)   Any improvement project proposed by a city, a self-governed special
district, or any other independent entity for which project the consent of the
Board is required;
   (d)   An industrial project;
   (e)   A redevelopment project.
(Am. Ord. 1919, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2799, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3121,
passed - -1987)
§ 17.0103   Project Review Commission.
   (a)   The Board hereby creates the Project Review Commission for the purpose
of assuring that each project is reviewed by appropriate County staff. The
Commission shall be made up of one representative from each of the following
County departments, agencies or offices, appointed by the head of such
department, agency, or office:
      (1)   Administrative Office;
      (2)   Department of Transportation and Flood Control;
      (3)   Environmental Health Services Department;
      (4)   Land Management Department;
      (5)   Office of Special Districts;
      (6)   Assessor;
      (7)   Treasurer;
      (8)   Auditor/Controller-Recorder;
      (9)   Housing and Community Development Department;
      (10)   Redevelopment Agency of the County of San Bernardino.
   (b)   The Administrative Office shall chair the meetings of the Commission.
   (c)   Each representative shall have one vote in the determination of any
matter considered by the Commission.
   (d)   The County Counsel or an assistant or deputy County counsel or other
attorney designated by the County Counsel shall meet with and participate in
the discussions of the Commission but shall not have a vote in the
determination of any matter considered by the Commission.
   (e)   The Commission shall review all projects referred to it to determine
whether the policies set forth and incorporated in this Division have been
satisfied. Commission review shall take place prior to presentation of such
projects to the Board. Whenever any such project is presented to the Board, it
shall be accompanied by a report containing the findings, determinations, and
recommendation of the Commission made in respect to such project.
   (f)   All documentation required for Commission review of a project shall be
submitted to the County Administrative Office at least 30 days prior to the
expected date of Commission review.
(Am. Ord. 1919, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2799, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3121,
passed - -1987)
§ 17.0104   Project Administration.
   (a)   All proceedings for improvement projects or new development
improvement projects of the County shall be conducted in the name of the
County. All proceedings of Board-governed special districts with assessment
powers shall be conducted in the name of the district. Proceedings for special
districts without assessment power or regulated public utilities may be
conducted in the name of the County.
   (b)   Proceedings for redevelopment projects shall be conducted in
accordance with applicable law and administered by the Redevelopment Agency.
   (c)   Proceedings for industrial projects shall be conducted in accordance
with applicable law and administered by the Authority.
   (d)   Upon completion of any project whose construction was conducted by the
County for another entity, all improvements constructed as a part of such
project, and the obligations for maintenance of such improvements, shall be
transferred to the entity for whom the project construction was conducted or
administered.
   (e)   All funds deposited or allocated for the construction of an
improvement project or entity conducting the proceeding under §
17.0104(a) subject to this Division shall be administered by the County or
entity conducting the proceeding under §
17.0104(a) utilizing a working capital fund or funds. Any residual funds shall
be deposited to the credit of the entity for which the project has been
constructed or in accordance with any governing law which requires a different
disposition of such funds.
   (f)   All construction and funding records for projects administered by the
County shall be retained by the conducting entity under §
17.0104(a) acting as custodian for the entity for whom the project is
administered.
   (g)   The County Administrative Officer shall designate the appropriate
County department, office, or agency to administer the review and carrying out
of any improvement project which is subject to this Division.
   (h)   The administering departments and the County Counsel or other retained
legal counsel shall develop standardized forms of resolutions, schedules,
applications and other required documents for project proceedings. Documents
prepared in respect to each such proceeding shall be reviewed by County Counsel
for legal adequacy and the documents shall then be forwarded to the Board,
Authority, or Redevelopment Agency for appropriate action.
(Am. Ord. 1919, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2799, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3121,
passed - -1987)
§ 17.0105   Assessment District Liability.
   (a)   Indemnification and Hold Harmless. In each case in which a proceeding
for an improvement project or new development improvement project conducted by
the County for an entity other than the County, such entity shall agree to hold
the County harmless and to indemnify the County for any loss suffered or
liability incurred on account of such proceeding or project.
   (b)   Contingent Liability. Except with the specific approval of the Board
of Supervisors, the County shall elect against contingent liability on any
improvement project.
(Am. Ord. 1919, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2799, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3121,
passed - -1987)
§ 17.0106   General Review Criteria.
   (a)   In its review of any project, the Commission shall determine whether
or not the proposed project conforms to applicable criteria established by an
entity of competent jurisdiction with respect to the following:
      (1)   Land use zoning;
      (2)   General or specific plan directories, constraints, or prohibitions;
      (3)   Waste disposal, including, as pertinent, wastewater, solid waste
and hazardous waste disposal;
      (4)   Availability of public utilities;
      (5)   Availability of requisite public and governmental services such as
police, fire, hospital, emergency medical, and flood control;
      (6)   Air quality maintenance;
      (7)   Building and Safety Standards;
      (8)   Protection of the Environment;
      (9)   Land Values. In reviewing a proposed Improvement Project, the Board
will consider (a) the present value of the land and (b) the estimated value
subsequent to the completion of the proposed improvements when determining the
economic feasibility of the project;
      (10)   Compliance with applicable Federal, State and local enabling acts
and regulations;
      (11)   Responsibility for operations and maintenance cost.
   (b)   With respect to Industrial and Redevelopment Projects, the
determinations related to criteria numbered (9) and (10) shall be made by the
Economic Development Commission and the Redevelopment Agency respectively.
   (c)   The review required by Subdivision (a) of this Section is in addition
to such further and different review as may be required by other provisions of
this Division or by other applicable law or regulation.
   (d)   As to all required review, the Commission shall include in its report
to the Board as required by §
17.0103(e), findings and determinations regarding compliance of the project
with the criteria set forth or referred to in this Section.
(Am. Ord. 1919, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 2799, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3121,
passed - -1987)
§ 17.0107   New Development Improvement Project Criteria.
   The following criteria also shall apply to new development improvement
projects:
   (a)   Type of Development. Proposals for assessment district financing shall
be considered for commercial, industrial and residential development.
   (b)   Type of Improvement. Proposal must be for construction, installation,
or acquisition of the following backbone facilities, including, but not limited
to: master plan of highways designated routes, street lights, water and/or
sewer trunk lines, flood control facilities, and/or regional drainage
facilities and any other facilities as allowed by law. Nonbackbone or arterial
facilities will be considered on a case-by-case basis by the Project Review
Committee.
   (c)   Minimum Underwriting Standards.
      (1)   The provisions of §
17.0105 shall apply.
      (2)   Property value assessment lien ratio. A minimum average three-to-
one property value to total assessment ratio lien generally shall be required,
as determined by County approved appraisal. Property value means value measured
following completion of all project improvements financed pursuant to this
Chapter.
      (3)   Other Security Enhancements. Upon recommendation of County staff
and advisors, additional security enhancement may be required, such as:
         (a)   Guarantees;
         (b)   Letter of credit;
         (c)   Municipal bond insurance;
         (d)   Additional bond reserves.
         Security enhancement must be considered when proposed average property
value to total assessment lien is not considered sufficient by County staff and
advisors under Subdivision 9(c)(2) above, that is when the minimum average
property value to total assessment lien is less than three-to-one.
(Am. Ord. 1919, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
CHAPTER 2: IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS
Section
   
17.0201   Investigation of Project.
   
17.0202   1911 Act.
   
17.0203   1913 Act.
   
17.0204   1915 Act.
   
17.0205   Approved Projects.
   
17.0206   Approval of Nonconforming Projects.
   
17.0207   Roads.
   
17.0208   Water or Sewer Projects.
   
17.0209   Required Information.
   
17.0210   Petitions.
   
17.0211   Engineering Costs.
   
17.0212   Deposit—County Costs.
   
17.0213   Incidental Expense.
   
17.0214   Board Action.
§ 17.0201   Investigation of Project.
   The procedure set forth in the Investigation Act of 1931 may be utilized in
proceedings conducted by the County under any improvement act. The requirements
of the Investigation Act of 1931 may be waived as provided in the Streets and
Highways Code. The County at its discretion, instead of requiring that the
Investigation Act of 1931 be followed, may require that another type of hearing
or special meeting for the consideration of the project.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0202   1911 Act.
   The Board finds that the provisions of the 1911 Act can be utilized
beneficially to finance approved Improvement Projects, subject to careful
analysis of costs, incidental expenses and bond discount rate.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0203   1913 Act.
   The Board finds that the provisions of the 1913 Act (Streets and Highways
Code §§ 10000—10609) can be utilized beneficially in conjunction with bonds
issued pursuant to the 1911 Act for approved improvement projects, where such
projects are consistent with the purpose of the 1913 Act, namely, to permit a
public agency or regulated utility to purchase or construct major public
utilities. Funds derived from bonds sold pursuant to the 1913 Act shall be
disbursed by the County only upon vouchers in affidavit form approved by the
County and after further verification by County inspectors that the work for
which a claim is made has in fact been completed.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0204   1915 Act.
   The 1915 Act may be used for such projects as are permitted to be financed
pursuant to the Act and which will serve the needs of domestic nonagricultural
uses primarily, provided, however, the 1915 Act shall be used only when it is
probable that substantial economic savings will result from use of the 1915 Act
compared to other available means of financing the proposed project.
   When the 1915 Act is used by the County on behalf of a public agency or
regulated utility, to the extent legally possible, the public agency, or
regulated utility, in addition to indemnification under §
17.0105(a) hereof, shall covenant to expend the necessary funds from whatever
sources are available to cure in a timely manner all delinquency situations
arising within that assessment district.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0205   Approved Projects.
   (a)   The merit of the improvement acts is that a group of property owners
in an area in which property is improved or occupied, such as a residential
neighborhood or a business district, can accomplish a needed public improvement
which the owners are willing to pay for, where it would be difficult to
accomplish the improvement through an agreement for pro rata contribution.
   (b)   Except for new development improvement projects, an improvement
project will be approved only when there is a substantial diversity of
ownership, and a majority of the parcels are improved, or wherein there is a
substantial diversity of ownership, and improvement and usage is restricted due
to the lack of needed public facilities.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0206   Approval of Nonconforming Projects.
   (a)   An improvement project which fails to comply with any provisions of
this Division, may nevertheless be approved if the Board makes an affirmative
finding that overriding social, economic, environmental or other considerations
warrant approval of the proposed project.
   (b)   Within the meaning of this Section, OVERRIDING SOCIAL, ECONOMIC,
ENVIRONMENTAL OR OTHER CONSIDERATION includes but is not limited to Improvement
Projects which will provide a substantial amount of affordable housing in
accordance with the County general plan or an applicable specific plan or
community plan, or improvement projects which support industrial or commercial
development which is expected to permanently enhance or enlarge the employment
base within the County, or Improvement Projects which mitigate an adverse
environmental impact.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0207   Roads.
   A County improvement project for road construction will be considered only
if the roads will meet the standards for roads in the County-maintained system.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0208   Water or Sewer Projects.
   (a)   An improvement project to construct water or sewer lines or systems
will be considered only if the area to be served is within, will be annexed to,
or will be served by a public agency or regulated utility, providing the
service.
   (b)   An improvement project to construct a water supply or distribution
system will not be approved unless evidence is submitted that the water supply
meets California water quality standards.
   (c)   An improvement project to construct a sewage treatment or collecting
system will not be approved unless evidence is submitted that existing or
proposed treatment facilities are or will be adequate for the anticipated load
and that the requirements for waste discharge of the governing California
Regional Water Quality Control Board will be met.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0209   Required Information.
   Information supplied for Commission and Board review by proponents of an
improvement project or new development improvement project by the project
engineer, any petition circulated to property owners, and any bid submitted by
any contractor shall include as a minimum the following estimates:
   (a)   Total cost of project, including interest;
   (b)   Cost of construction;
   (c)   Amount of incidental expense;
   (d)   Interest rate for bonds;
   (e)   Discount on bonds required by bond underwriters or other potential
purchasers of bonds;
   (f)   Fees charged by any person or firm providing financial assistance to a
contractor;
   (g)   Per parcel or per unit share of total cost;
   (h)   The existing total bonded indebtedness on each parcel of property
included within the proposed project area;
   (i)   Availability of Federal or State financial assistance;
   (j)   Comparison between method of public financing proposed by proponents
and other means of public or private financing;
   (k)   Project schedule for implementation;
   (l)   Any special recommendations for implementation of project.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0210   Petitions.
   This Section shall not apply to self-governed districts or to cities. In the
case of a sewer project involving property located within, or annexed to, a
special district or County service area governed by the Board, the
certification by the County Health Officer or his deputy of the need for the
project will be accepted in lieu of a petition. Criteria for certification may
include, but is not limited to, a review of sewage odor and nuisance
complaints, an analysis of individual sewage disposal system pumping records, a
hydrologic and geologic review of the soils and terrain and a sanitary survey
of the project. Requests for certification shall be honored only from the Board
or the County Special Districts Department and all costs relating to the
certification shall be borne by the special district or service area in which
the project is located and shall be payable to the County Environmental Health
Services Department.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0211   Engineering Costs.
   (a)   The proponents of any improvement project shall underwrite all
engineering costs on any project which does not proceed for any reason after
engineering services are performed. The County will not underwrite any
engineering costs of any such project, except as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   Because sewer projects are of such vital importance to the
environment, whenever the County Health Officer or his or her deputy has
certified to the need for such a project in accordance with §
17.0212, the Board will permit a special district or service area undertaking
such a project to guarantee payment of engineering fees, subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   There is compliance with §
17.0208 of this Chapter; and
      (2)   The contract with the engineer specifies that payment in case of
failure of the project to proceed shall be the reasonable value of the work
accomplished, considering the needs or program of the entity involved and the
relevance of the work to such needs or program, such value to be determined by
the Board upon recommendation of the County Administrative Officer.
   (c)   This Section shall not apply to cities or self-governed districts
seeking to obtain consent from the Board to conduct assessment district
proceedings.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0212   Deposit—County Costs.
   The proponents of any Improvement Project shall be required to deposit with
the County a sum sufficient to cover County costs incurred in connection with
review of a project, including, but not limited to, Commission review,
administration, plan checking, investigation, Board review and inspection. The
sum so deposited will be retained by the County only in the event that the
project is not completed or if such costs are not recovered by the County from
the project funding.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0213   Incidental Expense.
   Fees for County administrative expenses shall be established by the district
project manager and shall be limited to the actual cost of such expenses for
each project. Such fees will include all administrative, legal, financial,
engineering, bond discount, and miscellaneous expenses which may be required in
conjunction with the project. This Section shall not apply to public agencies,
and regulated utilities seeking to obtain consent from the Board to conduct
assessment district proceedings.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
§ 17.0214   Board Action.
   Upon review of a proposed improvement project and the report of the
Commission, the Board shall determine whether the project shall be approved. It
is Board policy to limit projects to the criteria set forth in this Division.
The Board reserves to itself the authority to approve or disapprove any
proposed improvement project based upon evidence received at hearings held by
the Board.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
CHAPTER 3: REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
Section
   
17.0301   Criteria for Review.
§ 17.0301   Criteria for Review.
   Redevelopment projects shall be reviewed by the Commission in accordance
with §
17.0106 of this Division and with criteria established by the Redevelopment
Agency and submitted by it to the Commission for the purpose of governing such
review.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
CHAPTER 4: INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS
Section
   
17.0401   Criteria for Review.
§ 17.0401   Criteria for Review.
   Industrial projects shall be reviewed by the Commission in accordance with §
17.0106 of this Division and with criteria established by the Authority and
submitted by it to the Commission for the purpose of governing such review.
(Am. Ord. 3121, passed - -1987)
DIVISION 8: MANAGEMENT OF COUNTY PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1: LEASING COUNTY REALTY
Section
   
18.0101   Alternative Bidding Procedure.
   
18.0102   Action by Board.
   
18.0103   Leases Excluded from Bidding Procedure.
   
18.0104   Execution and Termination of Leases, Rental Agreements, Licenses and
Use Permits.
   
18.0105   Initiation of Termination Proceedings.
§ 18.0101   Alternative Bidding Procedure.
   As an alternative to the bidding procedures set forth in Government Code §§
25526 to 25535, inclusive, the Real Property Manager, Real Estate Services
Division, is authorized to call for bids, except as provided herein, for
leasing or licensing any County realty as follows:
   (a)   By posting a description and minimum acceptable terms for the property
to be leased or licensed in at least three public places for not less than 15
days; and
   (b)   By publishing a description and minimum acceptable terms for the
property to be leased or licensed for not less than two weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in this County.
(Am. Ord. 1920, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 3236, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3833,
passed - -2001)
§ 18.0102   Action by Board.
   The Board of Supervisors shall either accept the highest proposal for the
proposed lease or license submitted in response to the call for bids as
provided in §
18.0101 hereof, or reject all bids.
(Am. Ord. 1920, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 3236, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3833,
passed - -2001)
§ 18.0103   Leases Excluded from Bidding Procedure.
   Leases and licenses of a duration not exceeding five years and having an
estimated monthly rental or use fee of not exceeding $5,000.00 may be excluded
from the bidding procedures of §
18.0101 provided that the actual monthly rental or use fee of the executed
lease or license shall not exceed $5,000.00, the term of the executed lease or
license shall not exceed five years, and the executed lease or license shall
not be renewable. Prior to executing any such lease or license, notice shall be
given pursuant to Government Code § 6061, posted in the Office of the San
Bernardino County Clerk and, if the lease or license involves residential
property, notice shall be given to the housing sponsors, as defined by Health
and Safety Code §§ 50074 and 50074.5. The notice shall describe the property
proposed to be leased or licensed, the terms of the lease or license, the
location where offers to lease or license the property will be accepted, the
location where the lease or license will be executed, and any County officer
authorized to execute the lease or license.
(Am. Ord. 1920, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 3236, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3383,
passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3833, passed - -2001)
§ 18.0104   Execution and Termination of Leases, Rental Agreements, Licenses
and Use Permits.
   (a)   The Real Property Manager, Real Estate Services Division, is hereby
authorized to enter into and terminate on behalf of the County all County
leases, rental agreements, licenses and use permits of a duration not exceeding
five years and having a monthly rental or use fee not exceeding $5,000.00 for
any County realty.
   (b)   The Director, Department of Airports, is hereby authorized to enter
into and terminate on behalf of the County leases, rental agreements, licenses
and use permits of a duration not exceeding three years and having a monthly
rental or use fee not exceeding $3,000.00 for County realty located on County
airports.
   (c)   The Chief, Regional Parks Division, is hereby authorized to enter into
and terminate on behalf of the County leases, rental agreements, licenses and
use permits of a duration not exceeding three years and having a monthly rental
or use fee not exceeding $3,000.00 for County realty located on County regional
parks.
(Am. Ord. 1920, passed - -1974; Am. Ord. 3236, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3470,
passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 3833, passed - -2001)
§ 18.0105   Initiation of Termination Proceedings.
   County Counsel, at the request of those County officers authorized to
execute and terminate agreements by §
18.0104, above, is hereby authorized to initiate any and all legal actions
necessary to terminate the agreements and recover possession of the affected
County realty.
(Ord. 3470, passed - -1991)
DIVISION 9: SUNSHINE ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
19.0101   Citation.
   
19.0102   Findings and Purpose.
   
19.0103   Construction.
   
19.0104   Public Access Web Site.
   
19.0105   Release of Public RecordsSunshine of Documents.
   
19.0106   Immediacy of Response, Withholding Kept to a Minimum.
   
19.0107   Records Survive Transition of Officials.
   
19.0108   Retention of Audio and Video Recordings of Public Meetings.
   
19.0109   Computer Systems and Public Information.
§ 19.0101   Citation.
   This Division may be cited as the San Bernardino County Sunshine Ordinance
or the Sunshine Ordinance.
(Ord. 4125, passed - -2010)
§ 19.0102 Findings and Purpose.
   The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino finds and declares:
   (a)   Efficient and effective governance occurs when the electorate is
adequately equipped to constructively oversee and hold elected and other
officials accountable for their actions.
   (b)   That transparency and open government is essential for good governance
and serves as the foundation upon which the electorate may equip itself to
fulfill these obligations.
   (c)   Members of the public must be provided with a meaningful opportunity
to participate in the decisions that affect them, and to understand how and why
those decisions are made.
   (d)   Public access to documents and records of San Bernardino County are an
essential component of transparency, and as such, failure to allow public
access to these documents compromises the strength and integrity of our
government.
   (e)   In order to further the people’s right of access to public records,
any exemptions that may be applied to the release of public records shall be
narrowly construed.
   (f)   Elected officials, commissions, boards, committees and other agencies
within the County exist to serve the public and to conduct the people’s
business. The people do not cede to these entities the right to decide what the
people should know about the operations of local government.
   (g)   In order to ensure public participation in and scrutiny of the
decisions and conduct of County government, records pertaining to the conduct
of the people’s business must be readily available to the public, unless exempt
from disclosure under the law.
   (h)   That it has a fiduciary responsibility to the people to exercise sound
judgment and take great care to be good stewards of their tax dollars and as
such, all County expenditures of public funds should be accounted for and fully
disclosed where not prohibited by law.
   (i)   Members of the public should not need to engage in prolonged or
burdensome efforts, or to retain the services of an attorney, to obtain
meaningful access to public records and information. Rather, it is the duty of
every officer, official and employee of County government to ensure prompt and
meaningful access to public records, and to assist the public in obtaining such
access.
   (j)   Honesty, integrity, and openness in the exercise of government
authority are fundamental prerequisites to an effective and efficient County
government that serves the needs and interests of its citizens.
(Ord. 4125, passed - -2010)
§ 19.0103 Construction.
   (a)   The right of the people to know what their government and those acting
on behalf of their government are doing is fundamental to democracy, and with
very few exceptions, that right supersedes any other policy interest government
officials may use to prevent public access to information. Only in rare and
unusual circumstances does the public benefit from allowing the business of
government to be conducted in closed session, and those circumstances should be
carefully and narrowly defined to prevent public officials from abusing their
authority.
   (b)   The provisions of this Chapter requiring or promoting public access to
meetings, records, or information relating to the conduct of the people’s
business shall be broadly construed. The provisions of this Chapter that limit,
restrict, or provide exceptions to the public’s right of access shall be
narrowly construed.
   (c)   The provisions of the California Public Records Act (Government Code
§§ 6350 et seq.) requiring or promoting public access to records or information
relating to the conduct of the people’s business, shall be broadly construed.
The provisions of the California Public Records Act that limit, restrict, or
provide exceptions to the public’s right of access shall be narrowly construed.
   (d)    All provisions of this Chapter shall be interpreted in a manner
consistent with the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code §§ 54950 et seq.) and
the California Public Records Act, as both currently exist, or as both are
hereafter amended from time to time and as interpreted by the California
Attorney General and case authority. In the event of any conflict between any
provision of this Chapter and the Brown Act or the California Public Records
Act, as both currently exist, or as hereafter amended from time to time and as
interpreted by the California Attorney General and case authority, the
provisions of the Brown Act and the California Public Records Act as they exist
at that time, and the opinions of the California Attorney General and the case
law interpreting each as they exist at that time, shall prevail over any
conflicting provision of this Chapter. If this Chapter is silent on any matter,
the provisions of the Brown Act and the California Public Records Act as both
then exist at that time, and as interpreted by the California Attorney General
and case authority at that time, will govern. This Chapter does not create a
cause of action separate from a cause of action under the Brown Act or the
California Public Records Act.
(Ord. 4125, passed - -2010)
§ 19.0104 Public Access Web Site.
   (a)   The County shall create and maintain a public access Web site.
   (b)   The public access Web site will include, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   A copy of the San Bernardino County Sunshine Ordinance.
      (2)   Information on how to obtain a free copy of the Sunshine Ordinance.
The County will provide a copy of the San Bernardino County Sunshine Ordinance,
the California Public Records Act, and the Ralph M. Brown Act to any requestor,
free of charge, except for postage if delivery by mail is requested.
      (3)   Any other information required by this Chapter to be posted on the
public access Web site.
(Ord. 4125, passed - -2010)
§ 19.0105 Release of Public RecordsSunshine of Documents.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors and the Legislature, mindful of the right of
individuals to privacy, finds and declares that access to information
concerning the conduct of the people’s business is a fundamental and necessary
right of every person in this County. There shall be a presumption that the
record sought is public, and the burden shall be upon the custodian to
articulate with specificity the exemption which applies.
   (b)   All requests for public records shall be directed to the department or
Board office responsible for the records requested or to the Clerk of the
Board, who shall direct the request to the appropriate department or Board
office. The California Public Records Act sets forth timelines for responding
to such requests and providing records. Each Board office and department will
respond to and provide the requested records as rapidly as possible, striving
to provide them sooner than the timelines in the California Public Records Act.
Said timelines should never be asserted to delay fulfilling a simple, routine
or otherwise readily answerable request. When gathering documents responsive to
a request, the Board office or department will not withhold all of the records
that are responsive to the request until all potentially responsive documents
have been gathered and reviewed, but will rather provide them in stages as
gathered and reviewed.
   (c)   County officers and employees will promptly provide records of
reimbursement of County officer and employee expenditures with as little
redacted as possible, except information routinely redacted by the County
Auditor to deter identity theft and protect privacy. For purposes of
reimbursement of County officer and employee expenditures, this Division
includes, but is not limited to, all bills, claims, invoices, vouchers or other
records of payment and disbursements showing the amount paid, the payee and the
purpose for which payment is made. The “deliberative process privilege” shall
not be asserted with regard to County payments and disbursements other than
information routinely redacted by the County Auditor to deter identity theft
and protect privacy. As technology advances, the County Auditor will devise a
system where records of reimbursement of expenditures can be posted and
accessed by the public on the County’s website.
   (d)   County officers and officials are discouraged from asserting the
“deliberative process privilege” as to records reflecting meetings or contacts
where County business is discussed with persons who are not County officers,
officials or employees. In no case should the “deliberative process privilege”
be asserted as to the identities of other County staff members at such meetings
or contacts.
   (e)   Any agenda item hiring the staff of the Board of Supervisors or
raising the salaries of the staff of the Board of Supervisors shall have
attached to said item a list of the staff members affected by the hiring or
salary increase and the amount of increase for each such staff member.
   (f)   The County Administrative Officer will provide training to at least
two staff members of each Board office and department about the California
Public Records Act and on how to properly respond to California Public Records
Act requests received by that office or department. No employee of any
department shall deny access to any record of that office without first
consulting with at least one of the staff members who has received such
training.
(Ord. 4125, passed - -2010)
§ 19.0106 Immediacy of Response, Withholding Kept to Minimum.
   (a)   The maximum deadlines provided in the California Public Records Act
are appropriate for extensive or demanding requests, but shall not be used to
delay fulfilling a simple, routine or otherwise readily answerable request.
   (b)   The person seeking the information need not state his or her reason
for making the request, or the use to which the information will be put, and
requesters shall not be routinely asked to make such a disclosure. Where a
record being requested contains information most of which is exempt from
disclosure under the California Public Records Act and this Chapter, the County
Counsel or custodian of the record may inform the requester of the nature and
extent of the non-exempt public information and inquire as to the requester’s
purpose for seeking it, in order to suggest alternative sources for the
information which may involve less redaction or to otherwise prepare a response
to the request.
   (c)   No record shall be withheld from disclosure in its entirety unless all
information contained in it is exempt from disclosure based on an express
provision of this Chapter, an exemption provided by California Public Records
Act, or on an express prohibition against disclosure imposed by California or
Federal law. Information that is exempt from disclosure shall be masked,
deleted, or otherwise segregated in order that the nonexempt portion of a
requested record may be released.
(Ord. 4125, passed - -2010)
§ 19.0107 Records Survive Transition of Officials.
   All public records maintained by a member of the Board of Supervisors or
their staff, by any other elected County official or their staff, by the County
Administrative Officer, County Clerk, or by the head of any County department,
shall, upon the departure of that individual from County service, be retained,
preserved, and stored in a manner consistent with the records retention
policies of the County. Except in the case of his or her own departure, the
County Administrative Officer, in consultation with the Director of Human
Resources, shall designate a person to assist such individual prior to his or
her departure to assure that his or her records are properly retained,
preserved, and stored for the period prescribed by the records retention
policies of the County. The County Administrative Officer shall in like manner
direct the Information Services Department to properly retain, preserve and
store all electronic public records of said departing individual in a manner
consistent with the records retention policies of the County. In the case of
the departure of the Chief Administrative Officer, the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors shall perform the functions of the Chief Administrative Officer as
described above. Notification of this section shall be given by the County
Administrative Officer or his or her designee to the departing individual(s)
prior to his or her departure.
(Ord. 4125, passed - -2010)
§ 19.0108 Retention of Audio and Video Recordings of Public Meetings.
   Any audio or video recording of an open and public meeting of the Board of
Supervisors or the Planning Commission shall be retained in perpetuity. Any
inspection of an audio or video recording shall be provided without charge on
equipment made available by the County.
(Ord. 4125, passed - -2010)
§ 19.0109 Computer Systems and Public Information.
   (a)   It is the policy of the County to use computer technology in order to
reduce the cost of public records management, including the costs of
collecting, maintaining, and disclosing records subject to disclosure to
members of the public under the California Public Records Act or this Chapter.
To the extent that it is technologically and economically feasible, departments
that use computer systems to collect and store public records shall program and
design these systems to ensure convenient, efficient, and economical public
access to records, and shall make public records easily accessible over public
networks such as the Internet.
   (b)   Departments purchasing new computer systems or software, or upgrading
existing systems or software, shall maintain the following goals as a means to
achieve the policies of this section:
      (1)   Implementing a computer system in which exempt information is
segregated or filed separately from otherwise disclosable information.
      (2)   Implementing a system that permits reproduction of electronic
copies of records in a format that is generally recognized as an industry
standard format.
      (3)   Implementing a system that permits making records available through
a public computer network, consistent with the requirement for security of
information.
(Ord. 4125, passed - -2010)
DIVISION 10: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.0101   Purpose and Intent.
   
110.0102   Findings.
   
110.0103   Authority.
   
110.0104   Applicability.
   
110.0105   Definitions.
   
110.0106   Conformance with State Law.
§ 110.0101 Purpose and Intent.
   The purpose of this Division is to authorize the County to undertake an
Economic Development Program consisting of economic development activities that
include, but are not limited to, those enumerated in this Division, for the
purposes of: (a) promoting the general health and welfare; (b) improving the
economic vitality of residents and businesses; (c) enhancing residential,
commercial, and industrial cohesion; (d) promoting employment creation,
retention, and workforce development activities; (e) expanding housing options
for low and moderate income households; (f) improving retail and commercial
opportunities for businesses and consumers; (g) promoting commercial and
industrial activity; (h) encouraging tourism and visitor spending; (i)
encouraging entertainment options, enriching cultural experiences, and
improving recreational opportunities; and (j) expanding the County’s tax base
to maintain and increase the County’s ability to provide services to residents
and businesses. The economic development activities authorized by this Division
accomplish these purposes and are among the proper powers and duties of the
County.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0102 Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors finds, determines and declares that:
   (a)   The County is a Charter County under Article XI, Section 3 of the
California Constitution, and that the Board of Supervisors is vested by the
California Constitution, and by Article I, Section 3 of the County Charter,
with the power to make and enforce within its limits all local, police,
sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general
laws that serve to protect the health, safety, and welfare of County residents.
   (b)   Neither the County Charter nor the provisions of this Division thwart
or otherwise supersede the authority and self-determination of any city within
the County, duly formed in accordance with Article XI, Section 2 or Section 3,
of the California Constitution. The County retains the power to make and
enforce all local, police, sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations not
in conflict with general laws to protect the health, safety, and welfare of all
persons residing within the County.
   (c)   Economic growth and the maintenance of the financial well-being of the
residents and businesses within the County promotes the general welfare of the
County and its residents.
   (d)   The County previously designated a redevelopment agency, the
Redevelopment Agency of the County of San Bernardino, which engaged in economic
activities under California’s former Community Redevelopment Law. That agency
was dissolved effective February 1, 2012, pursuant to Assembly Bill X1 26
(2011) and Assembly Bill X1 27 (2011) and subsequent litigation, California
Redevelopment Association v. Matosantos (2012) 53 Cal.4th 231. The adoption of
this Division will allow the County to accomplish the purposes and goals of the
County’s Economic Development Program despite the dissolution of the former
Redevelopment Agency.
   (e)   In part to encourage activities previously engaged in by the former
Redevelopment Agency, the County desires to engage in economic development
activities and to adopt the Economic Development Program outlined in this
Division to increase economic opportunity, expand public convenience, and
promote the general prosperity of the community.
   (f)   The County is authorized to engage in economic development activities
pursuant to: § 23004 of the Government Code relating to the management of
County property; §§ 52200 et seq. of the Government Code relating to economic
development; § 53083 of the Government Code relating to economic development;
and Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution as interpreted by the
California Supreme Court to authorize local ordinances and regulations “to
promote the economic welfare, public convenience and general prosperity of the
community.” (Miller v. Bd. Of Pub. Works (1925) 195 Cal. 477, 485.)
   (g)   The development of County-owned property and private property by a
joint venture agreement with private enterprise for commercial, industrial, and
cultural uses, would provide a means to produce additional revenue sources for
the benefit of the County, and aid the economic well-being of the state
generally.
   (h)   The Economic Development Program and the related activities of the
County are and will be for a public purpose, to benefit the economic welfare,
public convenience, and general prosperity of the County and its residents and
businesses.
   (i)   Whenever the creation of economic opportunity and community economic
development cannot be accomplished by private enterprise alone, without public
participation and assistance in the acquisition of land, in planning and in the
financing of land assembly, in the work of clearance, and in the making of
improvements necessary therefor, it is in the public interest to advance or
expend public funds for these purposes, and to provide a means by which
economic opportunity and community economic development can be created and
accomplished in the County.
   (j)   The Economic Development Program and the related activities of the
County are a proper use of public resources for the public purposes described
above and they provide a clear benefit to the community, including but not
limited to, promoting the general health and welfare, improving the economic
vitality of residents and businesses, enhancing residential, commercial and
industrial cohesion, promoting employment creation, retention and workforce
development activities, expanding housing options, improving retail and
commercial opportunities for businesses and consumers, promoting commercial and
industrial activity, encouraging tourism and visitor spending, encouraging
entertainment options, enriching cultural experiences, improving recreational
opportunities, eliminating blight, and expanding the County’s tax base to
maintain and increase the County’s ability to provide services to residents and
businesses. Such use of public resources shall therefore not be construed as a
gift of public resources or funds as prohibited by Article XVI, Section 6 of
the California Constitution.
   (k)   The creation of economic opportunity and the provision of appropriate
continuing land use and construction policies with respect to property
acquired, in whole or in part, for economic opportunity constitute public uses
and purposes for which public money may be advanced or expended and private
property acquired, and are governmental functions of local concern in the
interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the County.
   (l)   The County’s adoption and implementation of the Economic Development
Program and other related activities authorized under this Division will not
adversely impact property tax distribution to public school districts or
adversely impact the State budget.
   (m)   Community economic development is a municipal affair under the purview
of the County, as that term is used in Section 5 of Article XI of the
California Constitution.
   (n)   The necessity of the public interest for the provisions of this
Division is declared to be a matter of legislative determination.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0103 Authority.
   This Division is adopted pursuant to: Article XI, Section 7 of the
California Constitution, which authorizes counties to make and enforce within
their limits all local, police, sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations
not in conflict with general laws that serve to protect the health, safety and
welfare of its residents; § 23004 of the Government Code, which authorizes
counties to manage county property; and § 52200 of the Government Code, which
authorizes communities to enact local strategies to promote economic
development on a local level to promote employment creation, retention and
workforce development activities, create economic opportunity, and generate tax
revenue for all levels of government.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0104 Applicability.
   The procedures prescribed in this Division may be used by the County
notwithstanding any other provisions of law and without compliance with any
other provisions in conflict therewith. These procedures shall be an
alternative to any other procedures provided by law, shall be applicable to
public real property owned by the County regardless of the manner in which the
real property was acquired, the purposes for which the real property was
acquired, or other uses, if any, previously made of the real property. Real
property being disposed of under this Division is hereby declared and deemed to
be land held by the County for: (a) the purpose of exchange; and (b) to be
transferred for the public purpose of furthering the County’s Economic
Development Program. Furthermore, the property shall be deemed not to
constitute “surplus land,” that is, land no longer necessary for the County’s
use.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0105 Definitions.
   As used in this Division, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The Board of Supervisors of the County of San
Bernardino.
   BONDS. The bonds, notes, certificates, debentures, and other obligations
authorized to be issued by the County pursuant to this Division and payable as
provided in this Division, which shall be payable solely from specified
revenues, moneys, or assets pledged or assigned to secure payment of the bonds.
   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The person designated as the Chief Executive
Officer of the County.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino, any of its agencies, departments, and
subdivisions, any associated districts, and any entity for which the Board of
Supervisors serves as the legislative body, and any officer or employee
thereof.
   COUNTY COUNSEL. The attorney appointed by the Board of Supervisors to serve
as the County Counsel pursuant to Section 6 of Article II of the County
Charter.
   DEBT. Any binding obligation to repay a sum of money, including obligations
in the form of bonds, certificates of participation, long-term leases, loans
from government agencies, or loans from banks, other financial institutions,
private businesses, or individuals.
   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT. Any activity that enhances the factors of productive
capacity, such as land, labor, capital, and technology, of a national, state,
or local economy. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT includes policies and programs expressly
directed at improving the business climate in business finance, marketing,
neighborhood development, small business development, business retention and
expansion, technology transfer, and real estate redevelopment. ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT is an investment program designed to leverage private sector
capital in such a way as to induce actions that have a positive effect on the
level of business activity, employment, income distribution, and fiscal
solvency of the community.
   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT SUBSIDY. Any expenditure of public funds or loss of
revenue to the County in the amount of $100,000.00 or more, for the purpose of
stimulating economic development within the County, including, but not limited
to, bonds, grants, loans, loan guarantees, enterprise zone or empowerment zone
incentives, fee waivers, land price subsidies, matching funds, tax abatements,
tax exemptions, and tax credits. Nothing in this Division shall be read to
prohibit the expenditures or forbearance of public funds by the County for the
purpose of providing housing affordable to persons and families of low or
moderate income, as defined in § 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, and such
expenditures shall not constitute an economic development subsidy for the
purpose of complying with the procedural requirements applicable to economic
development subsidies under this Division.
   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM. The program established pursuant to this
Division.
   ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY. Any of the following: (a) development agreements or
other agreements that create, retain, or expand new jobs, in which the Board of
Supervisors finds that the agreement will create or retain at least one full-
time equivalent, permanent job for every $35,000.00 of County investment in the
project after full capacity and implementation; (b) development agreements that
increase property tax revenues to all property tax collecting entities, in
which the Board of Supervisors finds that the agreement will result in an
increase of at least 15 percent of total property tax resulting from the
project at full implementation when compared to the year prior to the property
being acquired by the government entity; (c) creation of affordable housing, if
a demonstrated affordable housing need exists in the community, as defined in
the approved housing element or regional housing needs assessment; (d) projects
that meet the goals set forth in the Sustainable Communities and Climate
Protection Act of 2008 (Senate Bill 375, Chapter 728 of the Statutes of 2008)
and have been included in an adopted sustainable communities strategy or
alternative planning strategy or a project that specifically implements the
goals of those adopted plans; (e) transit priority projects, as defined in §
21155 of the Public Resources Code, located within transit priority project
area; (f) such other meaning as adopted under any amendment to § 52200.2 of the
Government Code.
   FACILITY. Any of the facilities, places, buildings, or structures within the
territorial jurisdiction of the County which are, or will be, maintained and
operated for industrial, commercial, or business purposes, conform to the
general plan of the County or the city in which the facility is located, and
which are, or will be approved by the County for the financing authorized by
this Division, with such approval being given only when the County finds and
determines that such financing will substantially promote one or more of the
public purposes listed in §
110.0101.
   FAIR MARKET VALUE. The fair market value of property at the highest price on
the date of valuation that would be agreed to by a seller, being willing to
sell but under no particular or urgent necessity for so doing, nor obliged to
sell, and a buyer, being ready, willing, and able to buy but under no
particular necessity for so doing, each dealing with the other with full
knowledge of all the uses and purposes for which the property is reasonably
adaptable and available. The FAIR MARKET VALUE of property for which there is
no relevant, comparable market is its value on the date of valuation as
determined by any method of valuation that is just and equitable.
   FAIR REUSE VALUE. The value of property that would be expected to be
generated from the sale or lease of such property, in a competitive market, for
a specific purpose under reuse conditions established by the County, with the
assumption that the conveyance of the property will result in near-term
development, avoid land speculation and include strict restrictions on the use
of the property imposed pursuant to a written agreement with the County.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, firm,
company, association, group, body politic, or other entity, and any officer,
employee, agent, volunteer, trustee, assignee, contractor, or other
representative thereof.
   REAL PROPERTY. Means (a) land, including land under water and waterfront
property; (b) buildings, structures, fixtures and improvements on the land; (c)
any property appurtenant to or used in connection with the land; and (d) every
estate, interest, privilege, easement, franchise, and right in land, including
rights-of-way, terms for years, and liens, charges, or encumbrances by way of
judgment, mortgage, or otherwise and the indebtedness secured by such liens.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Planning, development, replanning, redesign, clearance,
reconstruction, or rehabilitation, or any combination of these, and the
provision of those residential, commercial, industrial, public, or other
structures or spaces as may be appropriate or necessary in the interest of the
general welfare, including recreational and other facilities incidental or
appurtenant to them.
   REVENUES. Amounts received by the County as payments of principal, interest,
and all other charges with respect to a loan or assistance authorized by this
Division, as payments under a lease, sublease or sale agreement with respect to
a facility, as proceeds received by the County from mortgage, hazard or other
insurance on or with respect to such a loan (or any property securing such
loan), lease, sublease or sale agreement, all other rents, charges, fees,
income and receipts derived by the County from the financing authorized by this
Division, any amounts received by the County as investment earnings or moneys
deposited in any fund securing the bonds, and such other legally available
moneys as the Board of Supervisors may, in its discretion, lawfully designate
as revenues.
   SMALL BUSINESS. The meaning set forth in § 11342.610 of the Government Code.
   SUBSIDIES. Includes, but is not limited to, bonds, grants, loans, loan
guarantees, enterprise zone or empowerment zone incentives, fee waivers, land
price subsidies, matching funds, tax abatements, tax exemptions, tax credits,
but specifically excludes subsidies for the purpose of providing low and
moderate income housing.
   TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. The geographic territory of the County described
in § 23136 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0106 Conformance with State Law.
   To the extent that the provisions of this Division are inconsistent with the
provisions of any general statute or special act or parts thereof, the
provisions of this Division shall be deemed controlling.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 2: AUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES
Section
   
110.0201   General Activities.
   
110.0202   Affordable Housing.
   
110.0203   Property Acquisition and Use.
   
110.0204   Public Improvements.
   
110.0205   Commercial Facilities.
   
110.0206   Remediation.
   
110.0207   Business Development.
§ 110.0201 General Activities.
   To accomplish the purpose of this Division, the County is authorized to
perform the following activities:
   (a)   In addition to all other powers vested in the County, to undertake and
complete any proceedings necessary to carry out the Economic Development
Program as enumerated in this Division.
   (b)   Assist in the creation of an economic opportunity, redevelopment, and
community economic development pursuant to and in conformance with the
requirements of this Division.
   (c)   Assist in the development of projects on a former military base,
provided that the projects are consistent with the military base authority
reuse plan and are approved by the military base reuse authority, if
applicable.
   (d)   Provide relocation assistance to persons displaced by governmental
action.
   (e)   Finance any project or portion of a project that is located in, or
overlaps with, any redevelopment project area or former redevelopment project
area or former military base, an enhanced infrastructure financing district
adopted pursuant to Chapter 2.99 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the
Government Code, an infrastructure financing district adopted pursuant to
Chapter 2.8 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code, an
infrastructure and revitalization financing district adopted pursuant to
Chapter 2.6 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code, or a
community revitalization and investment authority adopted pursuant to Division
4 of Title 6 of the Government Code.
   (f)   Contract with and employ any persons for the furnishing to the County
of special services and advice in financial, economic, accounting, engineering,
legal, real estate, or administrative matters, if such persons are specially
trained and experienced and competent to perform the special services required.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0202 Affordable Housing.
   In addition to all other powers vested in the County, in carrying out the
purposes of this Division, the County may exercise any or all of its powers for
the construction, rehabilitation, or preservation of affordable housing for
extremely low, very low, low and moderate income persons or families, including
the following:
   (a)   Acquire real property or building sites.
   (b)   Improve real property or building sites with onsite or offsite
improvements, but only if both: (1) the improvements are part of the new
construction or rehabilitation of affordable housing units for low or moderate
income persons that are directly benefited by the improvements, and are a
reasonable and fundamental component of the housing units; and (2) the County
requires that the units remain available at affordable housing cost to, and
occupied by, persons and families of extremely low, very low, low, or moderate
income for the same time period and in the same manner as provided in §§ 62101
(c) and 62101(f)(2) of the Health and Safety Code.
   (c)   Donate real property to private or public persons or entities for
affordable housing purposes.
   (d)   Accept a conveyance of real property owned by a public entity,
declared surplus by a public entity, or owned by a private entity.
   (e)   Finance insurance premiums necessary for the provision of insurance
during the construction or rehabilitation of properties that are administered
by governmental entities or nonprofit organizations to provide housing for
lower income households, as defined in § 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code,
including rental properties, emergency shelters, transitional housing, or
special residential care facilities.
   (f)   Construct, acquire, repair, or rehabilitate buildings or structures,
including multipurpose facilities and other community service facilities.
   (g)   To the extent the following households cannot obtain housing at
affordable costs on the open market, provide subsidies to, or for the benefit
of: extremely low income households, as defined by § 50106 of the Health and
Safety Code; very low income households, as defined by § 50105 of the Health
and Safety Code; lower income households, as defined by § 50079.5 of the Health
and Safety Code; or persons and families of low or moderate income, as defined
by § 50093 of the Health and Safety Code. Housing units available on the open
market are those units developed without direct government subsidies.
   (h)   Develop plans, pay principal and interest on bonds, loans, advances,
or other indebtedness, or pay financing or carrying charges.
   (i)   Maintain the community’s supply of mobile homes.
   (j)   Preserve the availability to lower income households of affordable
housing units in housing developments that are assisted or subsidized by public
entities and that are threatened with imminent conversion to market rates.
   (k)   Make loans to improve, increase, or preserve the supply of low and
moderate income housing, emergency shelters for homeless persons or households.
   (l)   Sell, lease, grant, donate or otherwise convey real property owned or
acquired by the County to a housing authority, private or nonprofit
organization, or to any public body for public housing projects.
   (m)   Require, by recorded covenants or restrictions, that all dwelling
units constructed or rehabilitated pursuant to this Division shall remain
available at affordable rent or housing cost to, and occupied by, low or
moderate income households, for the longest feasible time, but for not less
than 55 years for rental units and 45 years for owner-occupied units.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0203 Property Acquisition and Use.
   In carrying out the purposes of this Division, the County may exercise any
or all of the following powers:
   (a)   Purchase, lease, obtain option upon, acquire by gift, grant, bequest,
devise, or otherwise, any real property or personal property, any interest in
property, and any improvements on it, including repurchase of developed
property previously owned by the County. The County shall obtain an appraisal
from a qualified independent appraiser to determine the fair market value of
property before the County acquires or purchases real property subject to the
requirements specified in §
110.0502 of this Code or the requirements specified in § 52201 of the
Government Code.
   (b)   Finance the planning and design work that is directly related to the
purchase, construction, expansion, or rehabilitation of property.
   (c)   Clear or move buildings, structures, or other improvements from any
real property acquired by the County.
   (d)   Construct, improve or rehabilitate buildings, facilities or structures
or building sites with onsite or offsite improvements.
   (e)   Rent, maintain, manage, operate, repair, and clear real property.
   (f)   Sell, lease, for a period not to exceed 99 years, exchange, subdivide,
transfer, assign, pledge, encumber by mortgage, deed of trust, or otherwise
dispose of any real property or personal property or any interest in property.
   (g)   Develop as a building site any real property owned or acquired by the
County.
   (h)   Insure or provide for the insurance of any real property or personal
property of the County against risks or hazards.
   (i)   Make loans or grants for or to owners or tenants for the purpose of
improving, rehabilitating, or retrofitting facilities, and any such loan shall
be in the form of a written loan agreement that includes a payment schedule,
the terms for interest calculation, the rights and remedies of the parties in
case of default, and any other material terms of the loan.
   (j)   Provide for seismic retrofits of unreinforced masonry buildings, any
buildings that qualify as “historical property” under Health and Safety Code §
37602, or any other building to meet the requirements of the most current
edition of the Uniform Building Code of the International Conference of
Building Officials, as adopted and amended by the County.
   (k)   Take any actions necessary to remove graffiti from public or private
property.
   (l)   Provide aid and assistance to property owners in connection with
rehabilitation loans and grants.
   (m)   Construct foundations, platforms, and other like structural forms
necessary for the provision or utilization of air rights sites for buildings or
facilities to be used for residential, commercial, or industrial purposes.
   (n)   Finance any transit priority projects, as defined in § 21155 of the
Public Resources Code, that are located within a transit priority project area.
   (o)   Finance any projects that implement a sustainable communities
strategy, prepared pursuant to § 65080 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0204 Public Improvements.
   In carrying out the purposes of this Division, the County may exercise any
or all of the following powers:
   (a)   Cause, provide for, or undertake, or make provision with other
agencies, public entities, or a joint powers authority for, the acquisition,
installation, rehabilitation, upgrade, or construction of infrastructure,
including but not limited to:
      (1)   Highways, interchanges, ramps, bridges, arterial streets, parking
facilities, and any type of transit facilities.
      (2)   Water, sewer, and storm drainage facilities.
      (3)   Facilities and watershed lands used for the collection and
treatment of water for urban uses.
      (4)   Flood management, including levees, bypasses, dams, retention
basins, and drainage channels.
      (5)   Child care facilities.
      (6)   Libraries.
      (7)   Parks, park related recreational facilities, open space and habitat
restoration.
      (8)   Facilities for the transfer and disposal of solid waste, including
transfer stations and vehicles.
   (b)   Fund the installation, rehabilitation, upgrade, or construction of
infrastructure improvements which an owner or operator of the site would
otherwise be obliged to provide, if the County makes a finding that the
provision of such improvements is necessary to effectuate the purposes of the
Economic Development Program.
   (c)   Pay all or a part of the value of the land for and the cost of the
acquisition, installation, and construction of any building, facility,
structure, or other improvement that is publicly owned. Provided, however, that
the County shall not finance routine maintenance, repair work, or the costs of
an ongoing operation or providing services of any kind.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0205 Commercial Facilities.
   In carrying out the purposes of this Division, the County may exercise any
or all of the following powers:
   (a)   Loan funds to owners or tenants for the purpose of rehabilitating
facilities.
   (b)   Provide direct assistance to businesses in connection with new or
existing commercial facilities including retail, industrial or manufacturing
uses.
   (c)   Acquire, construct, or repair of facilities for private use. As part
of an agreement that provides for the development or rehabilitation of property
that will be used for facilities, the County may assist with the financing of
capital equipment, including, but not limited to, pollution control devices, so
long as the assistance is necessary for the economic feasibility of the
development and that the assistance cannot be obtained on economically feasible
terms in the private market.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0206 Remediation.
   In carrying out the purposes of this Division, the County may exercise any
or all of the following powers:
   (a)   Make loans or grants to fund brownfield restoration and other
environmental mitigation.
   (b)   Take any actions that the County determines are necessary and that are
consistent with other State and Federal laws to remedy or remove a release of
hazardous substances on, under, or from property, whether the County owns that
property or not, and utilize any powers under either the Polanco Redevelopment
Act (Article 12.5 (commencing with § 33459) of Chapter 4 of Part 1 of Division
24 of the Health and Safety Code) or Chapter 6.10 (commencing with § 25403) of
Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code, and finance any action necessary to
implement those laws.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0207 Business Development.
   In carrying out the purposes of this Division, the County may exercise any
or all of the following powers:
   (a)   Assist businesses to further any of the purposes in this Division.
   (b)   Assist businesses to promote employment creation, retention, and
workforce development activities.
   (c)   Create business development assistance programs.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 3: FINANCING
Section
   
110.0301   Special Revenues.
   
110.0302   Financing Activities.
   
110.0303   No Personal Liability.
   
110.0304   Financing Activities.
   
110.0305   Fees for Activities.
§ 110.0301 Special Revenues.
   In accordance with Section 5 of Article XIIB of the California Constitution,
the County shall establish the Economic Development Revolving Fund.
Contributions by the County to the Economic Development Revolving Fund, to the
extent derived from the proceeds of taxes, shall constitute appropriations
subject to the appropriations limitation contained in Article XIIB of the
California Constitution.
   Revenues, as defined by this Division, and the expenditures of such
revenues, shall not be taken into account in any manner in determining the
County’s compliance with Article XIIB of the California Constitution.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0302 Financing Activities.
   In carrying out the purposes of this Division, the County may exercise any
or all of the following powers:
   (a)   Develop plans, pay principal and interest on bonds, loans, advances,
or other indebtedness, or pay financing or carrying charges.
   (b)   Accept financial assistance, or any other assistance, from public or
private sources, for the County’s activities, powers, and duties and expend any
funds so received for any of the purposes in this Division.
   (c)   Borrow money or accept financial or other assistance from the State or
the Federal government or any other public agency, or any private lending
institution, and comply with any conditions of such loan or grant.
   (d)   For the purpose of raising money to be deposited in the Economic
Development Revolving Fund, the County may:
      (1)   Appropriate general fund money, residual distributions received by
the County under Health and Safety Code §§ 34183 or 34188, or any other funds.
      (2)   Issue and sell its general obligation bonds in conformity with
Article 4.5 (commencing with § 53506) and Article 5 (commencing with § 53510)
of Chapter 3 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code.
   (e)   If the County qualifies for funding as a disadvantaged community
pursuant to § 79505.5 of the Water Code or as defined by § 56033.5 of the
Government Code, the County may also enter into an agreement with a qualified
community development entity, as defined by Section 45D(c) of the Internal
Revenue Code, to coordinate investments of funds derived from the New Markets
Tax Credit with those of the County in instances where coordination offers
opportunities for greater efficiency of investments to improve conditions
described in Subdivisions (d) and (e).
   (f)   Borrow money (by the issuance of bonds or otherwise) or accept
financial or other assistance from any public or private lending institution
for any economic development project for any of the purposes of this Division,
and execute trust deeds or mortgages on any real or personal property owned or
acquired.
   (g)   Insure or provide for the insurance of any operations of the County
against risks or hazards.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0303 No Personal Liability.
   Neither the members of the Board of Supervisors, the Chief Executive
Officer, any directors, any other officers or employees of the County, nor any
person executing any bonds shall be liable personally on the bonds or be
subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance
thereof.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0304 Financing Activities.
   This Division shall not be construed to prevent the County from utilizing
revenues from any of the following sources, among others, to support its
activities provided that the applicable voter approval has been obtained:
   (a)   The Improvement Act of 1911 (Division 7 (commencing with § 5000) of
the Streets and Highways Code).
   (b)   The Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 (Division 12 (commencing with §
10000) of the Streets and Highways Code).
   (c)   The Improvement Bond Act of 1915 (Division 10 (commencing with § 8500)
of the Streets and Highways Code).
   (d)   The Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972 (Part 2 (commencing with §
22500) of Division 15 of the Streets and Highways Code).
   (e)   The Vehicle Parking District Law of 1943 (Part 1 (commencing with §
31500) of Division 18 of the Streets and Highways Code).
   (f)   The Parking District Law of 1951 (Part 4 (commencing with § 35100) of
Division 18 of the Streets and Highways Code).
   (g)   The Park and Playground Act of 1909 (Chapter 7 (commencing with §
38000) of Part 2 of Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code).
   (h)   The Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982 (Chapter 2.5
(commencing with § 53311) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government
Code).
   (i)   The Benefit Assessment Act of 1982 (Chapter 6.4 (commencing with §
54703) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government Code).
   (j)   An enhanced infrastructure financing district adopted pursuant to
Chapter 2.99 (commencing with § 53398.50) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of
the Government Code.
   (k)   An infrastructure financing district adopted pursuant to Chapter 2.8
(commencing with § 53395) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5 of the Government
Code.
   (l)   An infrastructure and revitalization financing district adopted
pursuant to Chapter 2.6 (commencing with § 53369) of Part 1 of Division 2 of
Title 5 of the Government Code.
   (m)   A community revitalization and investment authority adopted pursuant
to Division 4 (commencing with § 62000) of Title 6 of the Government Code.
   (n)   Any other similar financing source approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0305 Fees for Activities.
   The County is hereby authorized to charge application, commitment, financing
and other fees, in order to recover or reduce administrative and implementation
costs and expenses incurred in the exercise of the powers and obligations under
this Division.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 4: LIMITATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS
Section
   
110.0401   Limitations and Restrictions on Activities.
   
110.0402   Limitations and Restrictions on Property.
   
110.0403   Replacement Housing.
§ 110.0401 Limitations and Restrictions on Activities.
   In carrying out the purposes of this Division, the County may not provide
any form of financial assistance for projects that include:
   (a)   An automobile dealership which will be or is on a parcel of land that
has not previously been developed for urban use.
   (b)   Agricultural land and open-space land that is enforceably restricted,
as defined in Government Code § 51201(b).
   (c)   A development or business, either directly or indirectly, for the
acquisition, construction, improvement, rehabilitation, or replacement of
property that is or would be used for gambling or gaming of any kind
whatsoever. This does not include acquiring property on, or in which an
existing gambling enterprise is located, for the purpose of selling or leasing
the property for uses other than gambling, provided that the County acquires
the property for fair market value.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0402 Limitations and Restrictions on Property.
   Nothing in this Chapter shall be read to abrogate the limits and protections
set forth in Section 5 of Article VI of the County Charter.
   The County shall not sell, lease, or otherwise transfer, at a price that is
less than the fair market value, any real property that was acquired through
eminent domain, except for property governed by the long-range property
management plan pursuant to § 34191.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or any
housing asset transferred to the County pursuant to § 34176 of the Health and
Safety Code.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0403 Replacement Housing.
   (a)   The actions of the County under this Division should not ordinarily
lead to the removal of existing dwelling units inhabited by persons or families
of very low, low, or moderate income, as defined in §§ 50105 and 50093 of the
Health and Safety Code. If, however, any dwelling units inhabited by persons or
families of very low, low, or moderate income, as defined in §§ 50105 and 50093
of the Health and Safety Code, are proposed to be removed or destroyed in the
course of public works construction or private development that is subject to a
written agreement with the County or that is financed in whole or in part by
the County under this Division, the County shall:
      (1)   Cause or require the construction or rehabilitation of an equal
number of replacement dwelling units that have an equal or greater number of
bedrooms as those removed or destroyed, within four years of the removal or
destruction of the dwelling units. The replacement dwelling units shall be
available for rent or sale to persons or families of very low, low, or moderate
income, at affordable rent, as defined in § 50053 of the Health and Safety
Code, or at affordable housing cost, as defined in § 50052.5 of the Health and
Safety Code, to persons in the same or a lower income category (extremely low,
very low, low, or moderate), as the persons displaced from, or who last
occupied, the removed or destroyed dwelling units.
      (2)   Comply with all relocation assistance requirements of Chapter 16
(commencing with § 7260) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code, for
persons displaced from dwelling units by any public works construction or
private development that is subject to a written agreement with the County or
that is financed in whole or in part by the County as a result of a project
undertaken pursuant to this Division.
      (3)   Ensure that removal or destruction of any dwelling units occupied
by persons or families of low or moderate income not take place unless and
until there has been full compliance with the relocation assistance
requirements of this section and Chapter 16 (commencing with § 7260) of
Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code, as such may apply.
   (b)   The County shall require, by recorded covenants or restrictions, that
all dwelling units constructed or rehabilitated pursuant to § 110.0403 shall
remain available at affordable rent or housing cost to, and occupied by,
persons and families of the same income categories for the longest feasible
time, but for not less than 55 years for rental units and 45 years for owner-
occupied units.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 5: LAND ACQUISITION AND DISPOSITION PROCESS
Section
   
110.0501   Bidding.
   
110.0502   Public Hearing.
   
110.0503   Public Report.
   
110.0504   Conditions of Transfer.
§ 110.0501 Bidding.
   (a)   Any transfer of land made under this Division may be made without
public bidding but only after a noticed public hearing in compliance with §
110.0502(d) below, and a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Any transfer of land made under this Division may be made by direct
negotiation or after competitive bidding in the manner determined appropriate
by the Board of Supervisors, which may include a request for proposal or
request for qualifications.
   (c)   Prior to any transfer under this Division made after public bidding,
such transfer shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors to meet all of
the following criteria:
      (1)   Offers the greatest economic return to the County or otherwise
serves to further the purpose of this division as outlined in §
110.0101.
      (2)   Meets the residential, commercial, industrial, or cultural
development needs of the County.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0502 Public Hearing.
   (a)   Before the County acquires real property for economic development
purposes under this Division, or transfers any County real property, including
property owned by the County per the long-range property management plan under
§ 34191.5 of the Health and Safety Code, for economic development purposes
under this Division, the acquisition or transfer shall first be approved by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution after public hearing.
   (b)   The resolution approving the acquisition or transfer shall be adopted
by a majority vote and shall contain a finding that the acquisition or transfer
of the property will assist in the creation of economic opportunity.
   (c)   The resolution shall also contain one of the following findings:
      (1)   The consideration is not less than the fair market value at its
highest and best use.
      (2)   The consideration is not less than the fair reuse value at the use
and with the covenants and conditions and development costs authorized by the
acquisition or transfer.
      (3)   If the proposed action is a transfer, and the proposed transfer
agreement is a lease, the Board of Supervisors shall make both of the following
determinations:
         (A)   The public benefit of the proposed lease agreement is expected
to be greater than the public benefit which would result from the sale of the
property.
         (B)   A reasonable expectation exists that future public need
justifies retention of the fee ownership in the property.
   (d)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the community at least once per week for at
least two successive weeks, as specified in § 6066 of the Government Code,
prior to the hearing, and shall be mailed to any person requesting special
notice, to any present tenant of the property, and to all owners of land
adjoining the property.
   (e)   The provisions of this section are an alternative to any other
authority granted by law to the County to dispose of County-owned property.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0503 Public Report.
   For any acquisition or transfer made under authority granted in this
Division, the County shall make available, for public inspection and copying at
a cost not to exceed the cost of duplication, a report no later than the time
of publication of the first notice of the hearing mandated by §
110.0502. This report shall contain both of the following:
   (a)   A copy of the proposed acquisition or transfer document.
   (b)   A summary that describes and specifies all of the following:
      (1)   The cost of the agreement to the County, including land acquisition
costs, clearance costs, relocation costs, the costs of any improvements to be
provided by the County, plus the expected interest on any loans or bonds to
finance the agreements.
      (2)   If the transaction is a transfer, the estimated value of the
interest to be transferred, determined at the highest and best uses permitted
under the general plan or zoning.
      (3)   If the transaction is a transfer, the estimated value of the
interest to be transferred, determined at the use and with the conditions,
covenants, and development costs required by the transfer.
      (4)   If the transaction is a transfer, the purchase price or present
value of the lease payments which the lessor will be required to make during
the term of the lease. If the sale price or total rental amount is less than
the fair market value of the interest to be conveyed or leased, determined at
the highest and best use, then the County shall provide as part of the summary
an explanation of the reasons for the difference.
      (5)   An explanation of why the acquisition, sale, or lease of the
property will assist in the creation of economic opportunity, with reference to
all supporting facts and materials relied upon in making this explanation.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0504 Conditions of Transfer.
   (a)   For any transfer made under authority granted in this Division, the
County may obligate lessees or purchasers of property to:
      (1)   Use the property for the purpose designated in this Division.
      (2)   Begin the project or activity within a period of time that the
County determines to be reasonable.
      (3)   Comply with the covenants, conditions, or restrictions that the
County deems necessary to prevent speculation or excess profit taking in
undeveloped land, including a right of reverter to the County. Covenants,
conditions, and restrictions imposed by the County may provide for the
reasonable protection of lenders.
      (4)   Comply with other conditions which the County deems necessary to
carry out the purposes of this Division.
   (b)   The County may provide in the transfer document that any of the
obligations of the purchaser are covenants or conditions running with the land,
the breach of which shall cause the fee to revert to the County.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 6: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT SUBSIDIES
Section
   
110.0601   Public Hearing.
   
110.0602   Public Information.
§ 110.0601 Public Hearing.
   (a)   Before granting an economic development subsidy, the County shall
provide public notice and a hearing regarding the economic development subsidy.
A public hearing and notice under this Subdivision is not required if a hearing
and notice regarding the economic development subsidy is otherwise required by
law, or for assistance to be given for the purpose of providing housing
affordable to persons and families of low or moderate income, as defined in §
50093 of the Health and Safety Code.
   (b)   Concurrent with the approval of an agreement for an economic
development subsidy pursuant to this Division, the Board of Supervisors must
make a finding, after a public hearing, that the assistance is necessary for
the economic feasibility of the development and that the assistance cannot be
obtained on economically feasible terms in the private market.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0602 Public Information.
   Before approving any economic development subsidy, the County shall provide
all of the following information in written form available to the public, and
through an easily identifiable and accessible location on its internet web
site, if applicable:
   (a)   The name and address of any corporation or any other business entity,
except for sole proprietorships, that are the beneficiaries of the economic
development subsidy.
   (b)   The applicable start and end dates and schedule for the economic
development subsidy.
   (c)   A description of the economic development subsidy, including the
estimated total amount of the expenditure of public funds by, or of revenue
lost to, the County as a result of the economic development subsidy.
   (d)   A statement of the public purposes for the economic development
subsidy.
   (e)   Projected tax revenue to the County as a result of the economic
development subsidy.
   (f)   Estimated number of jobs created by the economic development subsidy,
broken down by full-time, part-time, and temporary positions.
   (g)   Any other information deemed necessary or reasonable by the Chief
Executive Officer or the Chief Executive Officer’s designee in support of the
economic development subsidy.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 7: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
110.0701   Economic Development Subsidy Report.
   
110.0702   Economic Development Subsidy Public Hearing.
   
110.0703   Annual Report.
   
110.0704   Public Availability.
§ 110.0701 Economic Development Subsidy Report.
   (a)   Within the term of the economic development subsidy, but not later
than five years after the action granting an economic development subsidy, the
County shall issue a report for each economic development subsidy provided,
containing the following information, as applicable:
      (1)   The name and address of any corporations or any other business
entity, except for sole proprietorships, that are the beneficiaries of the
economic development subsidy.
      (2)   The start and end dates and schedule for the economic development
subsidy.
      (3)   A description of the economic development subsidy, including the
estimated total amount of the expenditure of public funds by, or of revenue
lost to, the County as a result of the economic development subsidy.
      (4)   The net tax revenue accruing to the County as a result of the
economic development subsidy.
      (5)   The net number of jobs created, retained by the economic
development subsidy, broken down by full-time, part-time, and temporary
positions.
   (b)   The information required to be provided in Subdivision (a) shall
remain available to the public under existing State and Federal law and be
posted in an easily identifiable and accessible location on the County’s
internet web site, if applicable, for the entire term of the economic
development subsidy.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0702 Economic Development Subsidy Public Hearing.
   (a)   The County, within the term of the economic development subsidy but no
later than five years after the action granting an economic development
subsidy, shall hold a public hearing to consider any written or oral comments
on the information contained in a report prepared pursuant to §
110.0701.
   (b)   For an economic development subsidy with a term of ten years or more,
the County shall hold a public hearing at the conclusion of each economic
development subsidy that shall contain the information described in Subdivision
(a) of §
110.0701, in written form available to the public, and through an easily
identifiable and accessible location on the County’s internet web site, if
applicable.
   (c)   Each public hearing required by this section shall be consolidated
with a Board of Supervisors’ regularly scheduled meeting.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0703 Annual Report.
   (a)   Within six months of the end of the County’s fiscal year, the County
shall prepare an annual report to present to the Board of Supervisors
containing the following information:
      (1)   A fiscal statement of the economic development activities for the
previous fiscal year.
      (2)   A description of the County’s economic development activities in
the previous fiscal year.
      (3)   A list of, and status report on, all loans made by the County that
are for $100,000.00 or more.
      (4)   Administrative costs, professional services, or other expenditures.
      (5)   Amount of outstanding debt for economic development activities.
      (6)   Amount of revenues generated.
      (7)   A description of the total number and nature of the properties that
the County owns and those properties the County has acquired in the previous
fiscal year for purposes associated with this Division.
      (8)   A status report on all loans made by the County that are for
$100,000.00 or more, that in the previous fiscal year were in default, or not
in compliance with the terms of the loan approved by the County.
      (9)   Any other fiscal information which the County believes useful to
describe its Economic Development Program including, but not limited to, the
number of jobs created and lost in the previous fiscal year as a result of its
activities.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors shall review the report and take any actions
it deems appropriate on that report.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
§ 110.0704 Public Availability.
   (a)   The information required to be provided shall remain available to the
public under existing State and Federal law, for the entire term of the
economic development subsidy.
   (b)   The County shall provide a copy of any report required under Chapter
7, upon the written request of any person or any taxing agency. The County may
require any person or taxing agency to reimburse the County for all actual and
reasonable costs incurred in connection with providing a copy of the report.
   (c)   The County shall post the annual report and each economic development
subsidy report in an easily identifiable and accessible location on the
County’s internet web site.
(Ord. 4316, passed - -2017)
TITLE 2: PUBLIC MORALS, SAFETY AND WELFARE
Chapter
DIVISION 1: EMERGENCY SERVICES
   
1.   Emergency Services Organization
DIVISION 2: FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS
   
1.   Firearms
DIVISION 3: FIRE PROTECTION AND EXPLOSIVES AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
   
1.   Uniform Fire Code (Repealed by Ord. 4459, passed --2023)
   
2.   Fire Regulations
   
3.   Abatement of Fire Hazards and Hazardous Trees
   
4.   Authority and Administration for Hazardous Materials
   
5.   Public Nuisance Abatement for Hazardous Materials
   
6.   Permits, Inspections and Hearing Procedures for Hazardous Materials
   
7.   CUPA Permit Elements for Hazardous Materials
DIVISION 4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT, PLACES AND PUBLICATIONS
   
1.   Nude Entertainment and Commercial Nudity
   
2.   (Repealed by Ord. 3468, passed - -1991)
   
3.   Blinder Racks
   
4.   Off-Limit Rules at Military Installations (Repealed by Ord. 3896, passed -
-2003)
   
5.   Alcoholic Beverage Containers
   
6.   Subsequent Sheriff Response to Parties, Gatherings and Events
   
7.    Noise Abatement and Control
DIVISION 5: MINORS
   
1.   Curfew Regulations
   
2.   Daytime Loitering on School Days
DIVISION 6: GAMBLING
   
1.   Cards, Dice and Similar Games
   
2.   Pinball Machines, Marble Machines and Similar Contrivances
DIVISION 7: POLICE REGULATIONS AND PUBLIC PROTECTION
   
1.   Tort Claims
   
2.   False Reports to Sheriff
   
3.   Tree Trimming
   
4.   Misdemeanants
   
5.   Abandoned Orchards
   
6.   Elm Leaf Beetle
   
7.   Political Signs (Repealed by Ord. 3596, passed - -1995)
   
8.   Criminal Records Review Board
   
9.   Police Dogs
   
10.   Distribution of Funds from Forfeitures and Seizures
   
11.   Replica Firearms
   
12.   Regulation of Ephedrine Purchases
   
13.   Courthouse Security
   
14.   Regulation of Registered Sex Offenders
   
15.   Synthetic Stimulants and Synthetic Cannabinoids
   
16.   Unlawful Possession of a Catalytic Converter
DIVISION 8: PUBLIC PROTECTION
   
1.   Land
   
2.   Buildings
   
3.   San Bernardino County Regional Parks
   
4.   Off-Highway Motor Vehicle Use
   
5.   Trespass
   
6.   Access: Cucamonga Canyon
   
7.   Graffiti Prevention
   
8.   Littering and Illegal Dumping
DIVISION 9: PUBLIC SAFETY
   
1.   Swimming Pools (Repealed by Ord. 3560, passed - -1993)
   
2.   School Protection Act
DIVISION 10: VALIDITY OF TITLE 2
 
Editor's Note:
   Ordinance 4046, passed April 8, 2008, repealed and reenacted Title 2.
DIVISION 1: EMERGENCY SERVICES
CHAPTER 1: EMERGENCY SERVICES ORGANIZATION
Section
   
21.0101   Purposes.
   
21.0102   Definition of Emergency.
   
21.0103   Office of Emergency Services.
   
21.0104   County Director of Emergency Services; Director of Emergency
Management.
   
21.0105   Powers of the County Director of Emergency Services.
   
21.0106   Disaster Council Membership.
   
21.0107   Disaster Council Chairperson and Staff.
   
21.0108   Disaster Council Powers and Duties.
   
21.0109   Organization.
   
21.0110   Violations.
§ 21.0101   Purposes.
   The declared purposes of this Chapter are to provide for the preparation and
execution of plans for the protection of life and property within this County
in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and
the coordination of the emergency functions of this County with all other
public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons.
(Ord. 4191, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4484, passed - -2025)
§ 21.0102   Definition of Emergency.
   As used in this Chapter, EMERGENCY shall mean an actual disaster or threat
of disaster or of an extreme peril to the safety of life and property within
this County as described in Government Code § 8558 or its successor, or caused
by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot,
drought, cyberterrorism, sudden and severe energy shortage, de-energization
event, electromagnetic pulse attack, plant or animal infestation or disease,
the Governor's warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an
earthquake, or other conditions, including situations resulting from war,
terrorist attack or imminent threat of war or terrorist attack, but other than
conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which are or are likely to be
beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of
this County, thus requiring coordinated action within the County and possibly
the assistance of other private and public agencies within and without the
County.
(Ord. 4191, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4484, passed - -2025)
§ 21.0103   Office of Emergency Services.
   (a)   There is hereby created the Office of Emergency Services. The Office
of Emergency Services shall develop emergency plans and manage the emergency
programs of this County.
   (b)   The Office of Emergency Services shall, prior to an emergency, be
responsible for:
      (1)   Developing and coordinating the emergency services planning for San
Bernardino County, which will provide for the utilization of all County
governmental entities, their resources and equipment, all commercial and
industrial resources, and all special groups, bodies, and organizations,
including the San Bernardino County Operational Area Coordinating Council, as
may be necessary for the support of emergency services operations.
      (2)   Developing and coordinating such training programs and exercises as
may be necessary for operational requirements.
      (3)   Developing and coordinating programs designed to inform the public
of measures for self-protection and emergency services activities.
      (4)   Coordinating and serving as liaison with Federal, State, other
County, City, and Town emergency services agencies, and with representatives of
the United States Armed Forces.
      (5)   Recommending to the San Bernardino County Disaster Council for
consideration all matters within the purview of the Council's responsibilities.
      (6)   Recommending to the Board of Supervisors for consideration matters
of policy insofar as they relate to emergency services.
      (7)   Overseeing the emergency operations plan and its annexes as they
relate to County groups, departments, and agencies.
(Ord. 4191, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4484, passed - -2025)
§ 21.0104   County Director of Emergency Services; Director of Emergency
Management.
   (a)   The Chief Executive Officer of San Bernardino County shall be the
County Director of Emergency Services. In the absence of the Chief Executive
Officer, the Chief Operating Officer shall serve in this capacity. In the
absence of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Operating Officer, the
Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the Office of Emergency Services shall
serve in this capacity. In the absence of the Chief Executive Officer, the
Chief Operating Officer, and the Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the
Office of Emergency Services, the Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the
Department of Public Works shall serve in this capacity. In the absence of the
Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Operating Officer, the Assistant Executive
Officer overseeing the Office of Emergency Services, and the Assistant
Executive Officer overseeing the Department of Public Works, the Assistant
Executive Officer overseeing the Land Use Services Department shall serve in
this capacity. In the absence of the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief
Operating Officer, the Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the Office of
Emergency Services, the Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the Department
of Public Works, and the Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the Land Use
Services Department, the Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the Risk
Management Department shall serve in this capacity. In the absence of the Chief
Executive Officer, the Chief Operating Officer, the Assistant Executive Officer
overseeing the Office of Emergency Services, the Assistant Executive Officer
overseeing the Department of Public Works, the Assistant Executive Officer
overseeing the Land Use Services Department, and the Assistant Executive
Officer overseeing the Risk Management Department, the County Chief Financial
Officer shall serve in this capacity. In the absence of the Chief Executive
Officer, the Chief Operating Officer, the Assistant Executive Officer
overseeing the Office of Emergency Services, the Assistant Executive Officer
overseeing the Department of Public Works, the Assistant Executive Officer
overseeing the Land Use Services Department, the Assistant Executive Officer
overseeing the Risk Management Department, and the County Chief Financial
Officer, the Assistant Executive Officer overseeing Human Services shall serve
in this capacity.
   (b)   There shall be appointed a Director of Emergency Management, who shall
be the day-to-day manager of the Office of Emergency Services Department and
shall be responsible for carrying out the responsibilities of the Office of
Emergency Services under the provisions of §
21.0103. The Director of Emergency Management shall have such other powers and
duties as may be assigned by the County Director of Emergency Services. During
an emergency, the Director of Emergency Management will operate the Emergency
Operations Center and assist the County Director of Emergency Services in
coordinating emergency response efforts.
(Ord. 4191, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4358, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4484,
passed - -2025)
§ 21.0105   Powers of the County Director of Emergency Services.
   (a)   The County Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered to:
      (1)   Request the Board of Supervisors to proclaim the existence of a
"Local Emergency" if the Board of Supervisors is in session, or to issue such
proclamation if the Board of Supervisors is not in session. Whenever a local
emergency is proclaimed when the Board of Supervisors is not in session, the
Board of Supervisors shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven
days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.
      (2)   Recommend that the Board of Supervisors request the Governor to
proclaim a "State of Emergency" when, in his or her opinion, the locally
available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.
      (3)   Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization (as
defined in §
21.0109 of this Chapter) of this County for the accomplishment of the purposes
of this Chapter.
      (4)   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff
of the emergency organization (as defined in §
21.0109 of this Chapter) of this County and resolve questions of authority and
responsibility that may arise between them.
      (5)   Represent this County in all dealings with public or private
agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.
   (b)   In the event of the proclamation of a "Local Emergency" as herein
provided, the proclamation of a "State of Emergency" by the Governor or the
Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a
"State of War Emergency," the County Director of Emergency Services is hereby
empowered to:
      (1)   Make and issue rules, regulations and orders on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency,
provided, however, that such rules, regulations and orders are confirmed at the
earliest practicable time by the Board of Supervisors.
      (2)   Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, and to bind the
County for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer
the same for public use.
      (3)   Require emergency services of any County officer or employee, and
in the event of the proclamation of a "Local Emergency" in the County or the
existence of a proclaimed "State of Emergency" or a "State of War," to command
the aid of as many citizens of this County as he or she deems necessary in the
execution of his or her duties. All such County officers and employees
performing disaster work that is outside the course and scope of their regular
employment without pay, and all such commanded citizens, shall be entitled to
all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by State law for
registered disaster service workers.
      (4)   Requisition necessary personnel or material of any County
department or agency.
      (5)   Execute all of his or her ordinary power as County Director of
Emergency Services, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this
Chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted by the Board of Supervisors,
all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved
by the Board of Supervisors, and by any other lawful authority.
(Ord. 4191, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4484, passed - -2025)
§ 21.0106   Disaster Council Membership.
   (a)   The San Bernardino County Disaster Council is hereby created and shall
consist of the following 19 voting members and one non-voting member:
      (1)   The Chief Executive Officer, or his or her pre-designated
representative in his or her absence;
      (2)   The Chief Operating Officer, or his or her pre-designated
representative in his or her absence;
      (3)   The Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the Department of Public
Works, or his or her pre-designated representative in his or her absence;
      (4)   The Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the Department of Risk
Management, or his or her pre-designated representative in his or her absence;
      (5)   The Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the Land Use Services
Department, or his or her pre-designated representative in his or her absence;
      (6)   The Assistant Executive Officer overseeing Human Services, or his
or her pre-designated representative in his or her absence;
      (7)   The County Chief Financial Officer, or his or her pre-designated
representative in his or her absence;
      (8)   The Fire Chief/Fire Warden of the San Bernardino County Fire
Protection District, or his or her pre-designated representative in his or her
absence;   
      (9)   The County Sheriff/Coroner/Public Administrator, or his or her pre-
designated representative in his or her absence;
      (10)   The Assistant Executive Officer overseeing the Office of Emergency
Services, or his or her pre-designated representative in his or her absence;
      (11)   The Director of the Risk Management Department, or his or her pre-
designated representative in his or her absence;
      (12)   The Director of the Department of Public Health, or his or her
pre-designated representative in his or her absence;
      (13)   The Director of Emergency Management, or his or her pre-designated
representative in his or her absence;
      (14)   The Chief Executive Officer of Arrowhead Regional Medical Center,
or his or her pre-designated representative in his or her absence;
      (15)   The Director of the Innovation and Technology Department, or his
or her pre-designated representative in his or her absence;
      (16)   The Director of the Purchasing Department, or his or her pre-
designated representative in his or her absence;
      (17)   The Director of the Department of Public Works, or his or her pre-
designated representative in his or her absence;   
      (18)   The Auditor-Controller/Treasurer/Tax Collector, or his or her pre-
designated representative in his or her absence;
      (19)   The County Superintendent of Schools, or his or her pre-designated
representative in his or her absence; and
      (20)   A non-voting at-large Representative of the designated lead agency
of the San Bernardino County Operational Area Coordinating Council.
(Ord. 4191, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4358, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4484,
passed - -2025)
§ 21.0107   Disaster Council Chairperson and Staff.
   (a)   The Chief Executive Officer shall serve as the Disaster Council
Chairperson. In the absence of the Chief Executive Officer, the Fire Chief/Fire
Warden of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District shall serve as the
Disaster Council Chairperson. In the absence of the Fire Chief/Fire Warden of
the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District, the County Sheriff/Coroner/
Public Administrator shall serve as the Disaster Council Chairperson. The
individual serving as Chairperson shall not be the pre-designated
representative of any of the individuals identified in this Subsection.
   (b)   The staff assigned to assist the San Bernardino County Disaster
Council in carrying out its powers and duties shall consist of the following:
      (1)   The Director of Emergency Management who shall serve as the
Executive Director of the Disaster Council to facilitate its operations, or an
Office of Emergency Services staff member assigned to assist the Disaster
Council in his or her absence;
      (2)   The County Counsel, or a Deputy County Counsel assigned to advise
the County's Office of Emergency Services, in his or her absence; and
      (3)   Such other persons as are required by the Disaster Council.
(Ord. 4191, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4484, passed - -2025)
§ 21.0108   Disaster Council Powers and Duties.
   It shall be the duty of the San Bernardino County Disaster Council, and it
is hereby empowered, to advise and recommend for adoption by the Board of
Supervisors, mutual aid agreements, and such ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements, and to
serve as the San Bernardino County Citizen Corps Council. The Disaster Council
shall meet at least annually or upon the call of the Disaster Council
Chairperson, or the Director of Emergency Management as often as is deemed
necessary by such persons. The Disaster Council shall comply with the
California Emergency Services Act (Title 2, Division 1, Chapter 7 of the
Government Code).
(Ord. 4191, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4484, passed - -2025)
§ 21.0109   Organization.
   Emergency Organization. All officers and employees of this County, together
with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all
groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law,
including persons impressed into service under the provisions of §
21.0105(b)(3) of this Chapter to be charged with duties incident to the
protection of life and property in this County during such emergency, shall
constitute the emergency organization of San Bernardino County.
(Ord. 4191, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4484, passed - -2025)
§ 21.0110   Violations.
   It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or
by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for any person,
during a State of War Emergency, State of Emergency, or Local Emergency, or a
drill or exercise in preparation for any such emergency to:
   (a)   Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this Chapter, or in the performance of duties, to include but not
be limited to willful deliberate interference with radio communications between
persons designated as agents of the County, paid or volunteer, during a
practice drill or an emergency;
   (b)   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this Chapter, if it is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give
assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of
this County, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof;
or
   (c)   Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the emergency agency of the State of California or
San Bernardino County.
(Ord. 4191, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4484, passed - -2025)
DIVISION 2: FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS
CHAPTER 1: FIREARMS
Section
   
22.0101   Areas Closed to Shooting Except Shotguns Firing Shot No Larger than
One-Half the Diameter of the Bore.
   
22.0102   Areas Permitting Shooting of Firearms for Lawful Hunting; Target
Shooting Permissible in Designated Areas.
   
22.0103   Areas Open to Shooting.
   
22.0104   Areas Open to Lawful Hunting with Shotguns Only.
   
22.0105   Areas Closed to Shooting.
   
22.0106   Areas Open to Shooting; Night Hunting Permissible.
   
22.0107   Exemptions.
   
22.0108   Prohibition of Night Shooting.
   
22.0109   Prohibited Areas.
   
22.0110   Purchase of Firearms.
   
22.0111   Prohibiting Firearms—Possession by Minors.
   
22.0112   Disposition of Confiscated Firearms.
   
22.0113   Throwing of Missiles.
   
22.0114   Penalty.
   
22.0115   Severability.
   
22.0116   Retail License.
§ 22.0101 Areas Closed to Shooting Except Shotguns Firing Shot No Larger than
One-Half the Diameter of the Bore.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, shoot or discharge any rifle or
pistol, or to discharge a slug from a shotgun which slug has a maximum diameter
greater than one-half of the bore of said shotgun with the boundaries described
in subdivisions (a) to (i) inclusive, of this Section.
   (a)   San Bernardino Valley Area. All that territory included within the
exterior boundaries described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the
north line of Section 24, Township 1 North, Range 8 West, San Bernardino
Meridian (S.B.M.), with the westerly boundary line of the County of San
Bernardino; thence easterly, northerly and southerly, following the south
boundary of San Bernardino National Forest along its various continuous courses
to the northeast corner of Section 36, Township 1 South, Range 1 West, S.B.M.;
thence south along section lines to an intersection with the south boundary
line of the County of San Bernardino; thence west, north, west and south
following the boundary line between San Bernardino and Riverside Counties to an
intersection with the boundary line between San Bernardino and Orange Counties;
thence northwest along the boundary line between San Bernardino and Orange
Counties to an intersection with the boundary line between San Bernardino and
Los Angeles Counties; thence northwesterly, northeasterly, east and
northeasterly following said County boundary line to an intersection with the
north line of said Section 24, Township 1 North, Range 8 West, S.B.M., being
the point of beginning. Excluding therefrom all incorporated territory and San
Bernardino National Forest territory. Also excluding all unincorporated
territory except that unincorporated territory within the following described
boundaries: Sections 8, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31
and 32, Township 1 South, Range 2 West, S.B.M.; Section 6, Township 2 South,
Range 2 West, S.B.M.; Sections 29, 31 and 32, Township 1 South, Range 3 West,
S.B.M.; Sections 5 and 6, Township 2 South, Range 3 West, S.B.M.; Beginning at
the intersection of the west line of the East half of the East half of the
Northeast Quarter of said Section 13, Township 1 North, Range 6 West, S.B.M.,
said west line also being the east boundary of Area 2 of CSA 120, with the
southerly boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest; thence southerly
along said west line and east boundary of said CSA 120 to the existing
northwesterly boundary of the City of Fontana; thence continuing southerly
along said west line, east boundary and existing City boundary to an angle
point in the northwesterly boundary of said City; thence leaving said west line
and east boundary northeasterly along said City boundary through all of its
various courses to its intersection with the existing northwesterly boundary of
the City of Rialto; thence northeasterly along said City boundary through all
of its various courses to an angle point on said City boundary, said point also
being a point on the northeasterly boundary of said City and the southwesterly
right-of-way of Interstate 15; thence leaving said City boundary along said
southwesterly right-of-way of Interstate 15 northeasterly through all of its
various courses to a point on the southerly right-of-way of the Southern
Pacific Railroad, said point located in Section 33, Township 2 North, Range 5
West; thence leaving said southwesterly right-of-way of Interstate 15
southeasterly along said southerly right-of-way of said Railroad through all
its various courses to a point on the existing boundary of the City of San
Bernardino; thence along said existing City boundary through all of its various
courses in a generally northerly, southeasterly, northwesterly, northerly
direction to a point on said southerly boundary of said San Bernardino National
Forest; thence leaving said existing City boundary and following said southerly
boundary of said National Forest through all of its courses in a generally
northwesterly, southerly, southeasterly, southerly, easterly and southwesterly
direction to the point of beginning.
   (b)   Camp Baldy Area. All that territory included within the exterior
boundaries described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the north
line of Section 24, Township 1 North, Range 8 West, S.B.B.&M., with the
boundary line between San Bernardino and Los Angeles Counties; thence northerly
along said County boundary line a distance of 9.0 miles, more or less, to the
triangulation station on San Antonio Mountain (Old Baldy Peak) in Section 6,
Township 2 North, Range 7 West, S.B.B.&M., being also a point on the westerly
boundary line of San Bernardino National Forest; thence easterly along Forest
Trail 7W04 to the Boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest; thence
southeasterly, westerly and southwesterly along the boundary line of said San
Bernardino National Forest through Telegraph Peak, Timber Mountain, Bighorn
Peak, and Ontario Peak to the intersection of the West Cucamonga Truck Trail
(Forest Road 2N04); thence easterly along said Truck Trail to the south
boundary line of San Bernardino National Forest adjacent to section corner
common to Sections 8, 9, 16, and 17, Township 1 North, Range 7 West, S.B.B.&M.;
thence south and west along said south boundary of San Bernardino National
Forest to an intersection with the north line of Section 24, Township 1 North,
Range 8 West, S.B.B.&M., being the point of beginning.
   (c)   Wrightwood Area. All that territory included within the exterior
boundaries described as follows: Beginning on the intersection of the San
Bernardino and Los Angeles County boundary line with the north line of Section
31, Township 4 North, Range 7 West, which point is also on the north boundary
of the San Bernardino National Forest; thence east and south along the various
courses of the National Forest boundary to its intersection with State Highway
2; thence southwest along Highway 2 to its intersection with the north-south
centerline of Section 3, Township 3 North, Range 7 West; thence southerly to
the ridge dividing the Mojave River Basin from the Santa Ana River Basin;
thence southwesterly and northwesterly along the ridge to the San Bernardino
County and Los Angeles County line; thence northerly along the County line to
the north line of Section 31, Township 4 North, Range 7 West, being the point
of beginning.
   (d)   Lytle Creek–West Cajon Valley Area. All that territory included within
the exterior boundaries described as follows: Beginning at the southeast corner
of Section 26, Township 2 North, Range 6 West; thence west along section lines
to the southwest corner of Section 27, same Township and Range; thence north
along section lines to the southeast corner of Section 16, same Township and
Range; thence west along the section line of Section 16 to the southwest corner
thereof; thence north along the west line of said Section 16, to the west one-
quarter corner of Section 9, same Township and Range; thence easterly to the
east one-quarter corner of Section 10, same Township and Range; thence
southerly to the southeast corner of Section 10, same Township and Range;
thence easterly to the Applewhite Road (Forest Road 2N53); thence northerly to
the intersection of the Swartout Canyon Road (Forest Road 3N28) and Forest Road
3N77Y; thence northerly to Forest Road 3N47; thence northwesterly to the
junction of Forest Road 4N05 with Forest Road 3N47, which point is also on the
north line of Section 34, Township 3 North, Range 6 West; thence westerly to
the Lone Pine Canyon Road (Forest Road 3N25); thence southwesterly along the
north side of the road to the ridge between Lone Pine Canyon and West Cajon
Valley; thence northwesterly along the ridge to its intersection with the west
line of Section 29, same Township and Range; thence northerly to the northeast
corner of Section 18, same Township and Range; thence westerly to the southwest
corner of Section 12, Township 3 North, Range 7 West; thence northerly to the
northwest corner of Section 1, same Township and Range, said point also being
on the northern boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest; thence easterly
along said boundary to the northeast corner of Section 6, Township 3 North,
Range 6 West; thence southerly, leaving said boundary to the southeast corner
of said Section 6; thence easterly to the north one-quarter corner of Section
9, same Township and Range; thence southerly to the center of Section 21, same
Township and Range; thence easterly to the east edge of the right of way for
the northbound lanes of Interstate 15 freeway; thence southerly along said
right-of-way line to the east-west centerline of Section 13, Township 2 North,
Range 6 West; thence westerly to the west line or said Section 13; thence
southerly to a point one-quarter mile north of Lytle Creek Road; thence
southeasterly along a line parallel to and one-quarter mile northeasterly of
said Lytle Creek Road a distance of 4.0 miles, more or less, to an intersection
with the south boundary line of San Bernardino National Forest; thence westerly
following the southerly boundary line of said San Bernardino National Forest
along its various courses to a point one-quarter mile west of the Poleline Road
(Forest Road 2N57); thence northerly paralleling said road at a distance one-
quarter mile till reaching the southeast corner of Section 26, Township 2
North, Range 6 West, being the point of beginning.
   (e)   Crestline–Lake Arrowhead–Green Valley Area. All that territory
included within the exterior boundaries described as follows: Beginning at the
intersection of Bailey Canyon with the southerly boundary line of San
Bernardino National Forest at or near the southeast corner of Section 36,
Township 2 North, Range 5 West, S.B.B.&M.; thence northerly along Bailey Canyon
a distance of 1.0 mile, more or less, to an intersection with the Bailey Canyon
Truck Trail; thence northerly up Bailey Canyon Truck Trail to junction with the
Powell Canyon Road (Forest Road 2N1 6Y); thence northerly along said road to
Cleghorn Pass; thence northerly to the ridge between Horsethief Canyon and the
West Fork of the Mojave River; thence northeasterly to the northerly boundary
of the San Bernardino National Forest, said point being on the north line of
Section 36, Township 3 North, Range 5 West; thence easterly along said boundary
to a point one-quarter mile west of the northeast corner of Section 34,
Township 3 North, Range 4 West; thence southerly to ridge between the Mojave
River and an unnamed canyon; thence southeasterly and southerly along said
ridge top to its intersection with the Pilot Rock Truck Trail (Forest Road
2N33); thence easterly along said road to its intersection with Toll Road,
State Highway 2 in Section 5, Township 2 North, Range 3 West; thence easterly
along Highway 2 to junction of road of west line Section 3, Township 2 North,
Range 3 West; thence southeasterly along road and Jeep Trail to junction of
Squints Ranch Road and North Shore Campground Road in Section 10, Township 2
North, Range 3 West; thence along North Shore Campground Road to a point
approximately in the center of Section 11, same Township; thence easterly
approximately .5 miles to junction with Rouse Ranch Road; thence easterly along
Rouse Ranch Road to junction with Squints Ranch Road, approximately on the east
line of Section 12, Township 2 North, Range 3 West; thence southeasterly along
road to Little Bear Creek; thence down Little Bear Creek to junction with Deep
Creek; thence southerly up Deep Creek to mouth of Green Valley Creek; thence
easterly up Green Valley Creek to approximately the corner common to Sections
21, 22, 27, 28, Township 2 North, Range 2 West; thence north along section line
to the corner common to Sections 15, 16, 21, 22, same Township; thence east
along section line to the top of Crafts Peak in Section 18, Township 2 North,
Range 1 West; thence south to junction with State Highway 18; thence south
along Highway 18 to Lakeview Point; thence following the edge of the rim west
of Bear Creek to Slide Peak, Keller Peak, Mill Peak and Seymour Flat; thence
down to a ridge just east of Fredalba Creek in Section 8, Township 1 North,
Range 2 West, to the end of a road in Section 7, same Township; thence
southerly along road to junction of Plunge Creek Truck Trail; thence
southwesterly along said road to its intersection with the north line of
Section 24, Township I North, Range 3 West; thence westerly to the northwest
corner of Section 23, same Township and Range; thence southwesterly, parallel
to and one-half mile east of State Highway 30, to the southern boundary of the
San Bernardino National Forest; thence westerly and northwesterly to Bailey
Canyon, the Point of Beginning. Excepting therefrom, the following: Beginning
at a point on the East Fork of City Creek in the northwest portion of Section
11, Township 1 North, Range 3 West; thence westerly to a junction with the West
Fork of City Creek in north half of Section 10; thence northwesterly up a ridge
to its junction with the west City Creek Road near the northeast corner of
Section 9; thence southerly up a ridge of a point on top of the main ridge near
the center of Section 9; thence northwesterly along the ridge to a junction
with the Dailey Canyon Road near the southwest corner or Section 4; thence
northwesterly along the Dailey Canyon Road to a junction with the Strawberry
Creek Road near the center of Section 5; thence westerly along the Strawberry
Creek Road to a junction with a ridge one-quarter mile west of Strawberry Creek
in the southwest one-quarter of Section 6; thence north up the ridge through
the west one-half of Section 6, same Township and Section 31, Township 2 North,
Range 3 West, to a knob in the northwest one-quarter of Section 31; thence east
through Sections 32, 33, 34, and 35, same Township to the East Fork of City
Creek near the east line of Section 35; thence southerly down the East Fork of
City Creek crossing the Township line between Sections 35 and 2; thence
continuing southerly through Sections 2 and 11 to point of beginning in the
northwest one-quarter of Section 11.
   (f)   Barton Flats–Camp Angelus–Forest Home Area. All that territory
included within the exterior boundaries described as follows: Beginning at the
intersection of Staircase Canyon and Radford front-line road near the center of
Section 9, Township 1 North, Range 1 East, S.B.B.&M.; thence east along Radford
Road through Sections 10, 11, and 13, same Township to west corner Section 18,
Township 1 North, Range 2 East; thence southeast to southeast corner of same
section; thence east to northeast corner Section 21, same Township; thence
south to the southeast corner of Section 28, same Township; thence west along
section line to Fish Creek and Wilderness boundary intersections; thence
westerly along Wilderness boundary through Sections 28, 29, 20 and 19, same
Township; thence westerly along Wilderness boundary through Sections 24 and 23
to South Fork of Santa Ana, Township 1 North, Range 1 East; thence south along
South Fork to southeast corner Section 26; thence southeast looping the South
Fork Meadows camping area near the west one-quarter corner of Section 36;
thence northwest one-eighth mile west of the South Fork Trail through Section
35 to the northwest corner Section 26, same Township; thence westerly along
Wilderness boundary through Sections 22, 21, and 20, to southwest corner of
Section 19, Township 1 North, Range 1 East, and junction of Forsee Creek;
thence northerly down Forsee Creek to junction with Barton Flats Highway;
thence west on Barton Flats highway to intersection with Cold Creek; thence
southerly up Cold Creek to junction with Wilderness boundary; thence southwest
along Wilderness boundary through Section 27, Township 1 North, Range 1 West,
to section line between Sections 27 and 34; thence southerly through the center
of Section 34, same Township; thence southerly to the southeast corner of
Section 3, Township 1 West, Range 1 West; thence easterly to the approximate
center of Section 12, same Township and the junction of Oak Cove Creek; thence
northeasterly up Oak Cove Creek to the northeast corner of Section 12 and the
Wilderness boundary; thence easterly along the Wilderness boundary to the
approximate center of Section 16, Township 1 South, Range 1 East, to junction
with Vivian Creek; thence southerly to Camp Creek to the top of Little San
Gorgonio Peak; thence westerly approximately 5 miles along Yucaipa ridge to
junction of ridge with Yucaipa ridge road in Section 15, Township 1 South,
Range 1 West; thence along road to ridge approximately at or near the one-
quarter section corner between Sections 8 and 17, Township 1 South, Range 1
West; thence northerly down ridge to a point on Highway 38 on the section line
between Sections 7 and 8, same Township, west of Thurman Flat; thence
northeasterly up a ridge to approximately the southeast corner of Section 32,
Township l North, Range 1 West; thence northerly through Section 32 to
Constance Peak in the southwest quarter of Section 28, same Township; thence
northeasterly to the approximate one-quarter corner between Sections 21 and 28;
thence northeasterly to the approximate one-quarter corner between Sections 21
and 22; thence northeasterly to the northeast corner of Section 22; thence
northeasterly through Section 14 to a junction with the Santa Ana River and
intersection of Clarks Ranch Road and Seven Oaks Road; thence northerly to the
one-quarter corner between Sections 11 and 14, same Township; thence east to
the southeast corner of Section 11; thence northeasterly through Section 12,
same Township and Section 7, Township 1 North, Range 1 East, to a junction with
Hamilton Creek along the north section line of Section 7; thence up Hamilton
Creek approximately one-half mile; thence northeasterly to a junction with the
Radford Road and Seven Oaks trailhead in Section 5, same Township; thence
easterly one-quarter mile; thence southeasterly to the southeast corner of
Section 5; thence south along the section line to a junction with the Radford
frontline road; thence easterly along the Radford frontline road to its
junction with Staircase Canyon, and point of beginning.
   Barton Flats. All those portions of Sections 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22 and
23, Township 1 North, Range 1 East, S.B.B.M., described as follows: Beginning
at the intersection of State Highway 38 and Stetson Creek; thence southeasterly
along said creek to an intersection with the northerly San Gorgonio Wilderness
boundary; thence easterly along said boundary, following all of its various
courses through said Sections 19, 20, and 21 to an intersection with the east
fork of Barton Creek; thence northerly along said creek to an intersection with
Jenks Lake Road; thence easterly along said road to an intersection with the
west line of said Section 23; thence southerly along said west line to the west
1/4 corner thereof; thence easterly along the south line of the north 1/2 of
said Section 23 to an intersection with the South Fork of the Santa Ana River;
thence northeasterly along said river to an intersection with the east line of
said Section 23; thence northerly along the east lines of said Sections 23 and
14, to the northeast corner of said Section 14; thence westerly along the north
lines of said Sections 14, 15 and 16 to the northwest corner of said Section
16; thence southerly along the west line of said Section 16 to an intersection
with Glass Road, also known as Forest Service Road 1N06; thence southerly along
said Glass Road to aforesaid State Highway 38; thence southwesterly along said
highway, following all of its various courses to the point of beginning.
   (g)   Big Bear Area. All that territory included within the exterior
boundaries described as follows: Beginning at the junction of State Highways 18
and 38 at the dam on Big Bear Lake; thence northerly up a ridge to Grays Peak;
thence northeasterly to the southwest corner of Section 11, Township 2 North,
Range 1 West; thence northerly to Forest Road 2N68Y; thence westerly along said
road to its intersection with the road around the west end of Fawnskin Valley
(Forest Road 2N13.2); thence northwesterly, northeasterly and southeasterly
around the westernmost boundary of the Hanna Flat Campground and one-quarter
mile distant therefrom; thence easterly to Little Bear Peak; thence easterly to
Delomar Mountain; thence southeasterly and easterly along the ridge between Big
Bear Lake and Holcomb Valley to Van Dusen Canyon; thence northeasterly up a
ridge to the top of Gold Mountain; thence continuing northeasterly to the
northeast corner of Section 36, Township 3 North, Range 1 East; thence
southeasterly along Nelson Ridge between Baldwin Lake and Arrastre Creek
through said Section 15 and through Section 22, Township 2 North, Range 2 East,
to the highest point in the southeast quarter of said Section 22 (Elevation
Marker 7387); thence easterly along a ridge to Arrastre Creek; thence southerly
up said Arrastre Creek to Balky Horse Creek; thence southerly up Balky Horse
Creek to an intersection with the south fence line of State Highway 38; thence
westerly along said fence line through Sections 34, 27, 28, 29, and 30,
Township 2 North, Range 2 East, S.B.B.&M., to the top of the ridge lying
between Green Canyon and the Greenspot Road; thence southwesterly up the ridge
to its intersection with the north line of Section 31, Township 2 North, Range
2 East; thence westerly to San Canyon Road (Forest Road 2N05); thence
southwesterly up a ridge to the ridge between Big Bear Valley and the Santa Ana
River; thence westerly along said ridge, through Clarks Summit; thence westerly
through the center of Section 34; thence northerly to the point of beginning.
   (h)   Desert Area. Beginning at the southeast corner of Section 33, Township
1 South, Range 7 East, S.B.M., said southeast corner being also on the County
boundary between San Bernardino and Riverside Counties; thence north along
section lines to the southeast corner of Section 33, Township 1 North, Range 7
East, said southeast corner being also on the Township line between Township 1
North and 1 South; thence east along section lines and said Township line to
the southeast corner of Section 32, Township 1 North, Range 9 East; thence
north along section lines to the northerly right-of-way of State Highway 62;
thence following said northerly right-of-way through all of its various courses
in a generally easterly, southeasterly and easterly direction to a point on the
westerly right-of-way of Ironage Road, said point located in Section 1,
Township 1 South, Range 12 East; thence leaving said northerly right-of-way of
State Highway 62 and following said westerly right-of-way through all of its
various courses in a generally northerly and northwesterly direction to a point
on the southerly right-of-way Sheephole View, said point located in Section 16,
Township 1 North, Range 12 East; thence leaving said right-of-way of Ironage
Road and following said southerly right-of-way of Sheephole View to a point on
the east line of Section 17, Township 1 North, Range 12 East; thence leaving
said southerly right-of-way of Sheephole View and northerly along said east
line of Section 17 to the southeast corner of Section 8, Township 1 North,
Range 12 East; thence westerly along section lines to the southwest corner of
Section 7, Township 1 North, Range 12 East, said corner also being a point on
the Range line between Range 11 East and 12 East; thence northerly along said
Range line to the northeast corner of said Township 1 North, Range 11 East;
thence westerly along the northerly line of said Township and continuing along
the northerly lines of Township 1 North, Range 10 East and Township 1 North,
Range 9 East to the northeast of Section 4, Township 1 North, Range 9 East,
said corner also being a point on the southerly boundary of the military
training base; thence following said boundary of said military training base
through all of its various courses in a generally westerly, southerly and
northerly direction to an angle point in said boundary on the north line of
Section 18, Township 6 North, Range 5 East; thence leaving said boundary and
along said north line of Section 18 to the northwest corner thereof, said
corner being also on the Range line between Range 4 East and 5 East; thence
northerly along section lines and said Range line to the northeast corner of
Township 7 North, Range 4 East; thence west along Township lines to the
centerline of Barstow Road, also known as State Highway 247; thence northerly
along said centerline of Barstow Road to a point on the north line of Section
19, Township 9 North, Range 1 West; thence leaving said centerline westerly
along the northerly section lines of said Section 19 and continuing westerly
along the northerly section line of Section 24, Township 9 North, Range 2 West
to the northwest corner of said Section 24; thence southerly along the westerly
line of said section 24 to the east-west center section line of Section 23,
said Township and Range; thence westerly along center section lines of said
Section 23, Section 22 and 21, Township 9 North, Range 2 West, to the
centerline of Interstate 15; thence southwesterly along said centerline of
Interstate 15 to the south line of Township 8 North, Range 3 West; thence west
along said south line to the southwest corner of said Township 8 North, Range 4
West; thence north along the range line between Range 4 West and Range 5 West,
to the south right-of- way line of U.S. Highway 466, also known as State
Highway 58; thence westerly along said right-of-way following its various
courses to an intersection with the County boundary between San Bernardino and
Kern Counties; thence southerly along said County boundary following its
various courses to an intersection with the County boundary between San
Bernardino and Los Angeles Counties; thence continuing southerly along said
County boundary to an intersection with the north line of Section 31, Township
4 North, Range 7 West, said point being on the north boundary of the San
Bernardino National Forest; thence easterly along said San Bernardino National
Forest boundary following all of its various courses to an intersection with
the County boundary between San Bernardino and Riverside County, said point
being also the southeast corner of Section 36, Township 1 South, Range 2 East;
thence easterly along said County boundary to the point of beginning.
   Excepting all incorporated territory, all national parks, all military
bases, military training centers and El Mirage OHV area.
   (i)   Big Bear Lake Area.
      Parcel 1. All that portion of Township 2 North, Ranges 1 West and 1 East,
San Bernardino Meridian bounded as follows: on the north by State Highway 38;
on the east by the west line of Township 2 North, Range 2 East (near Greenspot
Boulevard); on the south by State Highway 18; and on the west by the junction
of said State Highways 18 and 38 at Big Bear Dam.
      Parcel 2. All that portion of Section 18, Township 2 North, Range 2 East,
San Bernardino Meridian, lying parallel with and 1,000 feet easterly of Big
Bear Boulevard and its southerly prolongation to the south line of said Section
18.
      Parcel 3. All of Section 20, Township 2 North, Range 2 East, San
Bernardino Meridian.
      Parcel 4. All of Section 24, Township 2 North, Range 1 East, San
Bernardino Meridian.
   Excepting the Big Bear Lake boundary as defined by the highwater line of
said lake, being elevation 6742.60 feet per Record of Survey of Big Bear Valley
recorded in Book 3, of Record of Surveys, Pages 103 to 110, Records of San
Bernardino County.
   Excepting all incorporated territory.
   (j)   The remainder of all the land within the boundaries of the San
Bernardino National Forest not described in (a) through (i) of this Section,
except in those areas designated by the United States Forest Service and except
for the lawful taking of birds and mammals.
(Ord. 699, passed - -1952; Ord. 792, passed - -1952; Am. Ord. 1015, passed - -
1962; Am Ord. 1247, passed - -1965; Am. Ord. 1443, passed - -1968; Am. Ord.
2198, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2499, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 3187, passed - -
1987; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0102 Areas Permitting Shooting of Firearms for Lawful Hunting; Target
Shooting Permissible in Designated Areas.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, shoot or discharge any firearm,
except for lawful hunting purposes and target shooting purposes in certain
designated areas within the boundaries described in this Section.
   All that territory included within the boundary of the San Bernardino
National Forest territory.
   Excepting therefrom all areas as described in Subdivisions (b), (c), (d),
(e), (f), (g), (j) and exceptions of said Subdivision (j) of §
22.0101.
   Excepting all incorporated territory;
   Excepting all the unincorporated territory described as follows:
   The northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 1
North, Range 7 West. Also excepting the area described as follows:
   Beginning at a point on the southerly line of the San Bernardino National
Forest boundary, said point also being the north-south center section line of
Section 12, Township 1 North, Range 7 West and the south line of said Section
12; thence northerly along said north-south center section line to the
northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said
Section; thence easterly along the north line of said southwest quarter to the
northeast corner thereof; thence southerly along the west line of said
southwest quarter to the southeast corner thereof; thence westerly along the
east-west center section line of said Section 12 and continuing along the east-
west center section line of Section 7, Township 1 North, Range 6 West to the
north-south center section line of said Section 7; thence northerly along said
north-south line to the south line of Section 6, said Township and Range;
thence westerly along said south line to the southwest corner of the east half
of the southwest quarter of said Section; thence northerly along the west line
of said east half to the south line of the northwest quarter of said Section;
thence westerly along said south line to the east line of Section 1, Township 1
North, Range 7 West; thence northerly along said east line to the southeast
corner of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 1;
thence westerly along the south line of said northeast quarter of the northeast
quarter to the southwest corner thereof; thence northerly along the west line
of said northeast quarter of the northeast quarter to the northwest corner
thereof; thence easterly along the north line of said northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter to the northeast corner thereof; thence southerly along the
east line of said Section 1 to the northwest corner of Section 6, Township 1
North, Range 6 West; thence easterly along the north line of said Section to
the north-south center section line of said Section 6; thence southerly along
said north-south center section line to the northwest corner of the southeast
quarter of said Section 6; thence easterly along the north line of said
southeast quarter to the east line of said Section; thence southerly along said
east line and continuing southerly along the east line of Section 7 to the
east-west center section line of Section 8, said Township and Range; thence
easterly along said east-west center section line to the northeast corner of
the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section 8; thence
southerly along the east line of said northwest quarter to the north line of
the southeast quarter of said southwest quarter of said Section 8; thence
easterly along said north line to the east line of said southwest quarter;
thence southerly along said east line to southerly line of the San Bernardino
National Forest boundary; thence westerly along said boundary through all of
its various courses to the point of beginning. Also excepting the area
described as follows:
   Beginning at a point on the southerly line of the San Bernardino National
Forest boundary, said point also being the southwest corner of the east half of
the southeast quarter of Section 8, Township 1 North, Range 6 West; thence
northerly along the east line of said east half to the northwest corner
thereof; thence easterly along the north line of said east half and continuing
along the north line of the south half of Section 9 and 10 to the northeast
corner of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section 10,
Township 1 North, Range 6 West; thence southerly along the east line said
northwest quarter to the north line of the south half of said southwest
quarter; thence easterly along said north line to the east line of said south
half; thence southerly along said east line to said southerly line of the San
Bernardino National Forest boundary; thence westerly along said boundary
through all of its various courses to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 699, passed - -1952; Ord. 792, passed - -1952; Am. Ord. 1015, passed - -
1962; Am Ord. 1247, passed - -1965; Am. Ord. 1443, passed - -1968; Am. Ord.
2198, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2499, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 3187, passed - -
1987; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0103 Areas Open to Shooting.
   It shall be lawful under this Chapter, subject to Federal and State law, for
any person to fire, shoot or discharge any firearm, within the boundaries
described in this Section.
   Beginning at a point on the west line of Section 33, Township 11 North,
Range 7 West, San Bernardino Meridian (S.B.M.), said point being also on the
County boundary between San Bernardino and Kern Counties and being the
intersection with the northerly right-of-way of State Highway 58, also known as
U.S. Highway 466; thence leaving said northerly right-of-way northerly along
said County boundary following its various courses to a point on the southerly
right-of-way of State Highway 178; thence leaving said County boundary easterly
along said southerly right-of-way following its various courses to a point on
the southerly boundary of Randsburg Wash Road, said point located within
Section 6, Township 27 South, Range 41 East, Mount Diablo Meridian (M.D.M.);
thence leaving said southerly right-of-way in a generally southerly and
easterly direction along said southerly boundary of said Randsburg Wash Road
following its various courses to a point on the westerly right-of-way of Trona
Road; thence leaving said southerly boundary southwesterly along said westerly
right-of-way and its southerly prolongation following its various courses to a
point on the westerly right-of-way of U.S. Highway 395; thence southerly and
southeasterly along said westerly right-of-way of said U.S. Highway 395
following its various courses to a point on said northerly right-of-way of said
State Highway 58; thence leaving said westerly right-of-way westerly along said
northerly right-of-way of said State Highway 58 following its various courses
to the point of beginning.
   Excepting all military bases and military training centers.
(Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0104 Areas Open to Lawful Hunting with Shotguns Only.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, shoot or discharge any firearm,
except a shotgun for lawful hunting, within the boundaries described in this
Section.
   Beginning at the east-west center section line of Section 22, Township 7
North, Range 3 West and the west line of said Section 22; thence north along
said west line of Section 22 and continuing along the west lines of Sections 15
and 10 to the northwest corner of said Section 10, said Township and Range;
thence westerly along the north section line of Section 9, said Township and
Range to the centerline of Interstate 15; thence northeasterly along said
centerline of Interstate 15 through all of its various courses to the east-west
center section line of Section 21, Township 9 North, Range 2 West; thence
leaving said centerline easterly along said east-west center section line of
Section 21 and continuing along east-west center section lines of Sections 22
and 23 to the west line of Section 24, said Township and Range; thence north
along said west line to the northwest corner of said Section 24; thence
easterly along the north line of said Section 24 and continuing along the north
line of Section 19, Township 9 North, Range 1 West to the centerline of Barstow
Road, also known as State Highway 247; thence southerly along said centerline
of Barstow Road through all of its various courses to a point on the north line
of Section 9, Township 7 North, Range 1 West; thence leaving said centerline
westerly along said north line of Section 9 to the northwest corner of said
Section; thence southerly along the west line of said Section 9 to the
southeast corner of Section 8, said Township and Range; thence westerly along
the south line of said Section 8 and continuing along the south section lines
of Sections 7, said Township 7 North, Range 1 West and Sections 12, 11, 10, 9
and 8, Township 7 North, Range 2 West to the centerline of Stoddard Wells Road;
thence southerly along said centerline of Stoddard Wells Road through all of
its various courses to the centerline intersection of Sorrel Trail, said
intersection lying within Section 21, Township 7 North, Range 2 West; thence
southwesterly along the centerline of said Sorrel Trail to a point on the north
line of Section 30, Township 7 North, Range 2 West; thence leaving said
centerline westerly along said north line of Section 30 and continuing along
the north section lines of Sections 25 and 26, Township 7 North, Range 3 West,
to the north-south center section line of said Section 26; thence northerly
along the north-south center section line of Section 23, said Township and
Range to the east-west center section line of said Section; thence westerly
along said east-west center section line of Section 23 and continuing along
said east-west center section line of Section 22 to the point of beginning.
   Except the incorporated territory of the City of Barstow.
(Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0105 Areas Closed to Shooting.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, shoot or discharge firearms,
within the boundaries described in this section.
   All national parks within San Bernardino County, Death Valley National Park,
Joshua Tree National Park and El Mirage Off Highway Vehicle area.
   Big Bear Lake Area.
   All that portion of Township 2 North, Range 1 East sections 10, 11, 12, 13,
14 and 15 San Bernardino Meridian bounded as follows: on the north by State
Highway 18; on the east by the west line of Township 2 North, Range 2 East
(near Greenspot Boulevard); on the south by State Highway 38; and on the west
by Division Road.
   All that portion of Section 18, Township 2 North, Range 2 East, San
Bernardino Meridian, lying parallel with and 1,000 feet easterly of Big Bear
Boulevard and its southerly prolongation to the south line of said Section 18.
   All of Section 20, Township 2 North, Range 2 East, San Bernardino Meridian.
   All of Section 24, Township 2 North, Range 1 East, San Bernardino Meridian.
   The Big Bear Lake boundary as defined by the highwater line of said lake,
being elevation 6742.60 feet per Record of Survey of Big Bear Valley recorded
in Book 3, of Record of Surveys, Pages 103 to 110, Records of San Bernardino
County.
   San Bernardino Valley Area.
   All that unincorporated territory lying within Township 2 South, Range 8
West; Township 1 South, Range 8 West; Township 1 South, Range 6 West; Township
1 South, Range 5 West; Township 2 South, Range 5 West; Township 1 South, Range
4 West; Township 2 South, Range 4 West; Sections 16, 17, 20 and 21 of Township
1 South, Range 3 West; San Bernardino Meridian.
   All that unincorporated territory lying southerly of the following described
line and within Township 1 North, Range 8 West; Township 1 North, Range 7 West;
Township 1 North, Range 6 West; Township 1 North, Range 5 West; Township 2
North, Range 5 West; Township 1 North, Range 4 West; Township 1 North, Range 3
West; San Bernardino Meridian.
   Beginning at the intersection of the north line of Section 24, Township 1
North, Range 8 West, San Bernardino Meridian (S.B.M.), with the westerly
boundary line of the County of San Bernardino; thence easterly along said north
line of Section 24 and continuing easterly along the north lines of Sections 19
and 20, Township 1 North, Range 7 West, to the southwest corner of Section 16;
thence northerly along the west line of said section to the northwest corner
thereof; thence easterly along the north line of said Section 16 and continuing
easterly along the north lines of Sections 15 and 14 to the northwest corner of
the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 14, same
Township and Range; thence southerly along the west line of said northwest
quarter, easterly along the south line of said northwest quarter and northerly
along the east line of said northwest quarter to the northeast corner thereof;
thence continuing easterly along the north line of said Section 14 and
continuing easterly along the north line of Section 13 to the north-south
center section line of Section 12, Township 1 North, Range 7 West; thence
northerly along said north-south center section line to the northwest corner of
the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section; thence easterly
along the north line of said southwest quarter to the northeast corner thereof;
thence southerly along the west line of said southwest quarter to the southeast
corner thereof; thence westerly along the east-west center section line of said
Section 12 and continuing along the east-west center section line of Section 7,
Township 1 North, Range 6 West to the north-south center section line of said
Section 7; thence northerly along said north-south line to the south line of
Section 6, said Township and Range; thence westerly along said south line to
the southwest corner of the east half of the southwest quarter of said Section;
thence northerly along the west line of said east half to the south line of the
northwest quarter of said Section; thence westerly along said south line to the
east line of Section 1, Township 1 North, Range 7 West; thence northerly along
said east line to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of said Section 1; thence westerly along the south line of
said northeast quarter of the northeast quarter to the southwest corner
thereof; thence northerly along the west line of said northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter to the northwest corner thereof; thence easterly along the
north line of said northeast quarter of the northeast quarter to the northeast
corner thereof; thence southerly along the east line of said Section 1 to the
northwest corner of Section 6, Township 1 North, Range 6 West; thence easterly
along the north line of said Section to the north-south center section line of
said Section 6; thence southerly along said north-south center section line to
the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of said Section 6; thence
easterly along the north line of said southeast quarter to the east line of
said Section; thence southerly along said east line and continuing southerly
along the east line of Section 7 to the east-west center section line of
Section 8, said Township and Range; thence easterly along said east-west center
section line to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of said Section 8; thence southerly along the east line of said
northwest quarter to the north line of the southeast quarter of said southwest
quarter of said Section 8; thence easterly along said north line to the east
line of said southwest quarter; thence southerly along said east line to the
northerly line of Section 17, Township 1 North, Range 6 West; thence easterly
along the north line of said Section 17 to the southwest corner of the east
half of the southeast quarter of Section 8, Township 1 North, Range 6 West;
thence northerly along the east line of said east half to the northwest corner
thereof; thence easterly along the north line of said east half and continuing
along the north line of the south half of Section 9 and 10 to the northeast
corner of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section 10,
Township 1 North, Range 6 West; thence southerly along the east line said
northwest quarter to the north line of the south half of said southwest
quarter; thence easterly along said north line to the east line of said south
half; thence southerly along said east line to northerly line of Section 15,
said Township and Range; thence easterly along said north line of Section 15
and continuing easterly along the north lines of Sections 14 and 13, said
Township and Range to the west line of the East half of the East half of the
Northeast Quarter of said Section 13, Township 1 North, Range 6 West, S.B.M.,
said west line also being the east boundary of Area 2 of CSA 120, with the
southerly boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest; thence southerly
along said west line and east boundary of said CSA 120 to the existing
northwesterly boundary of the City of Fontana; thence continuing southerly
along said west line, east boundary and existing City boundary to an angle
point in the northwesterly boundary of said City; thence leaving said west line
and east boundary northeasterly along said City boundary through all of its
various courses to its intersection with the existing northwesterly boundary of
the City of Rialto; thence northeasterly along said City boundary through all
of its various courses to an angle point on said City boundary, said point also
being a point on the northeasterly boundary of said City and the southwesterly
right-of-way of Interstate 15; thence leaving said City boundary along said
southwesterly right-of-way of Interstate 15 northeasterly through all of its
various courses to a point on the southerly Boundary of the right-of-way of the
Southern Pacific Railroad, said point located in Section 33, Township 2 North,
Range 5 West; thence leaving said southwesterly right-of-way of Interstate 15
southeasterly along said southerly right-of-way of said Railroad through all
its various courses to a point on the existing boundary of the City of San
Bernardino; thence along said existing City boundary through all of its various
courses in a generally northerly, southeasterly, northwesterly, northerly
direction to a point on said southerly boundary of said San Bernardino National
Forest; thence following said southerly boundary of said National Forest
through all of its courses in a generally southeasterly direction to the
northeast corner of Section 36, Township 1 North, Range 3 West, San Bernardino
Meridian.
(Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0106 Areas Open to Shooting; Night Shooting Permissible.
   It shall be lawful under this Chapter, subject to Federal and State law, for
any person to fire, shoot or discharge firearms at all times, within the
boundaries described in this Section.
   All unincorporated territory within the County of San Bernardino northerly
and easterly of the following described line:
   Beginning at the southeast corner of Section 33, Township 1 South, Range 7
East, S.B.M., said southeast corner being also on the County boundary between
San Bernardino and Riverside Counties; thence north along section lines to the
southeast corner of Section 33, Township 1 North, Range 7 East, said southeast
corner being also on the Township line between Township 1 North and 1 South;
thence east along section lines and said Township line to the southeast corner
of Section 32, Township 1 North, Range 9 East; thence north along section lines
to the northerly right-of-way of State Highway 62; thence following said
northerly right-of-way through all of its various courses in a generally
easterly, southeasterly and easterly direction to a point on the westerly
right-of-way of Ironage Road, said point located in Section 1, Township 1
South, Range 12 East; thence leaving said northerly right-of-way of State
Highway 62 and following said westerly right-of-way through all of its various
courses in a generally northerly and northwesterly direction to a point on the
southerly right-of-way Sheephole View, said point located in Section 16,
Township 1 North, Range 12 East; thence leaving said right-of-way of Ironage
Road and following said southerly right-of-way of Sheephole View to a point on
the east line of Section 17, Township 1 North, Range 12 East; thence leaving
said southerly right-of-way of Sheephole View and northerly along said east
line of Section 17 to the southeast corner of Section 8, Township 1 North,
Range 12 East; thence westerly along section lines to the southwest corner of
Section 7, Township 1 North, Range 12 East, said corner also being a point on
the Range line between Range 11 East and 12 East; thence northerly along said
Range line to the northeast corner of said Township 1 North, Range 11 East;
thence westerly along the northerly line of said Township and continuing along
the northerly lines of Township 1 North, Range 10 East and Township 1 North,
Range 9 East to the northeast of Section 4, Township 1 North, Range 9 East,
said corner also being a point on the southerly boundary of the military
training base; thence following said boundary of said military training base
through all of its various courses in a generally westerly, southerly and
northerly direction to an angle point in said boundary on the north line of
Section 18, Township 6 North, Range 5 East; thence leaving said boundary and
along said north line of Section 18 to the northwest corner thereof, said
corner being also on the Range line between Range 4 East and 5 East; thence
northerly along section lines and said Range line to the northeast corner of
Township 7 North, Range 4 East; thence west along Township lines to the
centerline of Barstow Road, also known as State Highway 247; thence northerly
along said centerline of Barstow Road to a point on the north line of Section
19, Township 9 North, Range 1 West; thence leaving said centerline westerly
along the northerly section lines of said Section 19 and continuing westerly
along the northerly section line of Section 24, Township 9 North, Range 2 West
to the northwest corner of said Section 24; thence northerly along the west
line of Section 13 to the northwest corner thereof; thence easterly along the
north line of said Section 13 to the northeast corner thereof; thence northerly
along the east line of Section 12 to the centerline of Interstate 15; thence
westerly and southwesterly along said centerline of Interstate 15 to the south
line of Township 8 North, Range 3 West; thence west along said south line to
the southwest corner of said Township 8 North, Range 4 West; thence north along
the range line between Range 4 West and Range 5 West, to the south right-of-
way line of U.S. Highway 466, also known as State Highway 58; thence westerly
along said right-of-way following its various courses to an intersection with
the County boundary between San Bernardino and Kern Counties; also excepting
incorporated areas, San Bernardino National Forest territory, national parks,
military bases, military training centers, Mojave National Preserve, Indian
reservations and unincorporated areas as described in West Desert Open Shooting
Area.
(Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0107 Exemptions.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any peace officer in the
regular discharge of his or her duties; nor to any officers or employees of the
County of San Bernardino acting in their official capacity or within the scope
of their employment upon County property in compliance with all applicable
laws, rules and regulations governing the use of firearms and with the approval
of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino; nor to persons
engaged in the protection of crops or livestock; nor to any contest conducted
by and under the supervision of a bona fide rifle or pistol organization at a
public shooting gallery or rifle and pistol range; nor to discharge of bow and
arrows at any archery course or rifles or pistols at any rifle or pistol range,
provided that the location and construction of such public gallery or such
rifle and pistol range or archery course must first be approved by the Board of
Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, and provided
further that approval of any such public shooting gallery or rifle and pistol
range or archery course may be canceled by said Board whenever in its judgment
public safety or welfare may require such cancellation; nor shall the
provisions of this Chapter apply to any person in the due protection of life or
property.
(Ord. 1451, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 2068, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2499,
passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 3187, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0108 Prohibition of Night Shooting.
   It shall be unlawful to shoot or discharge any firearms between one-half
hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise of the following day in all
areas of San Bernardino County described in §§
22.0101 through
22.0105.
(Ord. 2499, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0109 Prohibited Areas.
   Except as otherwise provided by statute of the State of California, it shall
be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm or shoot or discharge a bow
and arrow in the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County within 150 yards
of any train, aircraft or domestic livestock, or within 150 yards of any
building without having in his possession the written permission of the owner
or tenant thereof, or within 150 yards of any tent, motor home, house trailer,
or other temporary encampment of persons without the permission of the
occupants thereof, without having in his immediate possession the written
permission of the occupants or tenants thereof.
(Ord. 117, passed - -1906; Am. Ord. 2499, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 4117, passed
- -2010)
§ 22.0110 Purchase of Firearms.
   No person except a parent or guardian shall purchase from, sell, exchange,
give, lend or furnish to any person under the age of 18 years, a revolver or
pistol of any description, shotgun, or rifle, which may be used for the
explosion of cartridges, or any airgun, “B-B” gun, gas-operated gun or spring
gun, or any knife or knives having the appearance of a pocketknife, the blade
or blades of which can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure of the handle
or other mechanical devices; or any instrument, toy or weapon commonly known as
a “sling shot,” or any bow made for the purpose of throwing or projecting
missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever, whether such instrument is called
by any name set forth above or by any other name. Any such weapon possessed in
violation of this Chapter may be confiscated by any peace officer.
(Ord. 914, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0111  Prohibiting Firearms—Possession by Minors.
   No person under the age of 18 years shall have in his or her possession,
care, custody or control, any of the articles mentioned in §
22.0110 of this Chapter except within his or her own domicile or except when
accompanied by and under the immediate supervision of a parent, guardian, or
responsible adult. This Section shall not apply to any person possessing a
valid California hunting license.
(Ord. 914, passed - -1960; Ord. 920, passed - - 1960; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -
2010)
§ 22.0112 Disposition of Confiscated Firearms.
   Every peace officer taking a weapon used in violation of this Chapter, shall
deliver the same to the Sheriff to be held by him or her until the final
determination of the prosecution for said offense; and upon the finding of
guilt it shall then be the duty of the Sheriff on a first offense to return the
weapon to the owner and on a second offense the Sheriff is authorized to
confiscate and destroy it.
(Ord. 914, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0113 Throwing of Missiles.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw a snowball, ice or any missile or
object whatsoever, at or into an automobile or other vehicle at any time when
such vehicle is in motion, or when such vehicle is occupied by one or more
persons.
(Ord. 309, passed - -1928; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0114 Penalty.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail, not exceeding six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 914, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0115 Severability.
   The Board of Supervisors hereby declares that it would have adopted this
Chapter and each section, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subdivisions,
clauses, phrases, or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
If for any reason any portion of this Chapter shall be declared invalid or
unconstitutional, then all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and
enforceable.
(Ord. 2198, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
§ 22.0116 Retail License.
   The Sheriff of San Bernardino County shall be the licensing authority for
the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County responsible for accepting
applications and granting licenses under the provisions of Penal Code § 12071.
The Sheriff shall collect an annual license fee of $50.00 for each license
issued pursuant to Penal Code § 12071. License fees collected under this
Section shall be deposited in the County General Fund.
(Ord. 2655, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4117, passed - -2010)
DIVISION 3: FIRE PROTECTION AND EXPLOSIVES AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
CHAPTER 1: UNIFORM FIRE CODE (REPEALED BY ORD. 4459, PASSED --2023)
 
CHAPTER 2: FIRE REGULATIONS
Section
   
23.0201   Setting Fires.
   
23.0205   Smoke Detectors.
   
23.0206   Fire Companies.
§ 23.0201   Setting Fires.
   Every person who willfully and maliciously sets on fire or who causes to be
set on fire any grass, timber, underbrush, brushland, woodland or native desert
vegetation, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail
not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (a)   Reward. The County of San Bernardino will pay a reward of not
exceeding $500.00 and not less than $100.00 for information leading to the
arrest and conviction of any person violating this Section.
   (b)   Eligibility for Reward. All officers and employees of the United
States, the State of California, the County of San Bernardino, or of any
incorporated city within the County, who are engaged in fire suppression or law
enforcement activities are barred from receiving a reward under this Section.
(Ord. 870, passed - -1958)
§ 23.0205   Smoke Detectors.
   A smoke detector, approved and listed by the State Fire Marshal, pursuant to
Health and Safety Code § 13114, shall be installed, in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions, in every existing single-family dwelling,
manufactured home, and mobilehome intended for human occupancy.
   (a)   The owner of each single-family dwelling, manufactured home and
mobilehome shall supply and install smoke detectors required by this Chapter in
the locations and in the manner set forth in the manufacturer’s instructions,
as approved by the State Fire Marshal’s regulations. Said installation shall be
accomplished within 60 days of the effective date of this Section.
   (b)   The owner shall be responsible for testing and maintaining detectors.
The smoke detector shall be operable at the time that a tenant takes
possession. A tenant shall be responsible for notifying the owner if the tenant
becomes aware of an inoperable smoke detector within his or her dwelling. The
owner or authorized agent shall correct any reported deficiencies in the smoke
detector and shall not be in violation of this Section for a deficient smoke
detector when he or she has not received notice of the deficiency.
   (c)   A violation of this Section shall be an infraction, punishable as
provided in § 11.0201 of this Code.
   (d)   This Section shall not affect any rights which the parties may have
under any other provisions of law because of the presence or absence of a smoke
detector.
§ 23.0206   Fire Companies.
   (a)   Findings. The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino
hereby finds and determines:
      (1)   That the efficient and safe provision of fire protection services
is one of the most important priorities and public functions within the County
of San Bernardino.
      (2)   That such services are provided in an effective and professional
manner by the existing fire protection districts, fire departments, community
service districts and county service areas with fire powers within the County.
      (3)   That the formation and operation of fire companies, which may
attempt to provide services without direction from, and coordination with, the
established County fire agencies, may present a serious safety threat to the
residents of the County, resulting in possible mismanagement of emergencies and
in confusion to those who are seeking aid.
      (4)   That the operation of such fire companies can also jeopardize the
safety of firefighters of agencies having jurisdiction, who respond to fires
and other emergencies.
   (b)   Formation and continued operations of fire companies.
      (1)   Fire companies shall not be formed or allowed to continue to
operate within the County of San Bernardino without approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
      (2)   Prior to granting approval, the following criteria must be met:
         (A)   Submit an application for formation to the California Office of
Emergency Services, Fire and Rescue Operational Area Coordinator where the
establishment of the fire company is being proposed that identifies:
            (I)   The proposed boundaries of the fire company.
            (II)   The proposed call-taking and dispatching procedures.
            (III)   The proposed radio frequencies and letter of authorizations
for use.
         (B)   If the proposed fire company is within the jurisdiction of an
organized fire protection agency, a letter approving the formation of the fire
company must be provided by the Fire Chief of the agency having jurisdiction.
         (C)   Must meet the requirements of Firefighting Resources of
California Organized for Potential Emergencies (FIRESCOPE) and be eligible for
issuance of a three letter designator.
         (D)   Must be recorded and tracked as an organized fire department
through the State Office of Emergency Services, Fire and Rescue Branch.
         (E)   Must be recognized by the State Fire Marshal and be eligible for
issuance of a California All Incident Reporting System (CAIRS) number.
         (F)   Must submit a completed application that indicates compliance
with all requirements to the County Fire Chief/Fire Warden for final approval
by the County Board of Supervisors.
      (3)    In addition to the above-referenced criteria, the fire company
must be fully qualified to provide fire protection services under applicable
State and local laws and regulations. Such qualification considerations shall
include, but not be limited to, training mandates, minimum staffing
requirements, the existence of a respiratory protection program and blood born
pathogen infection control program, proper dispatch frequency capability,
properly equipped and mechanically sound fire apparatus, and Master Mutual Aid
eligibility.
      (4)   That upon the recommendation of the Fire Chief/Fire Warden, the
Board of Supervisors shall act upon the formation application of a fire company
or a request for continued operation of a fire company. The decision of the
Board of Supervisors shall be final.
(Ord. 4022, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 3: ABATEMENT OF FIRE HAZARDS AND HAZARDOUS TREES
Section
   
23.0301   Duty to Abate Fire Hazards or Hazardous Trees.
   
23.0302   Valley Area Fire Hazard Abatement.
   
23.0303   Alternative Abatement of Large Parcels.
   
23.0304   Mountain Area Fire Hazard Abatement.
   
23.0305   Desert Area Fire Hazard Abatement.
   
23.0306   Hazardous Tree Abatement Within Mountain Area.
   
23.0307   Enforcement.
   
23.0308   Notice and Order to Abate.
   
23.0309   Emergency Abatement.
   
23.0310   Appeal Procedure.
   
23.0311   Removal of Fire Hazard or Hazardous Tree by Private Contractor.
   
23.0312   Payment for Abatement of Fire Hazard or Hazardous Tree.
   
23.0313   Enforcement Remedies and Penalties are Cumulative and Discretionary;
Not Exclusive.
   
23.0314   Authority to Inspect.
   
23.0315   Continuing Violations.
   
23.0316   Acts Including Causing, Aiding and Abetting.
   
23.0317   Criminal Actions.
   
23.0318   Civil Actions.
   
23.0319   Administrative Citations and Penalties.
§ 23.0301   Duty to Abate Fire Hazards or Hazardous Trees.
   Every owner or person in control of any land or interest therein in the
unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino shall abate all fire
hazards and hazardous trees from such land and from all sidewalks, parkways,
road easements and all other easements on such land. All such fire hazards and
hazardous trees are declared to be a public nuisance for which the costs of
abatement may be specially assessed pursuant to Government Code § 25845. To
provide firefighters defensible space and to minimize the spread of fire within
100 feet of a building or structure and pursuant to the California Public
Resources Code § 4291, every owner and person in control of any buildings or
structures in, upon, or adjoining any mountainous area, forest-covered lands,
brush-covered lands, grass-covered lands, or any land that is covered with
flammable material within the unincorporated area of the County of San
Bernardino shall at all times do the following:
   (a)   Maintain a firebreak by removing and clearing away, for a distance of
not less than 30 feet on each side of the building or structure or to the
property line, whichever is nearer, all flammable vegetation or other
combustible growth. Single specimens of trees or other vegetation may be
retained provided they are well-spaced, well-pruned as defined in §
23.0304 for mountain areas in this Chapter, and create a condition that avoids
spread of fire to other vegetation or to a building or structure.
   (b)   Provide a fuel break within 30 feet to 100 feet of a building or
structure by disrupting the vertical and/or horizontal continuity of flammable
and combustible vegetation with the goal of reducing fire intensity, inhibiting
fire in the crowns of trees, reducing the rate of fire spread, and providing a
safer environment for firefighters to suppress wildfire and provide structure
protection in and around wildland urban interface communities. Additional fire
protection or firebreak shall be made by the removal of brush, flammable
vegetation, or combustible growth that is located within 100 feet from the
building or structure or to the property line or at a greater distance if
provided by law.
   (c)   Property owners who do fuel reduction activities that remove or
dispose of vegetation should make every effort to properly reuse and/or recycle
the resultant materials either on site or at an appropriate off site facility,
without creating additional fire hazards and are required to comply with all
federal, state or local environmental protection laws and obtain permits when
necessary. Environmental protection laws include, but are not limited to,
threatened and endangered species, water quality, air quality, and cultural/
archeological resources.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed --1994; Am. Ord. 4058, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4064,
passed - -2008)
§ 23.0302   Valley Area Fire Hazard Abatement.
   (a)   Valley Area means that portion of the unincorporated area of the
County of San Bernardino south and west of the National Forest boundary.
   (b)   Flammable vegetation in the Valley area means:
      (1)   Plants, unless pruned to remove dead material;
      (2)   Grass over four inches in height;
      (3)   Tumbleweeds (Russian thistle).
   (c)   Fire Hazard in the Valley Area means:
      (1)   Flammable vegetation;
      (2)   Combustible rubbish;
      (3)   Limbs and undergrowth up to six feet off the ground in Eucalyptus
windrows.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed - -1994)
§ 23.0303   Alternative Abatement of Large Parcels.
   In the case of any parcel or contiguous parcels under the same ownership
upon which exists over five continuous acres of vegetation which constitutes a
fire hazard, the requirements of the duty to abate fire hazards may be
satisfied if there is cleared, and maintained cleared, a 40-foot wide strip of
land at the boundaries of such land, and through such land so that there shall
not be any portion of the land larger than two and one-half acres which is not
enclosed by itself within such strip, which shall be firebreak, and all of the
following conditions are also met:
   (a)   Firebreaks are not an approved abatement method for tumbleweeds
(Russian thistle).
   (b)   It shall be the landowner’s responsibility to notify the enforcing
agency, in writing, if the landowner wants to use the firebreak provisions of
this Section.
   (c)   All fire hazards must be removed within 30 feet of any structure.
Landowners are responsible for removing fire hazards on their property within
30 feet of any structure, regardless of parcel or lot lines.
   (d)   Where neighboring persons or properties are especially vulnerable to
the effects of a fire, including, but not limited to schools, hospitals,
mobilehome parks, retirement residences and chaparral/development interfaces,
and larger breaks or solid disking are deemed necessary for fire protection,
firebreaks which exceed 40 feet or solid disking of parcels larger than five
acres may be required by the enforcing agency.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed - -1994)
§ 23.0304   Mountain Area Fire Hazard Abatement.
   (a)   Mountain Area means that portion of the unincorporated area of the
County of San Bernardino located within the Fire Safety Overlay of the General
Plan, whether publicly or privately owned.
   (b)   Flammable vegetation which constitutes a fire hazard in the Mountain
Area means:
      (1)   All foliage and branches within six feet from the ground on trees
over 12 feet in height that stand within 100 feet of structures. Limbs should
be cut no less than 1/4 inch from the trunk of the tree to preserve the health
of the tree.
      (2)   All trees that are within 30 feet of structures that are smaller
than four inches in diameter that stand within ten feet from other trees, not
to include low energy release deciduous ornamental trees that are pruned and
free of dead or damaged foliage.
      (3)   All shrubs that are within 15 feet of structures that produce high-
energy-release components and are considered high fire fuels, not to include
low energy release deciduous ornamental plants that are well-pruned, well-
spaced and free of dead or damaged foliage. High-energy-release shrubs include,
but are not limited to, Manzanita, Service Berry, Mountain Whitethorn, Sage,
Ironwood, Juniper Shrubs, Spanish Broom and other species as determined by the
County Fire Chief/Fire Warden or their designee to constitute a fire hazard.
      (4)   All high-energy-release shrubs that are spaced together less than
double the size of the height of the tallest shrub and stand within 30 feet of
structures, (e.g. a four-foot high shrub should be spaced eight feet or more
away from the next shrub, providing that the four-foot high shrub is the
tallest of the two shrubs), not to include ornamental plants that are well-
pruned, well-spaced and free of dead or damaged foliage. Planting of native,
fire-wise, drought-resistant species is encouraged for the health of the
forest.
      (5)   Lower foliage measured at least 18 inches up from the ground and
all leaf litter and dead vegetation on and under all shrubs that stand within
100 feet of all structures.
      (6)   Dead branches and leaf litter in and under all plants, trees,
foliage and shrubs and all flammable vegetation at all heights within 100 feet
of all structures.
      (7)   Tree limbs (not trunks) less than ten feet away from chimneys and
stovepipes.
      (8)   Grass over four inches in height.
      (9)   Pine needles, leaf litter or chipped/ground mulch on the ground
over two inches in depth.
      (10)   Trunks or branches on the ground less than four inches in
diameter, not including split and neatly stacked fire wood.
   (c)   Fire Hazard in the Mountain Area means:
      (1)   Flammable vegetation within ten feet of a road;
      (2)   Combustible rubbish, waste or discarded materials;
      (3)   Leaves, needles or other dead vegetative growth on roofs or
structures.
   (d)   When neighboring persons or properties are especially vulnerable to
the effects of fire, including, but not limited to schools, hospitals,
mobilehome parks, residential occupancies, it is the responsibility of the
property owner to adhere to the provisions of this section when flammable
vegetation stands within 100 feet, measured on the ground, of all neighboring
structures. Additional clearance may be required at the discretion of the
County Fire Chief/Fire Warden or their designee on buildings listed above that
may be used as evacuation centers, medical facilities and/or places of public
gatherings and/or critical infrastructure.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed --1994; Am. Ord. 4058, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4064,
passed - -2008)
§ 23.0305   Desert Area Fire Hazard Abatement.
   (a)   Desert Area means all portions of the unincorporated area of the
County of San Bernardino north and east of the National Forest boundaries.
   (b)   Flammable vegetation in the Desert Area means:
      (1)   Tumbleweeds (Russian thistle);
      (2)   Limbs and debris of salt cedar (Tamarisk) within six feet of the
ground;
      (3)   Plants, unless pruned to remove dead material;
      (4)   Grass over four inches in height.
   (c)   Fire Hazard in the Desert Area means:
      (1)   Flammable vegetation within ten feet of a road;
      (2)   Tumbleweeds, regardless of distance from structures;
      (3)   Combustible rubbish;
      (4)   Flammable vegetation within 30 feet of all structures, including
that portion of the property within 30 feet of structures on adjacent
properties;
      (5)   Where neighboring persons or properties are especially vulnerable
to the effects of a fire, including, but not limited to schools, hospitals,
mobilehome parks, residential occupancies or chaparral/development interfaces,
flammable vegetation within 100 feet of all structures.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed - -1994)
§ 23.0306   Hazardous Tree Abatement Within Mountain Area.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors’ finds that within the Mountain Area as
defined in San Bernardino County Code §
23.0304(a) a unique problem arises from several factors, including storms and
various forms of precipitation, causing trees to become unstable and hazardous
to lives and property.
   (b)   Within the boundaries of the Mountain Area, the provisions of this
Section shall apply to any tree which constitutes a fire, health, or safety
hazard or which may endanger or injure neighboring property, or the health,
safety, or well-being of persons or property.
   (c)   Every owner, occupant or person in control of any land or interest in
land within such areas of the County shall abate any hazardous tree therefrom
and from all sidewalks, parkways and easements on such land.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed - -1994)
§ 23.0307   Enforcement.
   For the purpose of enforcing this Chapter, the County Fire Chief/Fire Warden
may designate any person as his or her deputy in the performance of the duties
enjoined upon him or her by this Chapter. In addition, each of the following
officers within the County of San Bernardino is hereby designated to perform
the same duties within the territory of the political subdivision which they
serve. Whenever the term COUNTY FIRE CHIEF/FIRE WARDEN is used in this Chapter,
the following officers are included in the meaning of such phrase, except that
the County Fire Chief/Fire Warden shall coordinate all such officers in the
performance of these duties:
   (a)   The Deputy Director of Code Enforcement, Fire Hazard Abatement Program
and their designees.
   (b)   The San Bernardino County Land Use Services Director or designee.
   (c)   Other officers hereafter designated by the Board of Supervisors or the
County Fire Chief/Fire Warden.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed --1994; Am. Ord. 4058, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4064,
passed - -2008)
§ 23.0308   Notice and Order to Abate.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the County Fire Chief/Fire Warden or any
designated person, whenever such officer deems it necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter, to issue a “notice and order to abate” by any or
all of the following methods:
      (1)   By mailing a notice to the owner at the address shown on the latest
tax roll;
      (2)   By personal service to the owner as shown on the latest tax roll;
      (3)   By posting the property.
   (b)   The form “notice and order to abate” shall include, at a minimum, the
following information:
      (1)   List of hazards;
      (2)   List of locations;
      (3)   Due date by which abatement must be completed;
      (4)   Appeal rights;
      (5)   Landowner’s name and address (situs and assessor’s);
      (6)   Parcel number of affected property.
   (c)   The notice and order to abate shall be placed in the mail by the
issuing agency at least 30 days prior to the “due date” for abatement on the
notice.
   (d)   A ten-day extension for compliance is sent when the owner has removed
greater than 51% of the fire hazard and notified the agency that the hazard has
been abated, but nevertheless the agency determines the fire hazard still
exists. A ten-day extension for compliance shall be placed in the mail by the
issuing agency at least ten-calendar days prior to the “due date” for abatement
on the notice.
   (e)   Compliance will be considered “In-Progress” and the Non-Compliance
Notice and Order will be held in abeyance if the responsible property owner
contracts with state or federal agencies or non- profit organizations, such as
Forest Care or Fire Safe Councils, that are approved by the County Fire Chief/
Fire Warden as capable of providing compliance through said contract.
(Am. Ord. 2994, passed --1986; Am. Ord. 3586, passed --1994; Am. Ord. 4058,
passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4064, passed - -2008)
§ 23.0309   Emergency Abatement.
   When a fire hazard or hazardous tree constitutes an immediate hazard or
threat of harm and the situation calls for abatement sooner than the abatement
procedures herein otherwise allow, the enforcement officer listed in §
23.0307 may take or cause emergency abatement of such hazard with such notice
to parties concerned, or without notice, as the particular circumstances
reasonably allow.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed - -1994)
§ 23.0310   Appeal Procedure.
   (a)   Any person who is affected by the notice and order to abate may appeal
to the Board of Appeals, as defined in Subdivision (c) of this Section, within
the time for compliance with the order, by submitting the appeal in writing to
the issuing officer or department supervisor of such officer.
   (b)   The written appeal must be accompanied by a fee for the cost of the
appeal as established by the County Fee Schedule.
   (c)   As to appeals filed from notices and orders to abate for flammable
vegetation as described in §§
23.0304(b)(7) through (10) and
23.0304(c)(1) through (3) of this Chapter, the Board of Appeals shall consist
of three persons: one member shall be a designee of the County Fire Chief; one
member shall be a designee of the Director of the Public Health Department; one
member shall be a member of the public appointed by the Chairperson of the
Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   As to appeals filed from notices and orders to abate for flammable
vegetation as described in §
23.0304 (b)(1) through (6) of this Chapter, the Board of Appeals shall consist
of three persons: one member shall be a designee of the County Fire Chief; one
member shall be a designee of the Director of the Public Health Department; and
one member shall be a member of the public appointed by the member of the Board
of Supervisors of the supervisorial district in which the notice of order to
abate was issued.
   (e)   A timely appeal shall stay any further action until the appeal is
determined.
   (f)   The officer receiving the written appeal shall inform the issuing
officer, shall set the matter for hearing before the Board of Appeals and shall
notify the appellant of the date set for hearing at least 15 days prior to such
date.
   (g)   The Board of Appeals shall act on the appeal and its determination
shall be final.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed --1994; Am. Ord. 4064, passed - -2008)
§ 23.0311   Removal of Fire Hazard or Hazardous Tree by Private Contractor.
   (a)   If at the end of the time allowed for compliance in the original
notice and order, or as extended in cases of appeal, compliance has not been
accomplished, the officer or agency issuing the notice and order may order the
fire hazard or hazardous tree to be removed by a private contractor selected
and approved by the enforcing agency, in the manner and under the terms
specified by such enforcing agency.
   (b)   If a period of 90 days has elapsed since the due date for abatement of
the hazard listed on the notice and order to abate, another notice and order to
abate shall be issued, and the procedures set forth in §
23.0308 shall be required prior to any abatement.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed - -1994)
§ 23.0312   Payment for Abatement of Fire Hazard or Hazardous Tree.
   (a)   Billing. When the abatement has been completed, the agency or officer
so causing the abatement shall render to the County Auditor an itemized
statement covering work necessary for such removal. The County Auditor shall
pay the same from the funds of the agency or officer causing said work to be
done and the agency shall present to the property owner a demand for payment by
mailing a notice to the owner at the address shown on the latest tax roll.
   (b)   Tax Lien for Payment. If payment is not made by or on behalf of the
owner within 60 days after mailing such bill, the agency shall certify to the
County Auditor the demands remaining unpaid, together with the information
required by law in such cases. The County Auditor shall cause the amount of the
same to be entered upon the tax roll for the property from which removal was
accomplished, and the said special assessment shall be included upon the next
succeeding tax statement. Thereafter, the amounts of the assessment shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as County taxes are
collected, and are subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and
sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary County taxes. If any real
property to which such lien would attach has been transferred or conveyed to a
bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for
value has been created and attaches thereon prior to the date on which the
first installment of such taxes would become delinquent, then the lien which
would otherwise be imposed by this Section shall not attach to such real
property and the costs of abatement, as confirmed, relating to such property
shall be transferred to the unsecured roll and collected by any appropriate
means. If the property is tax-exempt, collection may be made by any appropriate
means.
   (c)   Appeals. Any appeal from these charges must be filed within 60 days
from the date of billing by the enforcing agency. An appeal may also be filed
within 60 days from the date of mailing of the tax bill which shows abatement
charges, if, and only if, no bill was received by the appellant. The appeal
procedure shall be the same as §
23.0311 of this Chapter, and the Appeal Board’s decision shall be final.
   (d)   Cancellation of Lien. All or any portion of any such special
assessment, penalty, or costs heretofore entered, shall on order of the Board
of Appeals be cancelled by the Auditor if uncollected, or, except in the case
provided for in Subdivision (5) hereof, refunded by the County Treasurer if
collected, if the Board of Appeals determines that they were entered, charged
or paid:
      (1)   More than once;
      (2)   Through clerical error;
      (3)   Through error or mistake of the Board of Appeals or of the officer
or board designated to give notice or to abate the fire hazard or hazardous
tree, in respect to any material fact, including the case where the cost report
rendered and confirmed as hereinbefore provided shows the County abated the
fire hazard or hazardous tree but such is not the actual fact;
      (4)   Illegally;
      (5)   On property acquired after the lien date by the State or by any
county, city, school district or other political subdivision and because of
this public ownership, not subject to sale for delinquent taxes.
   (e)   Procedure for Refund of Payment. No order for a cancellation or refund
under Subdivision (d) of this Section shall be made except on a claim:
      (1)   Verified by the person who paid the special assessment or his or
her guardian, executor, or administrator;
      (2)   Filed within 60 days after the error was discovered by the property
owner and no more than three years after making the payment sought to be
refunded.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed - -1994)
§ 23.0313 Enforcement Remedies and Penalties are Cumulative and Discretionary;
Not Exclusive.
   All remedies and penalties provided for in this Chapter shall be cumulative
and discretionary, and not exclusive, in accordance with this Section and in
the same manner as provided by §
11.0202 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Am. Ord. 3586, passed --1994; Am. Ord. 4091, passed - -2009)
§ 23.0314 Authority to Inspect.
   All persons authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter are
authorized to conduct investigations and inspections in accordance with this
Section and in the same manner as provided by §
11.0203 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4091, passed - -2009)
§ 23.0315 Continuing Violations.
   Each and every day, and any portion of which, any violation of this Division
is committed, continued, or permitted shall be deemed a new and separate
offense and shall be punishable or actionable as set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 4091, passed - -2009)
§ 23.0316 Acts Including Causing, Aiding and Abetting.
   Whenever in this Division any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall
include causing, permitting, aiding or abetting such act or omission.
(Ord. 4091, passed - -2009)
§ 23.0317 Criminal Actions.
   (a)   Criminal Penalties for Violations. It is unlawful for any person,
firm, partnership, corporation or other entity (hereafter “person”) to violate
any provision of this Division constituting a public offense. Any person
violating any such provision, unless as otherwise specified for certain
sections or for sections within a certain chapter of this Division, shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. To any
person so convicted the following shall apply:
      (1)   A first offense, shall constitute an infraction offense and
punished by a base fine not exceeding $100.00 and not less than $50.00.
      (2)   A second offense within one year shall constitute an infraction
offense and punished by a base fine not exceeding $200.00 and not less than
$100.00.
      (3)   The third and any additional offense within one year, shall
constitute either an infraction or a misdemeanor offense, and if it is an
infraction offense, shall be punishable by a base fine not exceeding $500.00,
or if a misdemeanor offense, punishable by up to six months in jail, and/or
base fine not exceeding $1,000.00.
      (4)   Any court costs that the court may otherwise be required to impose
pursuant to applicable state law or local ordinance shall be imposed in
addition to the base fine (Government Code § 25132).
      (5)   Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged
and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by up to six months in jail, and/or
base fine not exceeding $1,000.00.
      (6)   Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence shall not relieve
a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity from the
responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation.
   (b)   Criminal Citations. Criminal citations shall be issued in the same
manner and under the same authority as provided by §
11.0206(b) of this Code.
(Ord. 4091, passed - -2009)
§ 23.0318 Civil Actions
   All violations of this Division may be subject to enforcement through the
initiation of a civil action in accordance with this Section and in the same
manner and under the same authority as provided at §
11.0207 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4091, passed - -2009)
§ 23.0319 Administrative Citations and Penalties.
   As an alternative to the criminal or civil enforcement of this Division, all
violations of this Division may be subject to enforcement through the use of
administrative citations in accordance with Government Code § 53069.4 and this
Section, and in the same manner and under the same authority as provided at §
11.0208 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4091, passed - -2009)
CHAPTER 4: AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
   
23.0401   Intent and Enforcement Authority.
   
23.0402   Scope of Authority.
   
23.0403   Definitions.
   
23.0404   Validity and Severability.
   
23.0405   Existing Law Continued.
   
23.0406   No Liability/No Warranty.
   
23.0407   Authority to Investigate, Detain and/or Issue Citation and/or Abate a
Public Nuisance.
   
23.0408   Interference Unlawful/Criminal Penalties For.
   
23.0409   Public Records.
   
23.0410   Remedies for Public Nuisances.
   
23.0411   Civil Remedies and Penalties, and Remedies for Fraud or Unfair
Business Practices.
   
23.0412   Criminal Penalties.
   
23.0413   Notice of Lien for Non-Compliance.
§ 23.0401   Intent and Enforcement Authority.
   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code §§ 101025 et seq. (County Health
Officers); §§ 101075 et seq. (Local Health Emergencies); §§ 101375 et seq.
(County Health Administration for Cities); §§ 25100 et seq. (Hazardous Waste
Control); §§ 25200 et seq. (Permitting of Facilities); §§ 25280 et seq.
(Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances); §§ 25260 et seq. (Unified Agency
Review of Hazardous Materials Release Sites); §§ 25299.10 et seq. (Petroleum
Underground Storage Tank Cleanup); §§ 25500 et seq. (Business and Area Plans);
§§ 25404 et seq. (Unified Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials Management
Regulatory Program); Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq. (California
Environmental Quality Act); Water Code §§ 13304 and 13305 (Remedial Action by
Government Agencies); Penal Code §§ 370 et seq. (Public Nuisance); Government
Code § 25485 (Abatement of Nuisance); Code of Regulations (CCR) §§ 66001 et
seq. (Hazardous Waste Management); Code of Regulations §§ 2610 et seq.
(Underground Storage Tank Regulations); 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq. (Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act); and other relevant Federal and State authority,
this jurisdiction has found that the public’s interest will be best served by
all hazardous material, hazardous waste, underground storage and related
environmental protection programs within the borders of San Bernardino County
being enforced and administered through the County Consolidated Fire District,
hereinafter known as the San Bernardino County Fire Department, Division of
Hazardous Materials. The Fire Chief and Investigative Officers of San
Bernardino County Fire Department, Division of Hazardous Materials are hereby
authorized to enforce and administer all Federal, State, and local laws
pertaining to hazardous materials and hazardous waste including those listed
above and all provisions of Chapters
4 (Authority and Administration),
5 (Public Nuisance Abatement),
6 (Permits, Inspections and Hearing Procedures) and
7 (CUPA Permit Elements) of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0402   Scope of Authority.
   Authority is granted to the San Bernardino County Fire Department, the
County Fire Chief and Investigative Officers of the Division of Hazardous
Materials to enforce Health and Safety Code §§ 101075 et seq. (Local Health
Emergencies); §§ 25404 et seq. (Unified Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Materials
Management Regulatory Program); §§ 25100 et seq. (Hazardous Waste Control); §§
25280 et seq. (Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances); §§ 25299.10 et
seq. (Petroleum Underground Storage Tank Cleanup); §§ 25500 et seq. (Hazardous
Materials Release Response Plans and Inventory); Titles 19, 22, and 23 of
California Code of Regulations, and as enumerated in §
23.0401 of this Code. During declared states of emergency the Local Public
Officer shall have supervision of and control over the Division of Hazardous
Materials and its personnel. The County Fire Department Division of Hazardous
Materials shall enforce all California Health and Safety Code provisions
pertaining to hazardous materials and hazardous wastes as enumerated in §
23.0401 of this Code, within available resources. The County Consolidated Fire
District may charge reasonable fees for its services, including fees as are
prescribed by
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0403   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions throughout the
California Health and Safety Code and elsewhere in State laws and regulations
pertaining to hazardous materials, hazardous waste and toxics control.
   CERTIFIED UNIFIED PROGRAM AGENCY or CUPA. The San Bernardino County Fire
Department, Division of Hazardous Materials as the agency defined in Code of
Regulations §§ 15110 et seq., that has been certified by the Secretary of the
California Environmental Protection Agency to implement the Unified Program
specified in Health and Safety Code §§ 25404 et seq.
   CHIEF. The San Bernardino County Fire Chief or Fire Marshal.
   CODE. The San Bernardino County Code.
   CONTINGENCY PLAN. A document setting out an organized, planned and
coordinated course of action in case of fire, explosion or release of hazardous
waste or hazardous waste constituents to air, soil, or surface water that could
threaten human health and safety or the environment. Such document shall be
consistent with Code of Regulations §§ 66265.50 et seq.
   CORRECTIVE ACTION. Activities taken to investigate, characterize, evaluate,
correct and enforce requirements applicable to address releases of a hazardous
waste, hazardous constituents or hazardous substances, as necessary to protect
public health and the environment.
   CUPA PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to Health and Safety Code §§ 25404 et
seq.
   CUPA PERMIT PROGRAM ELEMENTS. The following six elements that are further
defined in
Chapter 7 of Division 3 of Title 2 of this Code:
      (1)   Hazardous waste generators and hazardous waste on-site treatment;
      (2)   Underground storage tanks (UST);
      (3)   Hazardous material release response plans and inventories;
      (4)   California Accidental Release Prevention (CalARP) Program;
      (5)   Above ground storage tanks (spill prevention control and
countermeasure plan only);
      (6)   Uniform Fire Code Hazardous Material Management Plans and
Inventories.
   DEPARTMENT. The San Bernardino County Fire Department.
   DISPOSAL. Any of the following:
      (1)   The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking,
placing, pouring or venting of any hazardous waste or material so that the
hazardous waste or material or any constituent of the hazardous waste or
material is or may be emitted into the air or discharged into or onto any land
or waters, including groundwater, or may otherwise enter the environment.
      (2)   The abandonment of any hazardous waste or material.
   DIVISION. The Division of Hazardous Materials of the San Bernardino County
Fire Department.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. A substance that presents a threat to the public
because of its toxicity, radioactivity, flammability, or other characteristic
dangerous to the public health or the environment. It shall also include all
hazardous substances so defined by Health and Safety Code § 25501(p).
   INVESTIGATIVE OFFICER and DEPUTY INVESTIGATIVE OFFICER. Any employee or
agent of the San Bernardino County Fire Department, Hazardous Materials
Division, who is so designated by the Chief, or who is registered as a
Registered Environmental Health Specialist (R.E.H.S.) in the State of
California.
   LOCAL PUBLIC OFFICER. The County Fire Chief or Fire Marshal.
   OPERATOR. Any person or entity engaged in any activity or facility that is
subject to the Division’s jurisdiction.
   OWNER. Any person or entity having a financial interest in any activity or
facility that is subject to the Division’s jurisdiction.
   PERSON. Includes individuals, businesses, general partnerships, limited
partnerships, joint ventures, corporations, State and local governmental
entities, the U.S. Government and its agencies, and every other legal entity or
any association having legal obligations subject to the provisions of this
Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0404   Validity and Severability.
   Chapters
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code shall not be in
conflict with State or Federal law. If any provision of those Chapters or the
application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of those Chapters are
severable.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0405   Existing Law Continued.
   The provisions of Chapters
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code, insofar as they are
substantially the same as provisions of existing laws and ordinances relating
to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements, continuations
and amendments thereof and not as new enactments.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0406   No Liability/No Warranty.
   The County of San Bernardino, the San Bernardino County Fire Department
Division of Hazardous Materials and their employees or agents shall not be held
liable for any act or omission to act done in good faith reliance upon State
law, or the ordinances and codes of the County of San Bernardino and upon
Division policies and procedures. The County of San Bernardino, the San
Bernardino County Fire Department Division of Hazardous Materials and their
employees or agents shall not be held liable for the negligence of, nor as the
guarantor of proper performance by, any person or entity holding any license,
permit, certificate, registration, privilege, or other entitlement from the
Division.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0407   Authority to Investigate, Detain and/or Issue Citation and/or Abate
a Public Nuisance.
   (a)   The Chief, and such investigative officers as the Chief designates,
shall have authority, at all reasonable times, with consent or a warrant if
required, to enter any place, property, enclosure or structure to investigate
for violations of Chapter
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code, to abate a public
nuisance, to detain for purposes of investigation or to issue a Notice of
Violation or a citation in conformance with relevant Federal and State laws and
ordinances of the County of San Bernardino to any person committing a
misdemeanor or infraction offense which is a violation of Chapters
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (b)   Each applicant and permittee is subject to periodic unannounced
inspections, with consent or a warrant if required, at all reasonable business
hours, by the Division’s Investigative Officers, and to the collection of
evidence, samples, photographs, examination of invoices, and all other
reasonable inspection procedures to determine compliance with all applicable
laws and regulations enforced by the Division.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0408   Interference Unlawful/Criminal Penalties For.
   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person or entity to deny access to,
interfere with, prevent, restrict, obstruct, or hinder employees or agents
acting within the scope of their duty or agency under Chapters
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of this Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0409   Public Records.
   In accordance with Government Code §§ 6250 et seq. (California Public
Records Act), the Division may charge reasonable fees to cover the costs of
copying public records. In the absence of a specific court order, and in
accordance with the California Public Records Act, the Division may determine
not to disclose to the public any information concerning criminal
investigations, epidemiological studies, medical records, private matters,
trade secrets, information which would reveal the identity of any person who
provided information to the Division in confidence or otherwise violate any
person’s right to privacy.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0410   Remedies for Public Nuisances.
   In addition to criminal prosecution, civil action, and every other remedy or
penalty provided by law, a public nuisance may be abated or enjoined in an
action brought by the Division.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0411   Civil Remedies and Penalties, and Remedies for Fraud or Unfair
Business Practices.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision
of Chapters
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code. All enforcement
procedures, remedies, and penalties provided by Health and Safety Code §§ 25299
et seq. and provided by Chapters
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code shall apply to any
person who:
      (1)   Fails to obtain all necessary permits required for installation,
operation, up-grade, permanent closure, or removal of underground storage
tanks, or for other CUPA Permit Elements as required;
      (2)   Operates without making payment of any required fees. Such person
or entity shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as specified in §
23.0412 of this Code;
      (3)   Fails to submit a work plan or provide required notifications of
commencement of work to the Division prior to the beginning of any phase of
corrective action or interim remedial action;
      (4)   Fails to implement any phase of corrective action as required by
law, regulation, ordinance or pursuant to conditions set by the Division;
      (5)   Fails to submit, within 30 calendar days after requested, a written
report of findings at any phase of corrective action;
      (6)   Fails to manage material contaminated with hazardous material or
hazardous waste from a release, as prescribed by law, regulation, ordinance, or
pursuant to conditions set by the Division.
   (b)   Penalties under this Section are in addition to, and do not supersede
or limit, any and all other legal remedies and penalties, civil or criminal,
that may be applicable under Health and Safety Code §§ 25280 et seq. or Code of
Regulations Title 23.
   (c)   Payment of any late fee or penalty established by this County Code
shall not relieve a person from the responsibility of correcting any violation
of this County Code or from correcting a violation of any other statute or
regulation.
   (d)   In addition to every other remedy or penalty provided by law, the
Division may refer suspected fraudulent or unfair business practices as defined
in the California Business and Professions Code to the appropriate authority
for further investigation and remedies.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0412   Criminal Penalties.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided, any person, firm, partnership, corporation
or other entity violating any provision of Chapters
4,
5,
6 or
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the Code shall be guilty of an infraction or
misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. Each day or portion thereof that such
violation is in existence shall be a new and separate offense.
   (b)   Any person so convicted shall be:
      (1)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $100.00 and not less than $50.00 for a first offense;
      (2)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $200.00 and not less than $100.00 for a second offense;
      (3)   Guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,000.00 and not less than $500.00 or six months in jail, or both, for a third
or additional offense;
      (4)   Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged
and prosecuted as a misdemeanor and the offender shall be punished pursuant to
Subdivision (3) above.
   (c)   Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence herein provided
shall not relieve a person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity
from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the
violation.
   (d)   In addition to the above penalties, the court may order that the
guilty party reimburse the Department for all of its costs of investigating,
analyzing, inspecting, abating and prosecuting the enforcement action against
the guilty party. The court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursement upon
submission of proof of such costs by the Department.
   (e)   The owner, manager, and operator of every activity or facility subject
to Chapters
4,
5,
6 or
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the Code shall be responsible for any violation of the
provisions of these Chapters by an employee.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0413   Notice of Lien for Non-Compliance.
   Whenever a notice of violation or notice of other administrative action has
been given, the Investigative Officer may record a “notice of lien for non-
compliance” with the Office of the County Recorder of San Bernardino County
pursuant to Government Code § 27280 and shall notify the owner of the property
of such action. The “notice of lien for non-compliance” shall describe the
location of the property, shall set forth the non-complying conditions, and
shall state that any costs incurred by the County, including but not limited to
investigative, administrative and abatement costs and attorney fees, as a
result of the violation of the San Bernardino County Code, or State law and
regulations, may become a lien on the property and that the owner has been so
notified. The County Recorder shall record and index the “notice of lien for
non-compliance” in the name of each person and property specified in the action
or proceeding. After all violations have been corrected, outstanding fees have
been paid, a formal written request for release of the notice of lien for non-
compliance must be submitted by the owner of the property or their authorized
representative with the required processing fee to the Division. The Division
shall make a determination of whether the property is in compliance. If an
inspection is required, a special inspection fee will be charged. Once the
Division has determined that the property is in compliance, it shall record in
the Office of the County Recorder a document terminating the “notice of lien
for non-compliance.”
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
CHAPTER 5: PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
   
23.0501   Authority.
   
23.0502   Definitions.
   
23.0503   Resolution.
   
23.0504   Duty to Abate.
   
23.0505   Criminal and Civil Penalties Applicable.
   
23.0506   Emergency Abatement.
   
23.0507   Notice to Abate.
   
23.0508   Appeal Procedure.
   
23.0509   Abatement.
   
23.0510   Payment for Abatement.
§ 23.0501   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 4 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code, other
relevant State law, and Government Code § 25845, the Board of Supervisors for
San Bernardino County hereby authorizes the Department, the Chief and
Investigative Officers of the Hazardous Materials Division of the County Fire
Department to enforce the provisions of this Public Nuisance Abatement Chapter
within this jurisdiction. Such authority includes the right to enter land, with
consent or a warrant if required, for investigation, posting or serving notice
or to cause abatement as herein provided.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0502   Definitions.
   Definitions stated in other Chapters of this Code shall supplement the
following:
   PUBLIC NUISANCES include:
   (a)   Accumulations of junk, trash, and related materials as set forth more
specifically at
Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code (Waste
Management) herein and including but not limited to: scrap metals; scrap
plastic or polymer materials; scrap pipe or plumbing fixtures; machinery; rags;
bedding; waste oil; batteries; oily wastes and similar accumulations under
conditions not in compliance with approved land uses or locations as set forth
more specifically in Title 8 of the San Bernardino County Code (Development),
or otherwise in any manner detrimental to public health and safety or the
environment.
   (b)   Hazardous waste or hazardous materials as defined in this Code that
are present under circumstances that could endanger public health and safety,
or the environment.
   (c)   Incompatible materials unsuitable for commingling where circumstances
suggest a likelihood of explosion, spontaneous combustion, chemical reaction,
fire, extreme heat, toxic substance formation or other dangerous reaction so as
to endanger public health and safety or the environment.
   (d)   Biological and medical related wastes and odors from hospitals and
medical facilities, sewers, cesspools, septic tanks, leach lines and fields
(whether of individual or multiple ownership), toilets, holding tanks, seepage
pits, butcher offal, animal droppings, excrement, urine, greywater, manure
accumulations, dead animals, putrid matter and similar materials under
circumstances endangering the public health and safety or the environment.
   (e)   The installation, operation, repair or modification of any underground
tank system contrary to the provisions of this Code or the spill, overfill or
release of a hazardous material or hazardous waste from an underground storage
tank system.
   (f)   Any situation or activity that exists or is conducted, maintained, or
permitted, known at common law, in equity jurisprudence, specified at Civil
Code §§ 3479 et seq., Penal Code § 370, or elsewhere defined in State law or by
the laws of the County as a public nuisance and within the authority of the
Division to abate.
   (g)   Any violation of the provisions of Chapters
4,
5,
6, or
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of this Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0503   Resolution.
   (a)   Whenever a public nuisance exists anywhere within this jurisdiction,
the Chief or Investigating Officer may declare such to be a public nuisance.
   (b)   Such declaration may refer to the public nuisance location by the name
under which it is commonly known, by street number and name, in reference to
adjacent or nearby roads, streets, or highways, by the County Assessor’s Parcel
Number(s) (APN), or by an abbreviated legal description.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0504   Duty to Abate.
   No person or entity shall cause, permit, maintain, conduct, or otherwise
allow a public nuisance to exist within the County. It shall be the
responsibility of every owner, occupant, and person in control of any land or
interest therein, located within the County to remove, abate, and prevent the
recurrence of a public nuisance upon such land or interest therein. Any
recurrence of a condition may be deemed to be a continuation of the original
condition.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0505   Criminal and Civil Penalties Applicable.
   Violations of this Chapter are also subject to all enforcement, criminal and
civil penalty provisions of
Chapter 4 and
Chapter 6 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code and all other remedies
and penalties provided by law which are not limited or superseded by this
Chapter.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0506   Emergency Abatement.
   When a public nuisance constitutes an immediate hazard or real threat of
harm under circumstances immediately dangerous to public health and safety or
the environment, and the situation calls for abatement sooner than the
abatement procedures herein otherwise allow, the Chief or Investigative
Officers of the Division may take or cause emergency abatement of such nuisance
with such notice to parties concerned, or without notice, as the particular
circumstances reasonably allow.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0507   Notice to Abate.
   (a)   After the Chief or Investigating Officer declares the existence of a
public nuisance, the Chief or Investigating Officer shall issue a “notice to
abate” by either of the following methods:
      (1)   Mailing a copy by first class or certified mail addressed to the
owner, person, or entity with a mailing address as shown on available tax or
assessment rolls of the County of San Bernardino and posting a copy at the
concerned property.
      (2)   Personal service upon the owner or occupant of the concerned
property.
   (b)   The form “notice to abate” shall be substantially in the form
following. In the absence of exigent circumstances, the notice may not require
abatement in less than 15 days.
NOTICE TO ABATE
Issued this:                                                                                                                                               
      Month      Day      Year
By authority of San Bernardino County Code Section
23.0501 et seq.,
YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED TO ABATE from your property described as
                                                                                                                                                                   
   Assessor’s Parcel Number/APN            Establishment Number
                                                                                                                                                                   
    Street Address               Post Office
from the County of San Bernardino Assessor’s Tax Records that list the owner as:
                                                                                                                                                                
Name
                                                                                                                                                                
   Address         Post Office      State      Zip
the following public nuisances:  ________
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                         
If said nuisances are not abated within                   calendar days of the above date, the Chief or Investigating Officer may order said conditions abated by
public employees, private contractor, or other person, and the cost of said abatement and all directly related investigative and administrative costs shall be
billed directly to the property owner or levied and assessed against the property as a special assessment lien.
Any appeal from this order must be in writing and filed within fifteen (15) calendar days with the Chief of the Hazardous Materials Division, who will set the same
for hearing before a Board of Appeals and notify you of the date of such hearing.
Failure to abate or to appeal within the times allowed may also make you subject to criminal and civil remedies. Your cooperation is anticipated.
                                                                                                                                                               
Name and Title of Issuing Officer
San Bernardino County Fire Department
385 North Arrowhead Avenue, 2nd Floor
San Bernardino, CA 92415-0153
 
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0508   Appeal Procedure.
   Any person or entity served, constructively or personally, with the Notice
to Abate set forth in §
23.0507 may appeal in writing to the Chief, by mail or by personal delivery,
within 15 calendar days of said service. The appeal shall contain the address
to which the Notice of hearing shall be sent in order for the appeal to be
valid. The Division shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before a Board
of Appeals and notify the appellant of the date set for such hearing at least
15 calendar days prior to such date. The Board of Appeals shall act on the
appeal and its determination shall be final. The Board of Appeals shall be
appointed by the Chief and consist of three persons as follows: two Fire
Department officers, but not the notice-issuing officer nor anyone having
knowledge of the particular case, and a public member. Except as provided
herein, the provisions of §
23.0610 of this Code apply.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0509   Abatement.
   If at the end of the time allowed for compliance in the notice to abate, or
as extended in cases of appeal, compliance has not been accomplished, the
Division may cause the abatement by public employees or by private contractor
selected and approved by the Board of Supervisors in the manner and under the
terms provided by this Chapter. If such abatement is so carried out, such
property shall be subject to a special assessment lien for the costs of the
abatement.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0510   Payment for Abatement.
   (a)   Procedure for Payment. When said abatement has been completed, the
Division shall render to the San Bernardino County Auditor-Controller an
itemized statement covering work necessary for the abatement. The Auditor-
Controller shall pay the same from the funds of the agency or department
causing said work to be done, and the Division shall present to the owner a
demand for payment by mail. If payment is not made on behalf of the owner
within 60 calendar days after mailing such bill, the Chief shall certify to the
Auditor-Controller the remaining unpaid cost, together with the information
required by law in such cases. The Auditor-Controller shall cause the amount of
the same to be entered upon the property from which abatement was accomplished,
and the said special assessment and tax shall be included upon the next
succeeding tax statement. Thereafter, the amounts of the assessment shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as County taxes are
collected, and are subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and
sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary County taxes, except that
if any real property to which such lien would attach has been transferred or
conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide
encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date
on which the first installment of such taxes would become delinquent, then the
lien which would otherwise be imposed by this Section shall not attach to such
real property and the costs of abatement, as confirmed, relating to such
property shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
   (b)   Appeals. Any appeal from these charges must be filed within 60
calendar days from the date of billing or receipt of a tax bill that shows
abatement charges. The appeal procedure shall be the same as specified in §
23.0508 of this Chapter, and the Appeal Board’s decision shall be conclusive.
   (c)   Cancellation of Claim. All or any portion of any such special
assessment, penalty or costs heretofore entered shall on order of the Board of
Appeals be canceled by the Auditor-Controller if uncollected or, except in the
case provided for in Subdivision (c)(5) hereof, refunded by the County
Treasurer if collected, if it or they were entered, charged, or paid:
      (1)   More than once;
      (2)   Through clerical error;
      (3)   Through the error or mistake (regarding any material fact relevant
to the determination of a claim) by the Board of Appeals, the Division or the
person designated by them to give notice to abate;
      (4)   Illegally; or
      (5)   On property acquired after the lien date by the State or by any
county, city, school district, or other political subdivision and because of
this public ownership is not subject to sale for delinquent taxes.
   (d)   Procedure for Refund of Payment. No order for a refund under the
foregoing Section shall be made except on a claim:
      (1)   Verified by the person who paid the special assessment, their
guardian, executor, or administrator;
      (2)   Filed within three years after making the payment sought to be
refunded.
(Ord. 3835, passed - -2001)
CHAPTER 6: PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND HEARING PROCEDURES FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
   
23.0601   Authority.
   
23.0602   Current CUPA Operational Permit Required.
   
23.0603   Division Plan Review and Construction Permits Required.
   
23.0604   Administration of CUPA Permits, Special Processing Fees and
Penalties.
   
23.0605   Operating With an Expired Permit Unlawful.
   
23.0606   Grounds for Revocation of CUPA Permits; Administrative Procedures and
Penalties for Continued Operation.
   
23.0607   New CUPA Permit Required After Revocation.
   
23.0608   Grounds for Summary Suspension of CUPA Permit and Penalties for
Continued Operation.
   
23.0609   Inspections.
   
23.0610   Administrative Hearing Procedures.
§ 23.0601   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 4 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code, the
Department shall enforce the following permits and hearing procedures.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0602   Current CUPA Operational Permit Required.
   (a)   No person or entity shall own, operate or allow the operation of any
activity or facility subject to the requirements of the CUPA Permit Program
Elements, whether for permanent or temporary activities, including but not
limited to the generation, production, storage, treatment or other handling of
hazardous materials or hazardous waste, nor own or operate a transporter
facility as defined in §
23.0711(d) of this Code, without first applying for, receiving, and retaining
an unexpired, unrevoked, unsuspended, CUPA permit for each activity or facility
and paying fees in those amounts specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (b)   The CUPA permit includes, but is not limited to, the following six
Program Elements as described in Articles
1-
6 of
Chapter 7 of Division 3 of Title 2 of this Code:
      (1)   Hazardous waste generators and hazardous waste on-site treatment;
      (2)   Underground storage tanks;
      (3)   Hazardous material release response plans and inventories;
      (4)   California accidental release prevention (CALARP) program;
      (5)   Above ground storage tanks (Ast) (Spill prevention control and
countermeasure plan only);
      (6)   Uniform Fire Code Hazardous Material Management Plans and
Inventories.
   (c)   Each applicant shall provide all relevant information regarding:
      (1)   Assessor’s parcel number;
      (2)   Board of Equalization number;
      (3)   All past and present DBAs and fictitious business names;
      (4)   Driver’s license number and state of issue;
      (5)   Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or State EPA
identification number;
      (6)   Federal tax identification number/social security number;
      (7)   Dunn & Bradstreet number;
      (8)   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the business, the applicant,
and the owner;
      (9)   Name and 24 hour phone number of the emergency contact person;
      (10)   Number and type of employees;
      (11)   Number of underground storage tanks;
      (12)   Standard Industrial Code (SIC) number for all locations; and
      (13)   A declaration under penalty of perjury that the information
provided is true and correct.
   (d)   In addition to (c)(1) through (c)(13) above, each applicant shall
provide all relevant information required for each applicable Program Element
as described in Articles
1-
6 of
Chapter 7 of Division 3 of Title 2 of this Code.
   (e)   Any person or entity who has been issued a valid CUPA Operational
Permit shall notify the Division of any changes in management or ownership.
   (f)   Issuance of a CUPA Operational Permit by the Division shall be in no
way construed as authorization for land use approval, nor shall it preclude any
state or local permitting agency requirements.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0603   Division Plan Review and Construction Permits Required.
   (a)   No person or entity shall commence any construction activity, remodel,
alteration, addition or change in equipment and/or scope of operation for any
activity or facility subject to the CUPA’s permitting and enforcement authority
as stated in §
23.0401 of this Code, whether permanent or temporary, without first obtaining
written approval of three sets, or more as required herein, of detailed plans
accompanied with plan check fees in those amounts specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (b)   Scaled plans shall be in conventional form that allows rapid review.
Where complex, unique, or peculiar public health and safety risks may be
created by the proposed activity or facility, the Division may require special
engineering studies sufficient to demonstrate that every reasonable action to
eliminate or reduce such risks has or will be undertaken. No deviation from
approved or corrected plans shall occur without written approval. No
construction or related activity shall occur at the job site without approved
or corrected plans being present. Inspection and approval shall be obtained at
the completion of each construction phase.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0604   Administration of CUPA Permits, Special Processing Fees and
Penalties.
   Except as otherwise provided in Chapters
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code, CUPA permits shall not
be transferable from one person or entity to another or from one location to
another. Each CUPA permit shall be placed in a conspicuous place at the
permitted facility. Permit holders shall renew CUPA permits prior to their
expiration. The Division may assess reasonable special processing fees and
delinquent fees against any activity or facility operating without a CUPA
permit; with an expired, suspended, or revoked CUPA permit; and when checks are
returned without payment all as set forth in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of this Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0605   Operating With an Expired Permit Unlawful.
   Any person or entity operating or allowing the operation of any activity or
facility subject to this Chapter with a CUPA permit expired for more than 30
calendar days without having made application for renewal, shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each day or portion thereof such violation exists as
specified in §
23.0412 of of this Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0606   Grounds for Revocation of CUPA Permits; Administrative Procedures
and Penalties for Continued Operation.
   (a)   The Division may revoke CUPA permits for noncompliance with applicable
law or otherwise for just cause where the health or safety of the public may be
endangered.
    (b)   Prior to such revocation, the Division shall, pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code, notify the CUPA permit
holder to show cause why the CUPA permit should not be revoked. The
notification shall state the allegations and facts leading to its issuance.
   (c)   Unless the CUPA permit is also suspended in addition to being revoked,
any activity or facility may continue to operate pending action on the
Administrative Order to Show Cause regarding revocation.
   (d)   Continued operation of any activity or facility after revocation or
suspension of relevant CUPA permits is an infraction or misdemeanor pursuant to
§
23.0412 of this Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0607   New CUPA Permit Required after Revocation.
   All conditions upon which the Division based a revocation shall be corrected
prior to an activity or facility being granted a new CUPA permit. Where
revocation of a CUPA permit has occurred, the applicant shall apply in the
manner provided for new applicants, shall pay all appropriate fees, and shall
include a certificate of compliance signed by the applicant that all conditions
upon which the revocation was based have been completely corrected. An
inspection by this Division shall be conducted to verify that all outstanding
violations have been corrected prior to issuance of a new CUPA permit.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0608   Grounds for Summary Suspension of CUPA Permit and Penalties for
Continued Operation.
   The Division may summarily suspend a CUPA permit when an Investigative
Officer finds continued operation of the facility or activity constitutes an
immediate public health risk. Any person continuing to operate any activity or
facility after suspension of CUPA permit shall be guilty of an infraction
offense or misdemeanor offense pursuant to §
23.0412 of this Code. Any suspension shall remain in effect until such time
that it is determined that grounds for suspension no longer exist.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0609   Inspections.
   (a)   The Division will conduct routine inspections of every facility that
is subject to the requirements of the CUPA Permit Program Elements within its
jurisdiction.
   (b)   After each inspection, the Division will prepare an inspection report,
detailing the inspection and will furnish a copy to the permit holder.
   (c)   In addition to, or in lieu of, the inspections specified in
Subdivision (a), the Division may require the permit holder to employ special
inspectors to periodically conduct an audit or assessment of the permit
holder’s facility to determine whether the facility is in compliance with
applicable Sections of the California Health and Safety Code, the California
Code of Regulations and this Code, and to prepare a special inspection report
with recommendations concerning the storage of hazardous materials or hazardous
waste in compliance with the CUPA permit.
      (1)   The report shall contain recommendations for compliance with CUPA
permit requirements. A copy of the report shall be filed with this Division at
the same time the inspector submits the report to the permit holder.
      (2)   Within 30 calendar days after receiving this report, the CUPA
permit holder shall file with the Division a plan to implement all
recommendations for CUPA permit compliance contained in the report or shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Division why these recommendations
should not be implemented.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0610   Administrative Hearing Procedures.
   Notwithstanding any other administrative procedure of the County, and unless
otherwise specified by State law, the following administrative procedures shall
apply to all hearings required pursuant to orders written pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code. The following
procedure shall not be applicable to hearings before the San Bernardino County
Board of Supervisors.
   (a)   An appeal made under this Section shall be made in writing and filed
with the County Fire Chief within 15 calendar days of receipt of an order
written pursuant to provisions of Chapters
4,
5,
6 and
7 of
Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County Code. The appeal shall
contain the address to which the notice of hearing shall be sent in order for
the appeal to be valid.
   (b)   The hearing officer shall be the County Fire Chief or another person
appointed by the Chief. Any such appointee shall be a person who has no
knowledge of the facts of the particular case at the outset of the hearing and
a person who is not immediately involved with enforcement activities pertaining
to the particular activity or facility concerned.
   (c)   For permit revocation proceedings pursuant to §
23.0606 of this Chapter, the hearing shall be held within 15 calendar days
after receipt of a request for a hearing. For permit post-suspension
proceedings pursuant to §
23.0608 of this Chapter, the hearing shall be held within five calendar days
after receipt of a request for a hearing. For all other proceedings, the
hearing shall be held within 90 calendar days after filing of a request for a
hearing. Upon written request of the permit holder, the hearing officer may
postpone the hearing date or it may be postponed or continued by stipulation of
the parties. If the party notified does not respond or appear, no further
hearing procedure shall be required.
   (d)   Witnesses shall swear or affirm to tell the truth. The oath or
affirmation shall be administered by the hearing officer. The investigative
officers shall present their case first with oral testimony, documentary or
other evidence. The responding party shall have the right to be represented by
counsel and shall have the right of cross-examination. The responding party may
present a response after the investigative officers have presented their case.
The investigative officers shall have the right of cross-examination. After
both sides have completed presenting evidence, the investigative officer may
comment on the evidence and argue. Thereafter, the responding party may do the
same.
   The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to
evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the
sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or
statutory rule that might make improper the admission of the evidence over
objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of
supplementing or explaining other evidence, but shall not be sufficient in
itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in
civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that
they are otherwise required by statute to be recognized at the hearing.
Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
   (e)   The Hearing Officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the
permittee within five County working days following the hearing. In the event
of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions
with which the permittee is charged and shall state the terms of the suspension
or that the permit has been revoked.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
CHAPTER 7: CUPA PERMIT ELEMENTS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Article
   
Article 1.   Hazardous Waste Generators and Hazardous Waste On-Site Treatment
CUPA Program Element.
   
Article 2.   Underground Storage Tanks CUPA Program Element.
   
Article 3.   Hazardous Material Release Response Plans and Inventories CUPA
Program Element.
   
Article 4.   California Accidental Release Prevention (CALARP) Program CUPA
Program Element.
   
Article 5.   Above Ground Storage Tanks CUPA Program Element.
   
Article 6.   Uniform Fire Code Hazardous Material Management Plans and
Inventories CUPA Program Element.
Article 1. Hazardous Waste Generators and Hazardous
Waste On-Site Treatment CUPA Program Element.
Section
   
23.0710   Authority.
   
23.0711   Definitions.
   
23.0712   Permits Required.
   
23.0713   Requirements—General.
   
23.0714   Orders Specifying Compliance or Correction; and Orders To Cease and
Desist, Remediate, or Mitigate Disposal of Hazardous Waste.
   
23.0715   Administrative Penalties and Administrative Due Process.
   23.0716-19   (Reserved).
§ 23.0710   Authority.
   Health and Safety Code § 25404(c)(1) is enforced by the CUPA. In addition,
the following definitions and requirements of this Article shall apply to such
enforcement and to enforcement of the provisions of this Article.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0711   Definitions.
   GENERATOR. Any person, business or entity, by site, whose act or process
produces hazardous waste identified or listed in Title 22 of the California
Code of Regulations. GENERATOR includes:
      (1)   HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATOR. Any person or business that produces or
generates a hazardous waste in any quantity;
      (2)   LIMITED QUANTITY HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATOR. Any person or business
that generates a hazardous waste in quantities equal to or less than five
gallons or 50 pounds per month; and
      (3)   SPECIAL HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATOR. Any person or business that only
generates and completely recycles one or more of the following hazardous
wastes: used oil, waste ethylene glycol automotive antifreeze, waste dry
cleaning solvents and solids, waste silver and silver containing solutions from
photo imaging, and waste non-halogenated automotive parts cleaning solvents.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste or mixture of wastes that is toxic, corrosive,
flammable, an irritant, a strong sensitizer or that generates pressure through
decomposition, heat or other means, if such waste or mixture of wastes may
cause substantial injury, serious illness or harm to human health and safety or
the environment, domestic livestock or wildlife. It shall also include all
wastes so defined by the Health and Safety Code (including but not limited to
§§ 25115, 25117, and 25316), and all hazardous wastes listed or defined in the
Code of Regulations Title 22.
   ON-SITE TREATMENT. Treatment of hazardous waste at the facility at which the
hazardous waste is produced. One or more of the following Tiered Permits as
defined in Health and Safety Code §§ 25110 et seq., are required for on-site
treatment:
      (1)   Conditional authorization (CA);
      (2)   Conditional Exemption (CE);
      (3)   Permit-by-rule (PBR).
   TRANSPORTER FACILITY. An approved commercial location at which hazardous
waste is stored for periods of less than 96 hours prior to delivery to a
permitted treatment, storage or disposal facility.
   TREATMENT. Any method, technique, or process that is not otherwise excluded
from the definition of treatment by Health and Safety Code § 25123.5, and that
is designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological character or
composition of any hazardous waste or any material contained therein, or that
removes or reduces its harmful properties or characteristics for any purpose.
Treatment does not include the removal of residues from manufacturing process
equipment for the purposes of cleaning that equipment.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0712   Permits Required.
   (a)   In addition to the requirements of §
23.0602 of this Code, permits and fees shall also apply to all construction,
modification, remodel and repair activities relating to any hazardous waste
generation, production, storage, transportation or treatment.
   (b)   In addition to the requirements of §
23.0602(c) of this Code, the following information is required:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone numbers of all operators and/or
owners of any transporter facility;
      (2)   The site address where hazardous waste is generated or produced if
different from the facility address;
      (3)   A listing of the types of hazardous waste generated, the volume of
each type of hazardous waste generated on a monthly basis, and the method by
which each type of hazardous waste is treated, recycled or disposed of at each
location;
      (4)   Names of all haulers and/or recyclers;
      (5)   A production process flow chart, that shall list all hazardous
materials and how they are used in each production process, what products are
produced, what hazardous and non-hazardous wastes are generated and the type
and quantity of all solvents and any other substances used in all maintenance/
clean-up activities related to each production process;
      (6)   As a condition of any permit to generate or produce hazardous
waste, the permittee shall prepare a Contingency Plan as defined in Code of
Regulations §§ 66260.10 and 66265.50 et seq. and shall notify the Division of
any changes in hazardous waste produced and/or production processes;
      (7)   As a condition of any permit for on-site treatment of hazardous
waste, the permittee shall complete and submit an Onsite Hazardous Waste
Treatment Notification Form.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0713   Requirements—General.
   (a)   All requirements of Code of Regulations Title 22, that implement the
requirements of Health and Safety Code §§ 25100 et seq., must be complied with,
including but not limited to the management, determination, identification,
analysis, storage, labeling, containment, treatment, reporting, manifesting,
transportation and disposal of hazardous waste, and/or waste oil, and/or waste
oil filters, and/or waste lead acid batteries; and including the requirements
regarding personnel/training records and hazardous waste contingency plans.
   (b)   Except as provided in Health and Safety Code §§ 25160 et seq., it is
unlawful for any person to transport hazardous waste unless registered with the
Department of Toxic Substances Control as a Hazardous Waste Transporter. Such
registration shall be in the possession of the transporter when transporting
hazardous waste.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0714   Orders Specifying Compliance or Correction; and Orders To Cease and
Desist, Remediate, or Mitigate Disposal of Hazardous Waste.
   (a)   Whenever the Department, Chief or Investigative Officer of the
Division of Hazardous Materials determines that any person has violated, is in
violation of, or threatens to violate those laws and regulations that fall
within the Department’s scope of authority pursuant to Health and Safety Code
§§ 25100 et seq. (Hazardous Waste Control), or the Department, the Chief or
Investigative Officer determines there has been a release as defined in Health
and Safety Code §§ 25300 et seq. of hazardous waste or constituents into the
environment from a hazardous waste facility, the Department, the Chief or
Investigative Officer may issue an order requiring a correction of the
violation, and specifying a schedule for compliance or correction.
   (b)   Whenever the Department, Chief or Investigative Officer of the
Division of Hazardous Materials determines that any person is disposing or has
illegally disposed of a hazardous waste or hazardous material to the air, soil,
or waters within its jurisdiction, the Department, Chief or Investigative
Officer may issue to the person an order to cease and desist from disposing of
the hazardous materials and/or hazardous waste, or to remediate, cleanup, or
mitigate such a disposal. Failure to comply with the order is a violation of
Chapter 7 of Division 3 of Title 2, and is punishable as set forth in §
23.0715 of this Code.
   (c)   The person ordered to comply may request a hearing pursuant to Health
and Safety Code § 25187. If the Department finds that the violation associated
with any provision of the order poses an imminent and substantial endangerment
to the public health or safety or the environment, a request for a hearing
shall not stay the effect of that provision of the order.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0715   Administrative Penalties and Administrative Due Process.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided, any person in violation of
Article 1 of Chapter 7 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino County
Code shall be subject to an administrative penalty pursuant to Code of
Regulations §§ 66272.60 et seq. when issued an administrative enforcement order
pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 25187; or as otherwise provided by law.
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided, any person who has been issued an
administrative enforcement order shall be served by personal service or
certified mail and shall be informed of the right to a hearing pursuant to the
provisions of Health and Safety Code § 25187; or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§§ 23.0716—19   (Reserved).
Article 2. Underground Storage Tanks CUPA Program Element.
Section
   
23.0720   Authority.
   
23.0721   Definitions.
   
23.0722   CUPA Permit and Fees Required.
   
23.0723   CUPA UST Installation and Modification Requirements.
   
23.0724   CUPA UST Permit Application and Conditions.
   
23.0725   Inspections.
   
23.0726   Modifying and Terminating CUPA UST Permits.
   
23.0727   CUPA Permit to Repair or Upgrade Existing Underground Storage Tanks.
   
23.0728   Tank Entry Guidelines for Maintenance, Repair, Lining and Bladder
Installations.
   
23.0729   Storage Tanks Not in Use.
   
23.07210   Temporary Closure.
   
23.07211   Permanent Closure by Removal.
   
23.07212   Permanent Closure in Place.
   
23.07213   Sampling Analysis for Closures.
   
23.07214   Corrective Action Requirements.
   23.07215-299   (Reserved).
§ 23.0720   Authority.
   Health and Safety Code § 25404(c)(3) is enforced by the CUPA. In addition,
the following definitions and requirements of this Article shall apply to such
enforcement and to enforcement of the provisions of this Article.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0721   Definitions.
   CONSTRUCTION OF AN UNDERGROUND TANK SYSTEM. To build or manufacture an
underground tank system or any part thereof, that does not qualify as a repair
or modification of an underground tank system.
   INSTALLATION OF AN UNDERGROUND TANK SYSTEM. Occurs when an underground tank
is placed in the ground or when an underground tank system is replaced by
another underground tank system.
   MODIFICATION OF AN UNDERGROUND TANK SYSTEM. Occurs when changes or upgrades
are made that alter the tanks, piping, dispensers, sumps, manways or monitoring
of an underground tank system through structural additions or deletions.
   PERMANENT CLOSURE BY REMOVAL OF AN UNDERGROUND TANK SYSTEM. Occurs when an
underground tank system has ceased the storage of hazardous substances and the
underground tank system will not be used, or is not intended to be used, for
storage of hazardous substances, and will be removed.
   PERMANENT CLOSURE IN PLACE OF AN UNDERGROUND TANK SYSTEM. Occurs when an
underground tank system has ceased the storage of hazardous substances and the
underground tank system will not be used, or is not intended to be used, for
storage of hazardous substances, and will not be removed.
   RELEASE. Any spilling, overfilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into
the environment.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. One or more of the following:
      (1)   Any person who owns or operates an underground storage tank used
for the storage of any hazardous waste or material;
      (2)   Any person who owned or operated the underground storage tank
immediately before the discontinuation of its use, in the case of any
underground storage tank no longer in use;
      (3)   Any owner of property where a release of a hazardous waste or
material from an underground storage tank has occurred; and
      (4)   Any person who has or had control over an underground storage tank
at the time of or following a release of a hazardous waste or material.
   SPECIAL INSPECTORS. Each and all of the following:
      (1)   A professional engineer registered pursuant to Business and
Professions Code §§ 6700 et seq., who is qualified to attest to structural
soundness, seismic safety, the compatibility of construction materials with
contents, cathodic protections and the mechanical compatibility of the
structural elements regarding underground storage tanks.
      (2)   A professional engineer registered pursuant to Business and
Professions Code §§ 6700 et seq., who is certified as a cathodic engineer or a
corrosion specialist for linings and cathodic protection by the National
Association of Cathodic Engineers (N.A.C.E.).
      (3)   A certified industrial hygienist registered pursuant to Business
and Professions Code §§ 20700 et seq., to assure compliance with health and
safety issues, appropriate testing and compliance with industry standards.
      (4)   A person with valid certification issued by the State of California
pursuant to Health and Safety § 20701 as appropriate for the types of
inspections and oversight directed by the Division, for upgrading underground
storage tanks.
   SUBSTANTIALLY BENEATH THE SURFACE OF THE GROUND. That at least ten percent
of the total capacity of the underground tank system is below grade, dug into
the earth, or placed in a vault or basement below the general ground surface.
   TANK. A stationary device designed to contain an accumulation of hazardous
substances for any period of time, that is constructed primarily of non-earthen
materials (e.g., wood, concrete, steel, plastic) that provide structural
support.
      (1)   ABOVEGROUND STORAGE TANK is defined in §
23.0751(a) of this Code.
      (2)   UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK (UST) means any one or combination of
tanks, including pipes connected thereto, that is used for the storage of
hazardous substances and that is totally or substantially beneath the surface
of the ground.
   TEMPORARY CLOSURE OF AN UNDERGROUND TANK SYSTEM. An underground tank system
in which the storage of hazardous substances has ceased but the underground
tank system is intended to be used for the storage of hazardous substances
within the next 12 months.
   UNDERGROUND TANK SYSTEM. An underground storage tank, connected piping,
ancillary equipment, and containment system, if any.
   UPGRADE. The addition or retrofit of any part of the underground tank system
such as cathodic protection, internal lining, secondary containment, spill
containment, overfill protection or any other activity designed to achieve
compliance with State or Federal regulations for containment or monitoring of
underground storage tanks.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0722   CUPA Permit and Fees Required.
   (a)   Within the County of San Bernardino, no person or entity shall
construct, install, own, operate, test, monitor, certify, inspect, modify,
repair, replace, remove, upgrade or abandon an underground storage tank of any
kind or store hazardous materials/waste underground except with an unexpired,
unsuspended, unrevoked CUPA permit issued pursuant to §
23.0602 of this Code, and plan review and construction permits issued pursuant
to §
23.0603 of this Code.
   (b)   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 101490, corrective action
oversight services provided by the Division that are not reimbursed through
contract with the State Water Resources Control Board shall be reimbursed
directly to the Division by the responsible parties at a rate specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0723   CUPA UST Installation and Modification Requirements.
   The San Bernardino County Fire Department Installation and Modification
Requirements for New and Existing Underground Storage Tanks are to be met by
the permittee and are enforced by the CUPA.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0724   CUPA UST Permit Application and Conditions.
   (a)   Application for a CUPA permit UST program element shall be made on the
standardized form provided by the Division. In addition to the requirements of
§
23.0602 of this Code, all of the requirements of Code of Regulations Chapter 16
of Division 3 of Title 23 shall be met. In addition to the requirements of §
23.0602(c) of this Code, the following information is required:
      (1)   A description of the construction of the underground storage tank;
      (2)   A list of all the hazardous materials or hazardous waste that are
or will be stored in the underground storage tanks, specifying the hazardous
materials or hazardous waste for each underground storage tank;
      (3)   A description of the monitoring program for the underground storage
tank;
      (4)   The name and address of the person, firm, corporation or legal
entity which owns the underground storage tank and if different, the name, Dunn
& Bradstreet Number, Federal Identification Number, Driver’s License Number,
Social Security Number, Board of Equalization Number and address of the person
who operates the underground storage tank;
      (5)   The address of the facility at which the underground storage tanks
are located;
      (6)   If the owner or operator of the underground storage tank is a
public agency, the application shall include the name of the supervisor of the
division, section or office that operates the underground storage tank.
   (b)   As a condition of any CUPA UST permit, the permittee shall complete an
annual report form, which details any changes in the usage of any underground
storage tank, including the storage of hazardous materials or hazardous waste,
changes in monitoring procedure or a release occurrence.
   (c)   If a permittee stores a hazardous material or hazardous waste in a
underground storage tank which is not listed in the application, the permittee
shall apply for a new or amended permit within 30 days after commencing the
storage of the hazardous material/waste.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0725   Inspections.
   Health and Safety Code §§ 25280 et seq. is enforced by the CUPA. In addition
to the requirements of Health and Safety Code Chapter 6.7 and §
23.0609 of this Code, the following is required:
   The inspection shall determine:
   (a)   Whether the UST complies with the design and construction standards of
Health and Safety Code §§ 25280 et seq. (Underground Storage of Hazardous
Substances), Code of Regulations §§ 2610 et seq. (Underground Tank
Regulations), and §§
23.0723 and
23.0727 of this Code; and
   (b)   Whether the operator has monitored and tested the UST as required by
the CUPA permit.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0726   Modifying and Terminating CUPA UST Permits.
   The Division shall review the permit whenever there has been a release, or
when a change in materials stored or the method of monitoring takes place. When
it determines that the underground storage tank is not complying with CUPA
permit requirements, the Division may modify or terminate the permit. In
determining whether to modify or terminate the permit, the Division shall
consider:
   (a)   The age of the underground storage tank;
   (b)   The methods of containment;
   (c)   The methods of monitoring;
   (d)   The feasibility of and required repairs;
   (e)   The concentration of the hazardous material or hazardous waste stored
in the underground storage tank;
   (f)   The severity of potential releases;
   (g)   The suitability of any other long-term preventive measures that would
meet the requirements of this Article;
   (h)   Whether all permit requirements have been met; and
   (i)   Whether monitoring and reporting have been properly carried out.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0727   CUPA Permit to Repair or Upgrade Existing Underground Storage
Tanks.
   (a)   In addition to §
23.0602 of this Code, pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 25299.2, and Code of
Regulations Chapter 16 of Division 3 of Title 23, and the State Water Resources
Control Board Local Guidance (LG) Letters, as now or hereinafter amended, the
following information is required when submitting an application for a CUPA
permit to repair or upgrade an existing underground storage tank:
      (1)   An application to construct, properly completed and signed;
      (2)   Name and business address of contractor(s) to perform any and all
tank work;
      (3)   Copy of contracts to perform underground storage tank work, proof
of valid contractor’s license, proof of workers’ compensation insurance, and
proof of a Hazardous Substance Certificate issued by the State of California
Consumer Affairs Board;
      (4)   Detailed work plan on all aspects of the project including any
required blueprints, site safety plans and copies of any other required
permits;
      (5)   Documents which demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Division
that the underground storage system is structurally sound and that the method
of repair or upgrade will prevent releases due to structural failure or
corrosion during the operating life of the underground storage tank system.
   (b)   In addition, the following is required:
      (1)   Prior to upgrading, the owner and/or operator shall submit
documents that demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Division that the
underground storage tank system has not caused a release. Before soil samples
are taken, the Division shall be notified a minimum of five days in advance so
that a representative of the Division may be present. A special inspection
permit may be required.
      (2)   Prior to upgrade, a preliminary assessment shall be submitted. The
Division shall review this report and require a site assessment to be
completed. Once the site assessment reports have been received the Division
shall grant or deny the upgrade within 45 days of receipt of the report.
      (3)   No person shall undertake any repair or upgrade, lining
installation, or entry into an underground storage tank for any purpose without
employing a Special Inspector. The Special Inspector shall have pre-approved
all work plans and site safety plans and shall, at the discretion of the
Division, be on site through all phases of the repair or upgrade project.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0728   Tank Entry Guidelines For Maintenance, Repair, Lining and Bladder
Installations.
   The San Bernardino County Fire Department Tank Entry Guidelines for
Maintenance, Repair, Lining and Bladder Installations are to be met by the
permittee and are enforced by the CUPA.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0729   Storage Tanks Not in Use.
   No person shall abandon, close or remove an underground storage tank,
temporarily cease operating an underground storage tank or gather soil and/or
water samples for the determination of contamination, except with a CUPA
permit.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.07210   Temporary Closure.
   (a)   An underground storage tank that is temporarily taken out of service,
but that the operator intends to return to use, shall continue to be subject to
all the CUPA permit, inspection and monitoring requirements.
   (b)   No person shall temporarily close an underground storage tank unless
the person undertakes all of the following actions to comply with CUPA permit
requirements:
      (1)   Demonstrates that all residual amounts of the hazardous substances
that were stored in the underground storage tank prior to its closure have been
removed, properly disposed of and neutralized;
      (2)   Adequately seals the underground storage tank to minimize any
threat to public health and safety and the possibility of water intrusion into
or runoff from the underground storage tank;
      (3)   Provides for and carries out the maintenance of the underground
storage tank for the period of time determined necessary by the Division;
      (4)   Demonstrates through monitoring and testing records that there has
been no soil contamination resulting from a discharge in the area surrounding
the underground storage tank or facility.
   (c)   No person shall re-open a temporarily closed tank or tank facility
until all requirements of Code of Regulations § 2671(d) and applicable Sections
of this Code have been met.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.07211   Permanent Closure by Removal.
   (a)   No person shall remove underground storage tanks or gather soils or
groundwater samples to be used for closure or contamination determination
without a qualified and authorized representative of the Division present.
   (b)   Owners or operators of underground storage tanks subject to permanent
closure by removal shall comply with applicable provisions of Code of
Regulations § 2672(b) and with the following requirements:
      (1)   When an underground storage tank or any part thereof is disposed
of, the owner or operator shall document to the Division that proper disposal
has been completed. This documentation shall be submitted to the Division
within 30 days of the disposal.
      (2)   An owner or operator of an underground storage tank or any part
thereof that is destined for a specific reuse shall provide the following
information in writing to the Division within 30 days after removal and before
the reuse of such tank or any part thereof:
         (A)   The names of the new owner and new operator of the underground
storage tank;
         (B)   The location of intended use;
         (C)   The nature of intended use; and
         (D)   Proof there are no hazardous materials remaining in the tank.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.07212   Permanent Closure in Place.
   (a)   No person shall close an underground storage tank in place unless it
can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of this Division that to remove the
underground storage tank would cause excessive structural damage to a structure
or structures that are currently inhabitable, or would cause unreasonable risk
to life, health, or property.
      (1)   A Registered Professional Engineer shall certify that the
underground storage tank meets the above minimum requirements.
   (b)   Owners or operators of underground storage tanks subject to permanent
closure in place shall comply with all applicable provisions of Code of
Regulations §§ 2672 et seq., and with the following requirements:
      (1)   All liquids, solids or sludges shall be removed and handled as
hazardous waste or recyclable materials in accordance with Health and Safety
Code §§ 25100 et seq. and §§ 25280 et seq.
      (2)   If the underground storage tank contained a hazardous material or
hazardous waste that could produce flammable vapors at standard temperature and
pressure, it shall be inerted to levels that shall preclude explosion or to
lower levels as may be required by the Division.
      (3)   All piping associated with the underground storage tank shall be
removed and disposed of, unless removal might damage structures or other pipes
that are being used and that are contained in a common trench, in which case
the piping to be closed shall be emptied of all contents and capped.
      (4)   The underground storage tank, except for piping that is closed in
accordance with Subdivision (3) above, shall be completely filled with an inert
solid.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.07213   Sampling Analysis for Closures.
   The owner or operator of an underground storage tank being closed pursuant
to this Article shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Division that no
release has occurred. This demonstration shall be based on soil sample analysis
and/or water analysis. This analysis shall be performed during or immediately
after closure activities. If the demonstration is based on soil sample
analysis, soil samples shall be taken and analyzed as follows:
   (a)   If the underground storage tank or any portion thereof is removed,
soil samples shall be taken immediately beneath the removed portions of the
tank and at a minimum of two feet into native material at each end of the tank
in accordance with Code of Regulations § 2649. A separate sample shall be taken
for each 20 lineal feet of trench for piping.
   (b)   If the underground storage tank or any portion thereof cannot be
removed, at least two borings shall be taken as close as possible to the
endpoint beneath the tank using a slant boring (mechanical or manual) or other
appropriate method, such as vertical borings drilled on each long dimensional
side of the tank.
   (c)   Soils shall be analyzed in accordance with Code of Regulations § 2649
for all constituents of the previously stored hazardous materials or hazardous
waste and their breakdown or transformation products. When key constituents
that pose a significant threat to water quality or the environment can be
identified for analysis, the Division may waive the requirement for analysis of
all constituents, breakdown or transformation products.
   (d)   An original copy of the sample analysis with a Quality Assurance and
Quality Control Report in accordance with Code of Regulations §§ 2650 et seq.,
shall be sent directly to this Division within 60 calendar days of the sample
date.
   (e)   The detection of any reportable release shall require compliance with
Code of Regulations §§ 2650 et seq., and the applicable requirements of §
23.07214 of this Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.07214   Corrective Action Requirements.
   (a)   Responsible parties for an underground storage tank shall comply with
the requirements of this Section whenever there is any release reportable
pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 25295.
   (b)   Responsible parties shall conduct investigations of any release, the
release site and the surrounding area possibly affected by the release and take
corrective action in compliance with the following requirements:
      (1)   All applicable waste discharge requirements or other order issued
pursuant to Water Code §§ 13000 et seq.(Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control
Act);
      (2)   All applicable State policies for water quality control adopted
pursuant to Water Code §§ 13140 et seq.;
      (3)   All applicable water quality control plans adopted pursuant to
Water Code §§ 13240 et seq.;
      (4)   All applicable requirements of Health and Safety Code §§ 25280 et
seq., and the regulations of Code of Regulations §§ 2610 et seq. promulgated
thereto; and
      (5)   All applicable requirements of Health and Safety Code §§ 25299.36
et seq. and §§ 25100 et seq., and Code of Regulations §§ 66001 et seq.
   (c)   Corrective action includes one or more of the following phases:
      (1)   Preliminary site assessment phase;
      (2)   Soil, air and water investigation phase;
      (3)   Corrective action plan implementation phase; and
      (4)   Verification monitoring phase.
   (d)   Responsible parties shall take or contract for interim remedial
actions, as necessary, to abate or correct the actual or potential effects of a
release. Interim remedial actions can occur concurrently with any phase of
corrective action. Before taking interim remedial action, responsible parties
shall notify the Division of the proposed action and shall comply with any
requirements the Division sets. Interim remedial actions include, but are not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Removal of free product;
      (2)   Enhanced biodegradation to promote bacterial decomposition of
contaminants;
      (3)   Excavation and disposal of contaminated soil;
      (4)   Vacuum extraction of contaminants from soil or groundwater; and
      (5)   Pumping and treatment of groundwater to remove dissolved
contaminants.
   (e)   The responsible party shall submit a work plan to the Division prior
to implementing any portions of its corrective action. The work plan shall
include the proposed actions and a proposed schedule for their completion. The
responsible party shall modify the work plan, as necessary, at the direction of
the Division.
   (f)   Implementation of the work plan may begin no less than 60 calendar
days after submittal, unless the responsible party is otherwise directed by the
Division. At least five working days before beginning these activities, the
responsible party or its representative shall:
      (1)   Notify the Division of the intent to initiate the proposed actions
included in the work plan submitted; and
      (2)   Comply with any conditions set by the Division, including
mitigation of adverse consequences from cleanup activities.
   (g)   The Preliminary Site Assessment Phase includes, at a minimum, initial
site investigation, initial abatement actions and initial site characterization
in accordance with Code of Regulations §§ 2652, 2653, and 2654 and any interim
remedial actions taken in accordance with Subdivision (d) of this Section.
Implementation of any of the interim remedial actions or any of the activities
included in the preliminary site assessment shall constitute initiation of
corrective action.
   (h)   The soil, air and water investigation phase includes the collection
and analysis of data necessary to assess the nature, vertical and lateral
extent of the release and to determine effective methods of cleanup. Using
information obtained during the investigation, the responsible party shall
propose a corrective action plan and submit it to the Division for review and
concurrence. The responsible party is required to demonstrate to the Division
that the corrective action plan will adequately protect human health and safety
and the environment, and will restore or protect current or potential
beneficial uses of water. The responsible party shall modify the corrective
action plan in response to the directives of the Division.
   (i)   The corrective action plan implementation phase consists of carrying
out the alternative selected during the soil, air and water investigation phase
for remediation or mitigation of the actual or potential adverse effects of the
release. Upon concurrence with the corrective action plan or as directed by the
Division, the responsible party shall implement, monitor, evaluate and report
the results of implementation of the corrective action plan on a schedule
agreed to by the Division. The responsible party shall modify or suspend clean-
up activities when directed to do so by the Division.
   (j)   The verification monitoring phase includes all activities required to
verify implementation of the corrective action plan and evaluate its
effectiveness. The responsible party shall verify completion of the corrective
action plan through sampling or other monitoring of soil, air and/or water for
such period of time and at intervals agreed to by the Division. Using the
monitoring results obtained pursuant to this Subdivision and any other relevant
data obtained pursuant to this Section, the responsible party shall evaluate
the effectiveness of the site work.
   (k)   The responsible party shall submit monitoring data and an evaluation
of the results of such monitoring in writing on a schedule and for a duration
agreed to by the Division.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§§ 23.07215 — 299   (Reserved).
Article 3. Hazardous Material Release Response Plans
and Inventories CUPA Program Element.
Section
   
23.0730   Authority.
   
23.0731   Definitions.
   
23.0732   Requirements—General.
   23.0733-39   (Reserved).
§ 23.0730   Authority.
   Health and Safety Code §§ 25404(c)(4) and §§ 25500 et seq. are enforced by
the CUPA. In addition, the following definitions and requirements of this
Article shall apply to such enforcement and to enforcement of the provisions of
this Article.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0731   Definitions.
   BUSINESS. An employer, self-employed individual, trust, firm, joint stock
company, corporation, partnership, or association, and also includes a business
organized for profit and a nonprofit business.
   BUSINESS PLAN. A separate plan for each facility, site or branch of a
business that meets the requirements of Health and Safety Code § 25504.
   HANDLE. To use, generate, process, produce, package, treat, store, emit,
discharge or dispose of a hazardous material in any fashion.
   HANDLER. Any business that handles a hazardous material.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any material that, because of its quantity,
concentration or physical or chemical characteristics poses a significant
present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if
released into the workplace or the environment. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS include,
but are not limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous waste and any material
that a handler or the CUPA has a reasonable basis for believing would be
injurious to the health and safety of persons or harmful to the environment if
released into the workplace or the environment.
   RELEASE. Any spilling, overfilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing
into the environment.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0732   Requirements—General.
   (a)   A business plan is required of any person, business or entity that
handles a hazardous material or a mixture containing a hazardous material,
except as specifically exempted in Health and Safety Code § 25503.5, if the
handler handles:
      (1)   A total quantity, whether in one container or multiple containers,
of any single material at one time during the reporting year that is equal to
or greater than a total weight of 500 pounds, a total volume of 55 gallons or
200 cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure for compressed gases; or
      (2)   A radioactive material in quantities for which an emergency plan is
required to be adopted pursuant to Title 10 of the Code of Federal Regulations;
or
      (3)   A Category 1 or Category 2 pesticide in any amount; or
      (4)   A DOT Class 1 explosive in any amount, or
      (5)   An extremely hazardous substance listed in Code of Federal
Regulations Appendix A of Part 355 of Title 40 in quantities at or exceeding
the threshold planning quantity; or
      (6)   Material which requires a business plan according to Health and
Safety Code §§ 25500 et seq.
   (b)   Except as provided in Health and Safety § 25507(b) relating to
transportation of hazardous materials on a highway, the handler or any
employee, authorized representative, agent or designee of a handler shall upon
discovery immediately report any release or threatened release of a hazardous
material to the CUPA and to the Office of Emergency Services in accordance with
the regulations adopted pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 25503. Each
handler and any employee, authorized representative, agent or designee of a
handler shall provide all State, city or county fire or public health or safety
personnel and emergency rescue personnel with access to the handler’s
facilities pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 25507.
   (c)   The CUPA, pursuant to subdivision (c)(2) of Section 25503.5 of the
Health and Safety Code, has found the following hazardous materials, under
stated circumstances, would not pose a present or potential danger to the
environment or to human health and safety if released into the environment.
Therefore, the following hazardous materials stored in the following manner are
exempt from provisions of Article 3 of Chapter 7 of Division 3 of Title 2 of
the San Bernardino County Code:
      (1)   Carbon dioxide gas used for carbonation of beverages and stored in
quantities of not more than six thousand (6,000) cubic feet at standard
temperature and pressure.
      (2)   Helium gas used for inflation of balloons and stored in quantities
of not more than six thousand (6,000) cubic feet at standard temperature and
pressure.
(Ord. 3846, passed --2002; Am. Ord. 4154, passed - -2011)
§§ 23.0733—39   (Reserved).
Article 4. California Accidental Release Prevention (CALARP) Program
CUPA Program Element.
Section
   
23.0740   Authority.
   23.0741-49   (Reserved).
§ 23.0740   Authority.
    Health and Safety Code §§ 25404(c)(5) and §§ 25531 et seq. are enforced by
the CUPA.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§§ 23.0741—49   (Reserved).
Article 5. Above Ground Storage Tanks CUPA Program Element.
Section
   
23.0750   Authority.
   
23.0751   Definitions.
   23.0752-59   (Reserved).
§ 23.0750   Authority.
   Health and Safety Code §§ 25404(c)(2) is enforced by the CUPA. In addition,
the following definitions shall apply to such enforcement and to enforcement of
the provisions of this Article.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0751   Definitions.
   ABOVE GROUND STORAGE TANK. Any above ground tank or container used for the
storage of petroleum.
   PETROLEUM. Crude oil, or any fraction thereof, that is liquid at 60°F
temperature and 14.7 pounds per square inch absolute pressure.
   RELEASE. Any spilling, overfilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into
the environment.
   SPILL PREVENTION, CONTROL AND COUNTERMEASURE PLAN. A plan which is required
to be prepared by each owner or operator of an above-ground storage tank
pursuant to the requirements of Health and Safety Code §§ 25270.5(c) in
accordance with the guidelines contained in 40 C.F.R. part 112.
   STORAGE. The containment, handling or treatment of petroleum, for any period
of time, including on a temporary basis.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§§ 23.0752—59   (Reserved).
Article 6. Uniform Fire Code Hazardous Material Management Plans
and Inventories CUPA Program Element.
Section
   
23.0760   Authority.
   
23.0761   Definitions.
   23.0762-69   (Reserved).
§ 23.0760   Authority.
   Health and Safety Code § 25404(c)(6) is enforced by the CUPA. In addition,
the following definitions shall apply to such enforcement and to enforcement of
the provisions of this Article.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 23.0761   Definitions.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INVENTORY STATEMENT or HMIS. A plan required by § 80.103
(c) (Article 80) of the Uniform Fire Code which each application for a permit
shall include when required by the Chief. A sample HMIS can be found in
Appendix II-E of the Uniform Fire Code.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS MANAGEMENT PLAN or HMMP. A plan required by § 80.103(b)
(Article 80) of the Uniform Fire Code which each application for a permit shall
include when required by the Chief. A sample HMMP can be found in Appendix II-
E of the Uniform Fire Code.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§§ 23.0762—69   (Reserved).
CHAPTER 8: COMPLIANCE WITH ROOF COVERING REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE FIRE SAFETY
OVERLAY
Section
   
23.0801    Compliance with Roof Covering Requirement Provisions of the County
Development Code and California Building Code.
§ 23.0801 Compliance with Roof Covering Requirement Provisions of the County
Development Code and California Building Code.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subdivisions (b) and (c) of this section, all
properties within the Fire Safety Overlay, as defined in §
82.13.030 of the County Code, shall be in compliance with County Code §
82.13.050(p)(4) prior to July 1, 2016.
   (b)   Structures registered in the California Register of Historical
Resources or other State or Federal government registers or official
inventories are exempt from this Section in accordance with §§ 18954 and 18955
of the California State Historical Building Code.
   (c)   A roof covering installed prior to January 1, 2009, with fire
retardant treated wood or other organic material with a Class A rated assembly,
under a permit from the County’s Building and Safety Division and supporting
documentation showing date of installation, is allowed if the roof covering is
inspected and approved in writing as to its condition by the Fire Chief or the
Fire Chief’s designee. The inspection will also include a review of the
property by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee for compliance with
County Code §
23.0301. If inspected and approved in writing by the Fire Chief or the Fire
Chief’s designee, the requirements of County Code §
82.13.050(p)(4) are held in abeyance 25 years past the final inspection
approval date identified on the County’s Building and Safety Division
construction permit for the roof covering or when the warranty of the roof
covering has expired, whichever comes first.
   (d)   Notwithstanding Subdivision (c) and except as provided in Subdivision
(b), all construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, conversions and/or
change of occupancy that causes a change in more than ten percent of the
existing total roof area or in at least 200 square feet of the existing total
roof area, whichever is smaller, of buildings and/or structures within the Fire
Safety Overlay as defined in §
82.13.030 of the County Code and mapped on the Fire Hazard Overlay Maps of the
County General Plan, shall, as to the entire roof structure, be brought into
and/or shall be in compliance with County Code §
82.13.050(p)(4). If any of the provisions of the California Building Code, as
adopted by the County Code, are in conflict with the provisions in this Section
or §
82.13.050(p)(4) of the County Code, the more restrictive in terms of fire/ember
resistance shall apply.
   (e)   Properties failing to meet the standards identified in this Section
shall be deemed not in compliance and, as such, property owners are subject to
available enforcement actions identified in §§
11.0201 et seq. of the County Code, including, but not limited to, civil,
administrative citation, and/or criminal actions, as well as the recordation of
a notice of pendency or a notice of action.
(Ord. 4059, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4225, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4369,
passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4369, passed - -2019)
DIVISION 4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT, PLACES AND PUBLICATIONS
CHAPTER 1: NUDE ENTERTAINMENT AND COMMERCIAL NUDITY
Section
   
24.0101   Alcoholic Beverage Establishments.
   
24.0102   Other Establishments.
   
24.0103   Commercial Nudity Other Than Entertainment.
   
24.0104   Employment or Payment Not Necessary For Offense.
§ 24.0101   Alcoholic Beverage Establishments.
   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, while acting as a waiter,
waitress or an entertainer in an establishment which serves or offers for sale
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of such establishment:
   (a)   To expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
   (b)   To expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
   (c)   To expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola.
(Ord. 2836, passed - -1984)
§ 24.0102   Other Establishments.
   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, while acting as an
entertainer in an establishment which does not serve or offer for sale
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of such establishment, and
while the person is located at any place in the establishment within view from
and closer than six feet to any area occupied by any customer or open to
customer use:
   (a)   To expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
   (b)   To expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
   (c)   To expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola.
(Ord. 2836, passed - -1984)
§ 24.0103   Commercial Nudity Other Than Entertainment.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, while engaged
in commercial activity other than as an entertainer:
      (1)   To expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
      (2)   To expose any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
      (3)   To expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola.
   (b)   This Section shall not apply to nudity at a resort or campground for
which site approval has been obtained pursuant to applicable land use
regulations.
(Ord. 2836, passed - -1984)
§ 24.0104   Employment or Payment Not Necessary For Offense.
   A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer, or to be
engaged in commercial activity, without regard to whether the person is
employed by or paid any compensation by the management of the establishment in
which the activity is performed, provided that the activity is performed in
furtherance of the establishment’s commercial enterprise.
(Ord. 2836, passed - -1984)
CHAPTER 2: REPEALED BY ORD. 3468, PASSED - -1991
CHAPTER 3: BLINDER RACKS
Section
   
24.0301   Definitions.
   
24.0302   Requirement of Blinder Racks.
   
24.0303   Penalty.
   
24.0304   Severability.
§ 24.0301   Definitions.
   Unless otherwise stated, words and terms are defined as follows:
   EXHIBIT. To show.
   HARMFUL MATTER. Matter, taken as a whole, which to the average person,
applying contemporary statewide standards, appeals to the prurient interest,
and is matter which, taken as a whole, depicts or describes in a patently
offensive way sexual conduct and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value for minors.
   KNOWINGLY. Being aware of the character of the matter.
   MATTER. Any book, magazine, newspaper, video recording, or other printed or
written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other
pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording,
transcription, or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other
articles, equipment, machines, or materials. MATTER also includes live or
recorded telephone messages when transmitted, disseminated, or distributed as
part of a commercial transaction.
   MINOR. Any natural person under 18 years of age.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or
other legal entity.
(Ord. 3412, passed - -1990)
§ 24.0302   Requirement of Blinder Racks.
   No material which is harmful to minors shall be displayed in any public
place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, unless
“blinder racks” are placed in front of the material, so that the lower two-
thirds of the material is not exposed to view.
(Ord. 3412, passed - -1990)
§ 24.0303   Penalty.
   Any person who violates this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of this Code.
(Ord. 3412, passed - -1990)
§ 24.0304   Severability.
   If any phrase, clause, sentence, section or provision of this Chapter or
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect any other phrase, clause, sentence, section,
provision, or application of this Chapter, which can be given effect without
the invalid phrase, clause, sentence, section, provision or application and to
this end the provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable.
(Ord. 3412, passed - -1990)
CHAPTER 4: OFF-LIMITS RULES AT MILITARY INSTALLATIONS (REPEALED BY ORD. 3896,
PASSED - -2003)
CHAPTER 5: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
Section
   
24.0501   Possession of Open Alcoholic Beverage Container on Premises of or on
Sidewalk Adjacent to Premises of Retail Package Licensee; Licensee Posting.
§ 24.0501   Possession of Open Alcoholic Beverage Container on Premises of or
on Sidewalk Adjacent to Premises of Retail Package Licensee; Licensee Posting.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful and an infraction for any person who has in his
or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic
beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have
been partially removed, to enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of,
including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package
off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to Business and
Professions Code §§ 23000 et seq., or on any public sidewalk immediately
adjacent to the licensed and posted premises. As used in this Section, POSTED
PREMISES means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail
package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately
adjacent to the licensed premises and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent
to the licensed premises on which clearly visible notices indicate to the
patrons of the licensee and parking lots and the persons on the public
sidewalk, that the provisions of this Section are applicable. The provisions of
this Section do not apply to a private residential parking lot which is
immediately adjacent to the posted premises.
   (b)   All retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees licensed
pursuant to Business and Professions Code §§ 23000 et seq. shall install and
maintain signs on the licensed premises, clearly visible to the patrons of the
licensee and to persons in or on any parking lot or public sidewalk immediately
adjacent to the licensed premises, which notify all such persons that the
provisions of Subdivision (a) of this Section are applicable. Any licensee
violating any provision of this Subdivision shall be guilty of an infraction.
(Ord. 3391, passed - -1990)
CHAPTER 6: SUBSEQUENT SHERIFF RESPONSE TO PARTIES, GATHERINGS AND EVENTS
Section
   
24.0601   Findings.
   
24.0602   Definitions.
   
24.0603   Sheriff Services at Parties Requiring More Than One Response.
   
24.0604   Sheriff Services Fee.
   
24.0605   Billing.
   
24.0606   Appeal.
§ 24.0601   Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors finds and determines that parties, gatherings or
events on private property can constitute a threat to the peace, health, safety
or general welfare of the public. Officers have been required to make many
return calls to parties, gatherings or events in order to disperse
uncooperative and unruly participants. Such return calls drain the manpower and
resources of the Sheriff’s Department and can leave other areas of the County
without minimal levels of law enforcement protection so as to create a
significant hazard to the safety of citizens and Sheriff’s officers.
§ 24.0602   Definitions.
   As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   PARTY. A party, gathering, event or other assembly of persons for a social
occasion or other activity.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR THE PARTY. Any of the following:
      (1)   The person or persons who own the property where the party takes
place;
      (2)   The person or persons in charge of the premises where the party
takes place;
      (3)   The person or persons authorizing the use of the premises for the
party;
      (4)   The person or persons who organized the party.
   SHERIFF SERVICES FEE. All costs of personnel and equipment for the amount of
time actually spent in responding to or in remaining at a party at the rate
established in § 16.0226(m) of this Code, including but not limited to the
salaries of Sheriff’s Department personnel, as well as the actual cost of any
medical treatment to injured officers, the cost of repairing any damaged County
equipment or property, and overhead and administrative costs related to all of
the foregoing.
   SUBSEQUENT SHERIFF RESPONSE. Any Sheriff Department response to the location
of a party made within 12 hours after the service of a written warning on a
person responsible for the party that the party is in violation of the law.
§ 24.0603   Sheriff Services at Parties Requiring More Than One Response.
   (a)   A Sheriff services fee may be imposed when:
      (1)   A Sheriff’s Department officer at the scene of a party has given
written notice to a person responsible for the party that the party violates
the law; and
      (2)   A subsequent Sheriff’s Department response to the party is required
to control the threat to public peace, health, safety and welfare and to
disperse the party.
   (b)   The provisions of this Chapter are in addition to the authority of the
Sheriff to regulate parties and shall supplement, and not supplant, the
exercise of any other law including, but not limited to, arrest or citation
pursuant to the California Penal Code or local law.
§ 24.0604   Sheriff Services Fee.
   (a)   Each person responsible for the party for which a Sheriff services fee
is imposed under §
24.0603 of this Code shall be jointly and severally liable for the Sheriff
services fee. Where a person responsible for the party for which a Sheriff
services fee is imposed under §
24.0603 of this Code is a minor, the parents or guardians of that minor shall
be jointly and severally liable for the Sheriff services fee.
   (b)   The amount of the fee imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be a
debt, owed to the County of San Bernardino, of the person responsible for the
party receiving the Sheriff services and, if minors, their parents or
guardians. Any person owing money shall be liable in an action brought by the
County in its own name to recover such amount, plus costs and reasonable
attorneys’ fees.
§ 24.0605   Billing.
   The Sheriff or his or her designate shall cause appropriate billings to be
sent to the person responsible for the party. Where there is more than one
person responsible for the party, the Sheriff or his or her designate may, in
his or her discretion, bill each such person for the portion of the Sheriff
services fee that is attributable to such person’s actions in causing the
violation of the law referenced in §
24.0603(a) of this Code.
§ 24.0606   Appeal.
   (a)   Any person receiving a bill for Sheriff services provided pursuant to
this Chapter may, within 15 days after the bill is mailed, file a written
request with the Sheriff’s Department appealing the bill. Any appeal regarding
the bill shall be heard by an employee of the Sheriff’s Department as
designated by the Sheriff.
   (b)   After a request for appeal is filed, the County shall refrain from
collection of the bill until conclusion of the appeal.
   (c)   If, after a hearing before a Sheriff’s Department employee, the appeal
is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the County shall be paid
within 30 days.
(Ord. 3818, passed - -2001)
CHAPTER 7: NOISE ABATEMENT AND CONTROL
Section
   24.0701   Purpose.
   24.0702   Definitions.
   24.0703   Sound Level Measurements.
   24.0704   General Sound Level Limits.
   24.0705   Disturbing, Excessive of Offensive Noise.
   24.0706   Special Sound Source Standards.
   24.0707   Exemptions.
   24.0708   Other Public Agency Exception.
   24.0709   False Statements.
   24.0710   Violations and Penalties.
§ 24.0701 Purpose.
   Disturbing, excessive or offensive noise may interfere with a person’s right
to enjoy life and property and may be detrimental to the public health and
safety. The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate noise in the unincorporated
area of the County of San Bernardino to promote the public health, comfort, and
convenience of its inhabitants and visitors. This Chapter is not intended to
establish thresholds of significance for the purpose of any analysis required
by the California Environmental Quality Act and no such thresholds are
established.
(Ord. 4361, passed - -2019)
§ 24.0702 Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter:
   (a)   AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL. The composite of existing noise from all sources
at a given location and time. Ambient noise is sometimes referred to as
background noise.
   (b)   AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL. The level in decibels of the mean-square A-
weighted sound pressure during a stated time period, with reference to the
square of the standard reference sound pressure of 20 micropascals. The AVERAGE
SOUND LEVEL is equivalent to the industry standard LEQ.
   (c)   AUDIO EQUIPMENT. A television, stereo, radio, tape player, compact
disc player, mp3 player, I-POD, or other similar device.
   (d)   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound level in decibels as measured on a
sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The A-weighted network is the
network for measuring sound that most closely resembles what the human ear
hears. Sound measured using the A-weighted network is designated dB(A).
   (e)   CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT. Tools, machinery, or equipment including
“special construction equipment” defined in the Vehicle Code, used in a
construction operation on any construction site.
   (f)   DECIBEL. A unit for measuring the amplitude of sound, equal to 20
times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.
   (g)   DISTURBING, EXCESSIVE, OR OFFENSIVE NOISE. Any sound or noise that
endangers the health or safety of any person, or causes discomfort or annoyance
to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity.
   (h)   EMERGENCY WORK. Work: (1) necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity; (2) required to protect a person or
property from injury or damage; or (3) by a public or private utility to
restore utility service.
   (i)   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The County of San Bernardino Land Use Services
Department, Code Enforcement Division, the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s
Department, and any other County department designated by the County Chief
Executive Officer or Board of Supervisors to enforce the provisions of the
County Code and/or this Chapter.
   (j)   MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL. The highest sound level reached when measuring
noise with a sound level meter using the A-weighted network and slow time
weighting. The MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL is equivalent to the industry standard known
as LMAX.
   (k)   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle as defined in the Vehicle
Code and includes a mini-bike and a go-cart.
   (l)   NEIGHBORING INHABITANT. Any individual residing within 200 yards of a
property that is alleged to be the source of noise in violation of this
Chapter.
   (m)   OCCUPIED PROPERTY. Property on which there is a building for which a
certificate of occupancy has been issued.
   (n)   PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound that can be detected by a person using his
or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under
investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification or
reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic base component of music is
sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The enforcement authority need not
determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the music.
   (o)   SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT. Any machine or device used to amplify
music, the human voice, or any sound such as a loudspeaker, microphone,
megaphone, or other similar device.
   (p)   SOUND LEVEL. The weighted sound pressure level obtained using a sound
level meter and frequency weighting network as provided in the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) specifications for sound level meters. As
used in this Chapter, SOUND LEVEL means the same as “noise level.”
   (q)   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument for the measurement of sound levels,
which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for a type 1 or type 2 meter
in the ANSI specifications for sound level meters (ANSI § SI.4 1979, Type 1 or
Type 2).
(Ord. 4361, passed - -2019)
§ 24.0703 Sound Level Measurements.
   A sound level measurement made pursuant to this Chapter shall be measured:
   (a)   At the property line of the nearest site that is occupied, and/or
zoned or designated to allow the development of noise-sensitive land uses;
   (b)   With a sound level meter that meets the standards of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI § SI.4 1979, Type 1 or Type 2); and
   (c)   Using the A-weighted sound level pressure scale in decibels (ref.
pressure = 20 micronewtons per meter squared). The unit of measure shall be
designated as dB(A).
(Ord. 4361, passed - -2019)
§ 24.0704 General Sound Level Limits.
   The general noise standards concerning acceptable noise levels identified in
§
83.01.080 of this Code, or as subsequently modified or renumbered, are
incorporated herein by reference. No person shall create any sound, or allow
the creation of any sound, on any property that causes the sound level on any
other occupied property to exceed the sound level limits set forth in §
83.01.080 of this Code.
(Ord. 4361, passed - -2019)
§ 24.0705 Disturbing, Excessive or Offensive Noise.
   (a)   In addition to the general limitations on sound levels in §
24.0704, it shall be unlawful for any person or property owner within the
County to make, cause, or allow to be made a noise that would be disturbing,
excessive, or offensive to a reasonable person. The types of disturbing,
excessive, or offensive noise may include, but shall not be limited to,
yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, playing a musical instrument,
or emitting or transmitting any loud music or noise from any audio equipment or
sound amplifying equipment.
   (b)   The factors, standards, and conditions that may be considered in
determining whether a violation of this Section has been committed, include,
but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The level of the noise.
      (2)   The level and intensity of the background (ambient) noise, if any.
      (3)   The proximity of the noise to residential or commercial sleeping
areas.
      (4)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates
and where it is received.
      (5)   The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates.
      (6)   The time of day and night the noise occurs.
      (7)   The duration of the noise.
      (8)   Whether the noise is constant, recurrent, or intermittent.
      (9)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.
      (10)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity.
      (11)   The number of complaints received.
   (c)   Unless a noise source is determined to be disturbing, excessive or
offensive by the enforcement authority after responding to or investigating a
complaint, evidence of a violation of this Section must be supported by
declarations from two neighboring inhabitants residing on separate properties,
unless there is only one neighboring inhabitant. These declarations are to be
made under penalty of perjury within a 60-day period from the date of the
complaint stating in detail all of the following:
      (1)   That the declarant is a resident of a residential neighborhood
located within 200 yards of the noise source; and
      (2)   Within the past 30 days the declarant has heard disturbing,
excessive or offensive noise for substantially long periods to the annoyance of
the declarant.
   (d)   A complainant residing in excess of 200 yards of the noise source may
also establish evidence of a violation in accordance with all other
requirements of Subdivision (c) above, provided that the complainant can
provide the enforcement authority with credible evidence that he, she, or they
are experiencing disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise for the enforcement
authority to waive the 200 yard requirement. Evidence may include, but is not
limited to, tape recordings, videotapes, sound monitoring logs, photographs,
maps, or declarations of other persons.
   (e)   Whether the sound or noise identified by a declarant endangers the
health or safety of any person, or causes discomfort or annoyance to a
reasonable person of normal sensitivity, will be determined by the enforcement
authority. Declarants should provide additional credible evidence in support of
their declaration, which may include, but is not limited to, tape recordings,
videotapes, sound monitoring logs, photographs, maps, or declarations of other
persons.
(Ord. 4361, passed - -2019)
§ 24.0706 Special Sound Source Standards.
   The general sound level limits in §
24.0704 and disturbing, excessive or offensive noise in §
24.0705 apply to sound emanating from all sources, including the following
special sound sources, and the person creating, or allowing the creation of,
the sound is subject to the requirements of those sections. In addition, there
is a reasonable expectation that certain hours of the evening and early morning
will be even quieter and more peaceful than other hours of the day and that
certain sound sources occurring during this time period causes discomfort or
annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivities. As a result of that
expectation, the following special sound sources are subject to the following
additional standards, the failure to comply with which constitutes a separate
violation of this Chapter and have been declared to be disturbing, excessive,
or offensive noise. A noise source is established as a per se violation of this
Section in the same manner as provided in Subdivision (c) of §
24.0705.
   (a)   Audio Equipment. No person shall operate, or allow the operation of,
any audio equipment, whether portable or not, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. such that the equipment is plainly audible inside an occupied
dwelling other than a dwelling in which the equipment may be located. Sound
level measurements may be used, but are not required, to establish a violation
of this Subdivision.
   (b)   Sound Amplifying Equipment and Live Music. No person shall install,
use or operate sound amplifying equipment, or perform, or allow to be
performed, live music, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. such that
the sound amplifying equipment or live music is plainly audible inside an
occupied dwelling other than a dwelling in which the sound source is located.
Sound level measurements may be used, but are not required, to establish a
violation of this Subdivision.
   (c)   Power Tools and Equipment. Except for emergency work, no person shall
operate any power tools or equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. such that the power tools or equipment are plainly audible inside an
occupied dwelling other than a dwelling in which the power tools or equipment
may be located. Sound level measurements may be used, but are not required, to
establish a violation of this Subdivision.
   (d)   Construction Activity. Except for emergency work, it shall be unlawful
for any person to operate or cause to be operated, construction equipment
between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 4361, passed - -2019)
§ 24.0707 Exemptions.
   The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this
Chapter:
   (a)   Emergency Work. Noise sources associated with alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency or in the performance of emergency work.
   (b)   School Sponsored Activities. Noise sources emanating from authorized
school bands, school athletic and school entertainment events.
   (c)   Federal or State Preempted Activities. Any activity the noise level of
which is regulated by State or Federal law.
   (d)   Minor Maintenance to Residential Property. Noise sources associated
with minor maintenance to property used for residential purposes, including,
but not limited to, lawnmowers, leaf blowers, etc., provided the activities
take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
   (e)   Public Health, Welfare, and Safety Activities. Noise sources
associated with construction, maintenance, and repair operations conducted by
public agencies and/or utility companies or their contractors which are deemed
necessary to serve the best interest of the public and to protect the public
health, welfare, and safety, including but not limited to, trash collection,
street sweeping, debris and limb removal, removal of downed wires, restoring
electrical service, repairing traffic signals, unplugging sewers, vacuuming
catch basins, repairing of damaged poles, removing abandoned vehicles,
repairing water hydrants and mains, gas lines, oil lines, sewers, storm drains,
roads, or sidewalks, and the executing of official duties by public safety
personnel. This exemption includes, without limitation, sound emanating from
all equipment used by such personnel, whether stationery or mobile.
   (f)   Animals. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any noise
sources associated with barking dogs or other intermittent noises made by
animals on any property within the County. Such noise shall be subject to the
provisions of §
32.0119 (Animals Which Habitually Make Noise) of this Code.
   (g)   Agriculture Operations. Noise sources associated with mechanical
devices, apparatus, or equipment associated with agriculture operations,
provided that each piece of equipment or machinery powered by an internal-
combustion engine is equipped with appropriate muffler and/or air intake
silencer in good working order and the operations and equipment are utilized
for the preparation, planting, harvesting, protection, or salvage of
agricultural crops.
   (h)   Authorized Events. Noise sources associated with outdoor gatherings,
public dances, shows, sporting and entertainment events and other similar
events, provided the activity is conducted pursuant to a permit or license
issued by the appropriate jurisdiction and contain acoustic and/or noise
standard conditions of approval. This Subdivision is not intended to excuse the
act of an individual not participating in the event who violates this Chapter.
(Ord. 4361, passed - -2019)
§ 24.0708 Other Public Agency Exception.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to prohibit any work
at different hours by or under the direction of any other public agency or
public or private utility companies in cases of necessity or emergency.
(Ord. 4361, passed - -2019)
§ 24.0709 False Statements.
   No person shall knowingly provide false information, either orally or in
writing, to the enforcement authority related to the enforcement of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 4361, passed - -2019)
§ 24.0710 Violations and Penalties.
   (a)   Any person found by the enforcement authority to have negligently or
knowingly violated any provision of this Chapter may be charged with an
infraction. Any person found by the enforcement authority to have negligently
or knowingly violated any provision of this Chapter more than once within a
180-day period may be charged with a misdemeanor. Each day a violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
   (b)   All violations of this Chapter may be enforced by the enforcement
authority and addressed through the institution of a criminal action, a civil
action, and/or an administrative action as set forth in
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 (Violations and Enforcement) of this Code or
as otherwise provided by law. Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, any peace
officer of the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department may arrest a person
without a warrant if he or she has reasonable cause to believe that the person
has committed a misdemeanor in his or her presence that violates this Chapter.
   (c)   Any violation of this Chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and
may be abated in accordance with law, including but not limited to by a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 4361, passed - -2019)
DIVISION 5: MINORS
CHAPTER 1: CURFEW REGULATIONS
Section
   
25.0101   Curfew Hours.
   
25.0102   Responsibility of Parents.
§ 25.0101   Curfew Hours.
   Every person under the age of 18 years who remains, loiters, idles or
wanders about the public streets, alleys sidewalks, parks or public places of
the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino, State of California,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and the time of sunrise the following day is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   This Chapter shall not apply to a minor accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian having legal custody and control of such minor, or by a spouse of such
minor over 18 years of age; to a minor upon an emergency errand for such adult;
to a minor returning directly home from a public meeting, school,
entertainment, or recreational activity; or to a minor who is required to be in
or upon a public place incidental to his or her employment.
(Ord. 627, passed - -1949; Am. Ord. 3468, passed - -1991)
§ 25.0102   Responsibility of Parents.
   Every parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care, custody or
control of any person under the age of 18 years who allows or permits such
person to violate any provisions of this Chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 627, passed - -1949)
CHAPTER 2: DAYTIME LOITERING ON SCHOOL DAYS
Section
   
25.0201   Purpose.
   
25.0202   Prohibited Acts.
   
25.0203   Valid Excuses.
   
25.0204   Enforcement Procedure.
   
25.0205   Infraction—Penalty.
   
25.0206   Hearing Requirement—Parental Obligation to Attend.
   
25.0207   Cost Recovery.
   
25.0208   Severability.
§ 25.0201   Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
both the community and unsupervised truants and to address those problems
minors create when they loiter in public places during school hours. Because of
their lack of maturity and experience, unsupervised students may involve
themselves in unsafe activities by loitering; some unsupervised students may
engage in criminal activity to the detriment of the community; and some
unsupervised students may become a burden on police who must return them to
school, wait for parents to pick them up, and/or investigate any and all
criminal activity related to the students’ truancy. Truant minors also lose
educational opportunities and their unexcused absences result in a loss of
State and Federal funding to the detriment of all students. As a result,
therefore, the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino finds and
determines that a special need exists for the adoption of a juvenile loitering
ordinance.
(Ord. 3653, passed - -1996)
§ 25.0202   Prohibited Acts.
   (a)   Minors. It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years, who is
subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, to
loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon public street, highway, road,
alley, park, playground, parking area, or other public ground, public place or
public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot, or any place
open to the public in the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino,
State of California, during those hours that his or her school is in session.
   (b)   Parents/Guardians. It is unlawful for the parent or guardian of any
minor to knowingly permit or by insufficient control to allow the minor to be
in violation of §
25.0202(a).
(Ord. 3653, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3719, passed - -1998)
§ 25.0203   Valid Excuses.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply when the minor has one or
more of the following valid excuses:
   1.   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor;
   2.   The minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
   3.   The minor is going directly to or returning directly from his or her
place of school-approved employment and the minor has in his or her possession
verification of employment;
   4.   The minor is going directly to or returning directly from a medical
appointment and has in his or her possession verification of such medical
appointment;
   5.   The minor has permission to leave campus for lunch and has in his or
her possession a valid, school-issued off-campus permit;
   6.   The minor is attending, going directly to or returning directly from a
school sponsored activity, such as a sporting event, field trip, movie or play
and the minor has in his or her possession verification of such school
sponsored activity; or
   7.   The minor is going directly to or returning directly from an event or
activity that is directly related to any medical condition of a parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
(Ord. 3653, passed - -1996)
§ 25.0204   Enforcement Procedure.
   Upon any violation of §
25.0202(a), a peace officer may issue a citation to the minor and may also do
one of the following:
   1.   Detain the minor until he or she can be placed in the care and custody
of his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and
custody of the minor.
   2.   Transport the minor to his or her home;
   3.   Transport the minor to the school from which the minor is absent.
   Upon the minor’s second and subsequent citations for violation of §
25.0202(a), a peace officer may also issue a citation to the minor’s parent or
guardian for violation of §
25.0202(b).
(Ord. 3653, passed - -1996)
§ 25.0205   Infraction—Penalty.
   Violation of §
25.0202(a) shall constitute an infraction and may be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $250.00 and/or by a requirement to perform community service for a
total time not to exceed 20 hours over a period not to exceed 30 days, during
times other than the minor’s hours of school attendance or employment.
   Violation of §
25.0202(b) shall constitute an infraction and may be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $250.00.
(Ord. 3653, passed - -1996)
§ 25.0206   Hearing Requirement—Parental Obligation to Attend.
   A minor cited for an infraction under this Chapter shall attend a court
hearing on the infraction and shall be accompanied at the hearing by his or her
parent, legal guardian, or other adult person having the legal care or custody
of the minor. If any such parental or custodial person fails to attend the
hearing with the minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be
served, the court shall continue the hearing and shall issue a citation to the
parental or custodial person, directing him or her to appear at the continued
hearing with the minor.
   At the hearing the minor’s parent or guardian shall be advised that the
minor was cited for a violation of §
25.0202(a). The parent or guardian shall be warned of his or her responsibility
and liability under §
25.0202(b)
(Ord. 3653, passed - -1996)
§ 25.0207   Cost Recovery.
   When a minor has been detained by the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s
Department as a result of the minor’s violation of §
25.0202(a), the minor’s parent or guardian shall be liable for the cost of
providing services relating to the detention, processing or supervision of the
minor beyond those services normally provided by the Sheriff’s Department if:
   1.   The minor was detained by the Sheriff’s Department for a period of time
in excess of one hour; and
   2.   A court of competent jurisdiction finds the minor violated §
25.0202(a).
   If the parent or guardian is liable under this Section for the cost of
providing services, the Sheriff’s Department may assess and bill the parent or
guardian as provided in the fee provisions of the County Code.
   Any person receiving a bill for services under this Section may, within ten
days after the date of the bill, file a written appeal with the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors. The requirement to pay the charges shall be stayed during
the pendency of the appeal. Any billing sent pursuant to this Section shall
notify the billed party of the right to appeal the charges.
   The Board of Supervisors shall designate a person to sit as a hearing
officer to hear any appeal under this Section. At the direction of the hearing
officer, notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be mailed to
the appellant. The hearing shall be informal and the formal rules of evidence
shall not apply. Within ten days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall
give written notice of the decision to the appellant. If the appeal is denied
in part or in full, all amounts found due to the County shall be paid within 30
days of the notice of the hearing officer’s decision.
(Ord. 3653, passed - -1996)
§ 25.0208   Severability.
   If any section, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, preempted or unconstitutional by
the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Chapter. The Board of
Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino hereby declares that it would have
adopted the ordinance establishing this Chapter and each section, subdivision,
sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any
one or more section, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion may be
declared invalid, preempted or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 3653, passed - -1996)
CHAPTER 3: SOCIAL HOST ORDINANCE CONCERNING CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
BY MINORS
Section
   
25.0301   Findings.
   
25.0302   Definitions.
   
25.0303   Prohibitions.
   
25.0304   Protected Activities.
   
25.0305   Separate Violation for Each Incident.
   
25.0306   Enforcement Authority.
   
25.0307   Enforcement Remedies and Penalties are Cumulative and Discretionary;
Not Exclusive.
   
25.0308   Criminal Penalties and Citations.
   
25.0309   Civil Penalties.
   
25.0310   Administrative Citations.
   
25.0311   Severability.
   
25.0312   Local Authority.
§ 25.0301 Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors makes the following findings concerning minors’
consumption of alcoholic beverages:
   (a)   Minors often obtain, possess or consume alcoholic beverages at
gatherings held on private property under the control of a person who knows or
should know of the conduct but fails to stop it.
   (b)   Underage consumption of alcoholic beverages poses an immediate threat
to the public health, safety and welfare in that it increases alcohol abuse by
minors, physical altercations, violent crimes including rape and other sexual
offenses, accidental injury, neighborhood vandalism and excessive noise
disturbance, all of which may require intervention by local law enforcement and
other emergency response personnel.
   (c)   Law enforcement and other emergency personnel responses to
disturbances involving underage consumption of alcoholic beverages at
gatherings frequently require the use of extensive resources. Further, when
these personnel respond to such disturbances, it limits their ability to
respond to other service calls in the community, thereby placing the community
at increased risk. Law enforcement and other emergency personnel are not
currently reimbursed for their expenses when called to disturbances involving
underage consumption of alcoholic beverages at gatherings.
   (d)   The prohibitions found in this chapter are reasonable and expected to
deter consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors by holding persons
responsible who encourage, and are aware of or should be aware of, the illegal
consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors, but fail to take reasonable steps
to prevent it.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0302 Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
   (a)   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains
one-half of 1 percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit or used for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
   (b)   ENFORCEMENT SERVICES. The actual amount of time spent by law
enforcement, code enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel in
responding to, or in remaining at, or returning from a gathering at which a
minor obtains, possesses or uses alcoholic beverages including, but not limited
to, the salaries and benefits of these personnel, the actual cost of medical
treatment incurred by these personnel, administrative costs attributable to the
incident, the cost of repairing or replacing any damaged County property, and
any other allowable costs related to the enforcement of this chapter.
   (c)   GATHERING. A party, event or other group of two or more persons who
have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or other activity on
private property.
   (d)   JUVENILE. Any person under the age of eighteen years.
   (e)   LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person who is legally vested with the power and
charged with the duty of taking care of a juvenile.
   (f)   MINOR. Any person under the age of 21 years.
   (g)   PARENT. Any person who is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, a
foster parent, a step-parent, or who acts in loco parentis for a juvenile.
   (h)   PRIVATE PROPERTY. A private residence, where one actually lives or has
his or her home, or any other privately-owned land, including vacant land or
any appurtenances or structures on the land, in the unincorporated area of the
County.
   (i)   SOCIAL HOST. Any of the following:
      (1)   The person or persons who owns or rents private property where a
gathering takes place where one or more minors consume one or more alcoholic
beverages;
      (2)   The person or persons in charge of private property where a
gathering takes place where one or more minors consume one or more alcoholic
beverages;
      (3)   The person or persons authorizing the use of private property for a
gathering where one or more minors consume one or more alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   The person or persons who organized a gathering where one or more
minors consume one or more alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0303 Prohibitions.
   It is the duty of a social host who knowingly hosts, permits, or allows a
gathering on the property to take all reasonable steps to prevent the
consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor at the gathering. Reasonable
steps include, but are not limited to, (i) controlling access to alcoholic
beverages, (ii) controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the
gathering, (iii) verifying the age of each person attending the gathering by
inspecting each person's driver's license or other government-issued
identification card and (iv) supervising the activities of minors at the
gathering.
   (a)   No social host shall allow a gathering to take place or continue on
his/her private property if a minor at the gathering obtains, possesses, or
consumes any alcoholic beverage and the social host knows or reasonably should
know, that the minor has obtained, possesses, or is consuming alcoholic
beverages at the gathering.
   (b)   No social host shall allow a gathering to take place or continue on
his/her private property if a minor at the gathering obtains, possesses, or
consumes any alcoholic beverage, when the social host has not taken all
reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor
at the gathering.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0304 Protected Activities.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person who provides an alcoholic
beverage to a minor as permitted by Article 1, Section 4, of the California
Constitution.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0305 Separate Violations for Each Incident.
   Each incident in violation of §
25.0303 shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable or
actionable as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0306 Enforcement Authority.
   The District Attorney and the Sheriff are authorized to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The District Attorney and the Sheriff
may exercise any enforcement powers provided by law.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0307 Enforcement Remedies and Penalties are Cumulative and Discretionary;
Not Exclusive.
   All remedies and penalties provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative
and discretionary, and not exclusive, in accordance with this section and in
the same manner as provided by §
11.0202 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0308 Criminal Penalties and Citations.
   (a)   Any person who violates §
25.0303 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the
same manner as provided by §
11.0206(a)(1) of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (b)   Criminal citations shall be issued in the same manner and under the
same authority as provided by §
11.0206(b) of this Code.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0309 Civil Penalties.
   (a)   Civil penalties for violations.
      (1)   Pursuant to California Civil Code § 1714.1, any act of willful
misconduct of a juvenile that results in injury or death to another person or
in injury to the property of another shall be imputed to the parent or legal
guardian having custody and control of the juvenile for all purposes of civil
damages, and the parent or legal guardian having custody and control shall be
jointly and severally liable with the juvenile for any damages resulting from
the willful misconduct.
      (2)   When a person(s) responsible for a gathering is a juvenile, the
parents or legal guardian(s) of that juvenile shall be jointly and severally
liable for the costs incurred for enforcement services pursuant to this
chapter.
      (3)   A social host shall be liable for the cost of providing enforcement
services in response to a gathering in which a minor(s) has obtained,
possessed, or consumed alcoholic beverages. Such costs include the County’s
reasonable attorneys’ fees in the event of litigation.
   (b)   All violations of this chapter may be subject to enforcement through
the initiation of a civil action in accordance with this section and in the
same manner and under the same authority as provided at §
11.0207 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0310 Administrative Citations.
   As an alternative to the criminal or civil enforcement of this chapter, all
violations of this chapter may be subject to enforcement through the use of
administrative citations in accordance with California Government Code §
53069.4 and this section, and in the same manner and under the same authority
as provided at §
11.0208 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0311 Severability.
   If any provisions of this chapter or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions
or applications of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
§ 25.0312 Local Authority.
   No provision within this chapter shall apply where prohibited or preempted
by state or federal law.
(Ord. 4111, passed - -2010)
DIVISION 6: GAMBLING
CHAPTER 1: CARDS, DICE AND SIMILAR GAMES
Section
   
26.0101   Permitting Illegal Games.
   
26.0102   Participation in Illegal Games.
§ 26.0101   Permitting Illegal Games.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the County of San Bernardino,
outside of any municipal corporation, to keep, maintain, conduct, control, have
charge of, be present at or visit any house, room, place or apartment where any
game is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, or other
device or contrivance for money, checks, chips, credit or any other
representative or thing of value.
(Ord. 3653, passed - -1996)
§ 26.0102   Participation in Illegal Games.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the County of San Bernardino,
outside of any municipal corporation, to deal, play, carry on, participate in
or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on
with cards, dice, or other device or contrivance for money, checks, chips,
credit, or any other representative or thing of value.
(Ord. 3653, passed - -1996)
CHAPTER 2: PINBALL MACHINES, MARBLE MACHINES AND SIMILAR CONTRIVANCES
Section
   
26.0201   Background to Prohibition of Pinball Machines.
   
26.0202   Possession or Use of Pinball Machine.
   
26.0203   Public Nuisance.
   
26.0204   Confiscation and Destruction of Gambling Apparatus.
§ 26.0201   Background to Prohibition of Pinball Machines.
   In enacting the provisions of this Chapter, the Board of Supervisors of the
County of San Bernardino hereby finds, determines and declares that within the
unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino there are maintained
certain devices described in §
26.0202 hereof, which are capable of and are being used for gambling purposes;
that the Grand Jury of the County of San Bernardino, regularly drawn and
impaneled for the year 1955, did find, and after an independent comprehensive
investigation conducted by the Attorney General of the State of California of
the operation of pinball machines and other similar devices situated in San
Bernardino County, officially reported:
   (a)   That throughout San Bernardino County machines of the type prohibited
by §
26.0202 hereof are numerous and are operating in general violation of the
gambling laws of the State of California;
   (b)   That the merchants interviewed during the investigation, 90.4 percent
admitted making payoffs;
   (c)   That the proceeds from the machines were divided 50-50 between the
pinball machine owners and the merchants upon whose premises the machines were
installed;
   (d)   That the wide-spread use of these machines makes enforcement by law
enforcement officers of the laws against gambling, impractical;
   (e)   That the operation of these machines constitutes a serious menace to
good government; that said Grand Jury recommended the immediate adoption of
ordinances banning such machines as public nuisances; that the Board of
Supervisors further finds, determines, and declares that the presence and use
of such machines for gambling purposes teach and encourage gambling in both
minors and adults, foster delinquency and encourage such persons in the
commission of unlawful acts for the purpose of obtaining money in order to
operate such machines; that the continued presence of such machines in the
unincorporated area of this County constitutes a serious problem of law
enforcement and is contrary to the public peace, health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the people of this County.
(Ord. 777, passed - -1955)
§ 26.0202   Possession or Use of Pinball Machines.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to keep, maintain,
posses or have under control in any place whatever, either as owner, lessee,
agent, employee, mortgagee or otherwise, any table game or device commonly
known as a “pinball machine,” “pin game” or “marble game” or similar device by
whatever name known, the operation, use or play of which is controlled by
placing therein any coin, plate, disk, plug, key or other device, or by the
payment of any fee.
(Ord. 777, passed - -1955)
§ 26.0203   Public Nuisance.
   Any machine, contrivance, appliance, device, game, instrument or article
kept, maintained, possessed or controlled in violation of §
26.0202 is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement
as provided in §
26.0204 below.
(Ord. 777, passed - -1955)
§ 26.0204   Confiscation and Destruction of Gambling Apparatus.
   Anything declared in §
26.0203 above to be a nuisance as a result of a violation of §
26.0202 above, of which violation any person, firm or corporation has been
convicted or has pleaded guilty, shall be destroyed with its contents by the
Sheriff of this County after such plea or after judgment of conviction becomes
final. If said machine contains money, such money shall be deposited in the
County General Fund.
   If anything so subject to destruction is in the custody of any court in this
County, said Sheriff will apply to said Court for the release of it to him or
her for destruction.
(Ord. 777, passed - -1955)
DIVISION 7: POLICE REGULATIONS AND PUBLIC PROTECTION
CHAPTER 1: TORT CLAIMS
Section
   
27.0101   Solicitation of Tort Claims—Prohibited.
   
27.0102   Negotiations Between Joint Tort Claimants.
§ 27.0101   Solicitation of Tort Claims—Prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit employment for himself or
herself or for any other person, either directly or through some other person
acting on his or her behalf, to prosecute, collect, settle, compromise or to
negotiate for settlement, compromise or collection of any tort on behalf of any
tort claimant in which he or she himself or herself has no pecuniary interest
arising from such tort.
(Ord. 406, passed - -1934)
§ 27.0102   Negotiations Between Joint Tort Claimants.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to prevent joint tort
claimants from negotiating with each other for the purpose of combining
respective claims or acts against the tort-feasor.
(Ord. 406, passed - -1934)
CHAPTER 2: FALSE REPORTS TO SHERIFF
Section
   
27.0201   Prohibition.
§ 27.0201   Prohibition.
   No person shall willfully and intentionally make any false, misleading or
unfounded report to the Sheriff’s Department of the County of San Bernardino,
for the purpose of interfering with the operation of the Sheriff’s Department
or with the intention of misleading any law enforcement officer.
(Ord. 516, passed - -1942; Am. Ord. 726, passed - -1954)
CHAPTER 3: TREE TRIMMING
Section
   
27.0301   Accumulation Declared a Nuisance.
   
27.0302   Definition of Accumulation.
§ 27.0301   Accumulation Declared a Nuisance.
   Any accumulation of limbs, branches, prunings, trimmings, stumps and parts
of domestic or cultivated fruit trees, cut, removed, fallen or severed from
such trees, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 332, passed - -1930)
§ 27.0302   Definition of Accumulation.
   The word ACCUMULATION as used in this Chapter is hereby defined as any and
all limbs, branches, prunings, trimmings, stumps and parts of domestic and
cultivated fruit trees, which have been cut, removed, severed or have fallen
from such trees and have not been destroyed by burning or otherwise, within ten
days after such cutting, removal, severance or falling, including such limbs,
branches, prunings, trimmings, stumps and parts of such trees which have been
cut, removed, severed or have fallen prior to the adoption of this Chapter.
(Ord. 332, passed - -1930)
CHAPTER 4: MISDEMEANANTS
Section
   
27.0401   Violation.
§ 27.0401   Violation.
   Every person, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
Chapter 3 and 4 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by imprisonment in the
County Jail not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 332, passed - -1930)
CHAPTER 5: ABANDONED ORCHARDS
Section
   
27.0501   Purpose.
   
27.0502   Definitions.
   
27.0503   Prohibition of Neglected or Abandoned Orchards.
   
27.0504   Notice.
   
27.0505   Appeal of Commissioner’s Determination.
   
27.0506   Removal of Trees.
   
27.0507   Legal Action to Compel Removal.
§ 27.0501   Purpose.
   The Board of Supervisors finds that neglected or abandoned orchards in the
unincorporated portion of this County are places where the trees constitute a
fire hazard, are places where vagrants or dissolute persons call dwell, are
places which constitute ugly and unsightly conditions which adversely affect
neighboring property, are places from which agricultural pests develop and
spread, and such orchards are public nuisances.
(Ord. 1472, passed - -1968)
§ 27.0502   Definitions.
   Whenever in this Chapter the following terms are used, they shall mean as
follows:
   COMMISSIONER. The San Bernardino County Agricultural Commissioner and
regularly appointed employees of the San Bernardino County Department of
Agriculture acting pursuant to his or her instructions.
   NEGLECTED or ABANDONED. An orchard or part of an orchard, the trees of which
being in such a condition that the limbs are moribund and the leaves or
branches of which are dead, and that the individual in charge of same is not
taking such ordinary care of the orchard as may be required for a harvested
orchard and is not watering or discing or spraying such trees, all for a period
of at least six months, which period of time need not be continuous.
   ORCHARD. Any of ten or more trees that are of the type that bear stone
fruits, citrus fruits or pome fruits, situated together as in a grove.
   REMOVAL. Cutting the trees and gathering the trunks, limbs, and debris in
such a manner that the land thereof will contain no limbs or debris, or only
such material neatly stacked such as firewood, all only in accordance with the
applicable fire code, and in an area of the land set apart for only firewood.
(Ord. 1472, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1607, passed - -1970)
§ 27.0503   Prohibition of Neglected or Abandoned Orchards.
   No orchard shall be permitted to be neglected or abandoned, in the
unincorporated part of the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 1472, passed - -1968)
§ 27.0504   Notice.
   The commissioner shall give written notice to the record owner of any
orchard which the commissioner shall have determined is neglected or abandoned.
The notice shall be given by any or all of the following ways:
   1.   Written notice, by certified mail;
   2.   By posting the property;
   3.   By personal service.
   The commissioner shall use the best available information of public record
for determining ownership and address for such notice, which shall be
sufficient regardless of receipt of same. The notice shall describe the orchard
in question, shall inform of the commissioner’s determination, and shall demand
compliance with this Chapter within 28 days. The running of this period of time
shall not be stayed. Such notice or a copy of such notice, shall in all cases
be mailed to the record owner of the orchard.
(Ord. 1472, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 2994, passed - -1986)
§ 27.0505   Appeal of Commissioner’s Determination.
   Any person who is affected by the notice mentioned in §
27.0504 may appeal to the Board of Appeals within the time for compliance with
the order, by an appeal in writing filed with the issuing officer or department
supervisor of such officer. Timely appeal shall stay any further action until
the date set for hearing. The officer receiving the written appeal shall inform
the issuing officer, who shall set the matter for hearing before the Board of
Appeals and notify the appellant of the date set for such hearing, at least 15
days prior to such date. If the appellant resides outside the County, the above
period of notice shall be at least 25 days. The Board of Appeals shall act on
the appeal and its determination shall be conclusive. The Board of Appeals
shall consist of five persons, and shall be comprised as follows: one member
shall be an officer of the department of the issuing officer, but not the
issuing officer; one member shall be a deputy of the agency administrator of
the County Agency which serves the department of the issuing officer; one
member shall be a deputy of the County Counsel; and two members shall be
selected directly by the Board of Supervisors. These two members shall be
persons selected from individuals who have a background as an orchardist, or as
a member of the Farm Bureau of San Bernardino County, or as an academician
whose field was, or is, agriculture.
(Ord. 1472, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 2058, passed - -1976)
§ 27.0506   Removal of Trees.
   Unless otherwise determined by the Board of Appeals as provided in §
27.0505, above, the orchard in question shall be brought into conformance with
the requirements of this Chapter, by removal of all neglected or abandoned
trees within 28 days after the sending of written notice as provided above, or,
in cases of appeal to the Board of Appeals, within 28 days of the sending of
written notice to the appellant of that Board’s decision. If there is not
compliance within that period of time, the owner or any other person in charge
of, or in possession of the orchard, who shall have received notice hereof,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each period of one week thereafter, during
which time the orchard is not in compliance with this part, shall constitute a
separate misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1472, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 2058, passed - -1976)
§ 27.0507   Legal Action to Compel Removal.
   The Commissioner shall cause any orchard hereof to be brought into
compliance with this Chapter after the expiration of 28 days after the last
notice is sent to the applicant, either the notice to remove or the notice of
the determination of the Board of Appeals. The compliance shall be achieved as
reasonably and economically as possible in accordance with the discretion of
the Commissioner. The County Auditor shall pay the cost of such compliance from
the funds of the Agricultural Commissioner. The total cost of such compliance
shall be computed and an administrative fee of 20 percent of such cost shall be
added thereto. A bill for the entire sum of the costs and administrative fee
shall be mailed to the record owner of such orchard and a copy shall be sent to
the County Auditor. The bill shall include an itemized statement covering the
work necessary for such removal. If the record owner of the orchard or his
agent does not pay the bill within 30 days after said mailing, the Commissioner
shall certify to the Auditor the demands remaining unpaid on said bill together
with any information required by law in such cases. The County Auditor shall
cause the amount of the same to be entered on the tax roll as a special
assessment and tax lien on the property from which removal was accomplished.
The special assessment shall be included on the next succeeding tax statement.
Thereafter the amounts of the assessment shall be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as County taxes are collected, and shall be subject to
the same penalties, and the same procedure and sale in cases of delinquencies
as provided in ordinary taxes. All or any portion of such special assessment,
penalty, or costs entered shall on order of the Board of Supervisors be
cancelled by the Auditor if uncollected or refunded by the County Treasurer
under order of the Board of Supervisors, if assessment, penalty, or costs were
entered, charged or paid:
   (a)   More than once;
   (b)   Through clerical error;
   (c)   Through the error or mistake of the Board of Supervisors or of the
Commissioner in respect to any material fact including the case where the costs
rendered shows the County abated the orchard, but such was not the fact;
   (d)   Illegally;
   (e)   On property acquired after the lien by the State or any city, county,
school district, or other political subdivision and because of this public
ownership not subject to sale for delinquent taxes.
   No order for refund under the foregoing shall be made except on a claim
verified by the person who paid the special assessment or the representative of
such person or his or her estate and said claim is filed within three years
after making the payment to be refunded.
   The above cancellation or refund shall be determined upon by the Board of
Appeals pursuant to appeals procedures similar to, and functioning in the same
manner as the appeals procedures set forth in §
27.0505 above.
(Ord. 1472, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1607, passed - -1970; Am. Ord. 2058,
passed - -1976)
CHAPTER 6: ELM LEAF BEETLE
Section
   
27.0601   Purpose.
   
27.0602   Spraying.
   
27.0603   Publication; Decision as to Whether Nuisance Exists.
§ 27.0601   Purpose.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors finds that there exists a large number of elm
trees in that area north and east of the San Bernardino Mountains generally
known as the desert area in the unincorporated part of the County. That these
are shade trees, and are an important constituent of the factors of property
value in that area, and greatly contribute to the quiet enjoyment of land.
   (b)   The Board further finds that the elm tree population is threatened
every spring and summer with destruction or serious damage and loss from the
elm leaf beetle, an insect which comes into unusually high numbers of epidemic
proportion during said seasons of the year.
   (c)   That unless concerted action is taken to combat the elm leaf beetle in
the spring of each year, the entire area will be threatened with a loss of
economic value and a lessening of comfort and enjoyment in the use of land.
(Ord. 1556, passed - -1970)
§ 27.0602   Spraying.
   (a)   All elm trees in that area north and east of the San Bernardino
Mountains generally known as the desert area in the unincorporated part of the
County shall be sprayed with an insecticide material such as Sevin or a
similarly effective chemical approved by the Agricultural Commissioner of San
Bernardino County hereinafter described as the “Commissioner.”
   (b)   The spraying hereof shall take place at a date no later than June 20
each year. Documentary proof that spraying of all elm trees on each parcel has
been accomplished shall be submitted to the Commissioner by the party having
possession or control of each parcel containing any such trees, and shall be
submitted on or before the above date each year. The proof may include, but not
be limited to, a declaration under penalty of perjury that such spraying has
been accomplished.
   (c)   In all cases where no such documentary proof has been submitted to the
Commissioner as stated supra, the Commissioner shall accomplish such spraying
on each such particular parcel at a date within a reasonable time after the
above date but in no event later than three months from said date. In those
cases where the Commissioner accomplishes the spraying, the cost of all such
spraying shall be borne by the County or San Bernardino and not by the person
in possession or control of the parcel; only trees infested or likely to be
infested shall be sprayed.
(Ord. 1556, passed - -1970)
§ 27.0603   Publication; Decision as to Whether Nuisance Exists.
   (a)   The ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be published twice in a
period of two weeks, all prior to May 20, 1971, in the San Bernardino Sun, a
newspaper of general circulation, in the infested area with the names of the
members of the Board of Supervisors voting for and against the same.
   (b)   Should the Commissioner be prevented by the individual in control or
possession of the property from accomplishing such spraying, the allowing of
the existence of this pest would be a public nuisance and the Commissioner may
then proceed under
Title 3, Division 7, Chapter 1 (beginning with §
37.0101), of the San Bernardino County Code to abate such a nuisance.
   (c)   The Commissioner shall, in the spring of each year prior to the
operation of the provisions of this Section, make a determination whether or
not the elm leaf beetle is in fact a nuisance as described above, in that
particular year. In the event the Commissioner finds that no such nuisance
exists for that year, he or she shall so report to this Board of Supervisors
and no spraying as described in this Chapter, shall be required for that year.
(Ord. 1556, passed - -1970)
CHAPTER 7: POLITICAL SIGNS (REPEALED BY ORD. 3596, PASSED - -1995)
CHAPTER 8: CRIMINAL RECORDS REVIEW BOARD
Section
   
27.0801   Establishment of Criminal Records Review Board.
   
27.0802   Consideration of Applicant Request.
   
27.0803   Quorum.
   
27.0804   Decision of Board.
   
27.0805   Correction of Records.
§ 27.0801   Establishment of Criminal Records Review Board.
   Pursuant to Penal Code § 13324(c), the Criminal Records Review Board is
hereby established. The Criminal Records Review Board shall consist of three
members of the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Office: The Commander of the
Records and Identification Division, or in his or her absence, a lieutenant of
that division; the Area Inspector of the Records and Services Divisions, or at
the direction of the Sheriff another inspector, or in the absence of the
Sheriff, his or her delegated authority may appoint another inspector in the
absence of the Area Inspector; the Commander for the Central Detective
Division, or in his absence, a lieutenant of that division. The Chairperson of
the Board shall be an inspector.
(Ord. 2492, passed - -1980)
§ 27.0802   Consideration of Applicant Request.
   Upon request of an applicant, the Board shall consider allegations of
inaccuracy or incompleteness in the criminal record of said applicant which
have been denied by the Records Division of the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s
Office.
(Ord. 2492, passed - -1980)
§ 27.0803   Quorum.
   A quorum shall consist of two members of the Board.
(Ord. 2492, passed - -1980)
§ 27.0804   Decision of Board.
   A decision of the Board shall be made by concurrence of two members. The
Board may either deny or concur in the allegation of the applicant. The Board
shall make its decision and shall inform the applicant in writing of said
decision within 30 days of the receipt of the referral from the applicant.
(Ord. 2492, passed - -1980)
§ 27.0805   Correction of Records.
   If the Board concurs in the allegations of the applicant, it shall direct
the Records Division to make the corrections pursuant to Penal Code § 13324(b).
(Ord. 2492, passed - -1980)
CHAPTER 9: POLICE DOGS
Section
   
27.0901   Unlawful Acts.
§ 27.0901   Unlawful Acts.
   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, in the unincorporated area
of the County of San Bernardino, in a manner not otherwise prohibited by Penal
Code § 597, to tease, harass, agitate, provoke, beat, kick, strike, injure, or
in any way interfere with any dog being used by any law enforcement officer in
the performance of his or her official duties.
(Ord. 2881, passed - -1980)
CHAPTER 10: DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS FROM FORFEITURES AND SEIZURES
Section
   
27.1001   (Reserved).
   
27.1002   Funds Subject to Distribution.
   
27.1003   Eligible Organizations.
   
27.1004   Claims.
   
27.1005   Allocation Provisions.
   
27.1006   Reports to Board of Supervisors.
   
27.1007   Effective Date.
§ 27.1001   (Reserved).
§ 27.1002   Funds Subject to Distribution.
   The forfeited funds subject to distribution pursuant to Health and Safety
Code § 11489(b)(2)(D) and which are derived by the County of San Bernardino
from seizures and forfeitures made pursuant to Health and Safety Code §§ 11470
et seq., and which have occurred as a result of information provided to law
enforcement agencies by nonprofit organizations established for the purpose of
aiding those seizures and forfeitures, shall be allocated to eligible
organizations in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3199, passed - -1987)
§ 27.1003   Eligible Organizations.
   ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATION for the purposes of this Chapter means: (1) an
organization whose primary purpose is to aid State and local law enforcement
agencies in conducting criminal investigations by directly relaying information
concerning criminal activity to such law enforcement agencies, and (2) such
organization has qualified as exempt from State and Federal taxation under the
Nonprofit Public Benefit Corporation Laws of the State of California and § 501
(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(Ord. 3199, passed - -1987)
§ 27.1004   Claims.
   All claims for forfeited funds initiated pursuant to this Chapter shall be
submitted to the District Attorney of the County of San Bernardino. Such claims
shall be accompanied by a written declaration under oath, prepared by the
investigating officer of the law enforcement agency seizing such funds,
verifying that:
   (a)   The information provided by the claimant organization was specific and
factual;
   (b)   The information provided was received and utilized by the law
enforcement agency; and
   (c)   The receipt of such information resulted in the seizure of the
forfeited funds for which the claim is made.
(Ord. 3199, passed - -1987)
§ 27.1005   Allocation Provisions.
   (a)   The District Attorney of the County of San Bernardino shall allocate
and distribute forfeited funds as he or she determines in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter, except that:
      (1)   No allocation shall be made to an organization other than an
eligible organization as defined in this Chapter.
      (2)   No forfeited funds shall be distributed pursuant to this Chapter
until:
         (A)   The superior court shall issue an order of forfeiture and
judgment of such funds in a judicial proceeding; or
         (B)   The Attorney General of California or the District Attorney of
the County of San Bernardino shall issue a written declaration of forfeiture of
such funds in an administrative forfeiture proceedings permitted by statute.
      (3)   If two or more organizations provide information to a law
enforcement agency, and such information is utilized by the law enforcement
agency to obtain an order of forfeiture or a declaration of forfeiture, the
forfeited funds available for distribution shall be divided equally among all
eligible organizations making a claim under such order or declaration.
   (b)   The District Attorney of the County of San Bernardino may adopt such
additional rules and regulations as may be necessary to establish guidelines
for the processing of forfeiture claims, provided such rules and regulations
are consistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3199, passed - -1987)
§ 27.1006   Reports to Board of Supervisors.
   The District Attorney of the County of San Bernardino shall report to the
Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino at least quarterly the
name and address of each nonprofit organization which received an allocation
under this Chapter and the amount given to the organization.
(Ord. 3199, passed - -1987)
§ 27.1007   Effective Date.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to the distribution and
allocation of revenues received by the County of San Bernardino subsequent to
the effective date of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3199, passed - -1987)
CHAPTER 11: REPLICA FIREARMS
Section
   
27.1101   Replica Firearms—Display for Sale and Sale Prohibited.
   
27.1102   Penalty for Violation.
§ 27.1101   Replica Firearms—Display for Sale and Sale Prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall display for sale or sell a replica or facsimile of a
firearm within the unincorporated area of the County.
   (b)   As used in this Chapter, the meaning of the term FIREARM shall be the
same as the meaning of that term under the “Dangerous Weapons’ Control Law”
located at Penal Code §§ 12000 et seq. A REPLICA OR FACSIMILE OF A FIREARM
shall include any device or object made of plastic, wood, metal or any other
material, which can reasonably be perceived to be an actual firearm, but is not
an actual firearm. Such term does not include any nonfiring replica of an
antique firearm, the original of which was designed, manufactured and produced
prior to 1898.
(Ord. 3229, passed - -1988)
§ 27.1102   Penalty for Violation.
   Any person, corporation, firm or association of persons who violates the
provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with the provisions of § 11.0201 of this Code.
(Ord. 3229, passed - -1988)
CHAPTER 12: REGULATION OF EPHEDRINE PURCHASES
Section
   
27.1201   Legislative Purpose.
   
27.1202   Definitions.
   
27.1203   Limitation on Sales.
   
27.1204   Penalties.
   
27.1205   Severability.
§ 27.1201   Legislative Purpose.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino finds that
there is a current and immediate threat to the public health, safety and
welfare in that the manufacture, processing, transportation, possession and
sales of illicit narcotics and drugs are inherently dangerous and that
chemicals, compounds, substances, byproducts and wastes which are associated
with the manufacture of illicit narcotics and drugs are both dangerous and
injurious to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the County of
San Bernardino.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino finds that
there has been a dramatic increase of sales, reports of sales, thefts and
possession of over-the-counter drugs which contain substances known as
ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, hydrochloride, ephedrine hydrochloride, and
pseudoephedrine sulfate, along with other substances and products associated
with the manufacture of methamphetamine, and that retailers are regularly
victimized by those persons who steal these substances, drugs and products on a
regular basis.
   (c)   The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino finds that
the general public does not normally purchase the described products in
multiple quantities and it is not the Board of Supervisor’s intent to restrain
legitimate businesses or customers from selling or purchasing the described
products.
   (d)   No provisions of this Chapter shall hinder or supersede any other
applicable State or Federal statute.
(Ord. 3700, passed - -1997)
§ 27.1202   Definitions.
   The following definitions apply to this Chapter.
   COUNT. The number of pills, tablets, capsules or individual units of a
substance contained within an individual package, box or container.
   CUSTOMER. Any person who purchases or acquires the products described in
this Section, or persons who are present for the purchase or acquisition of the
products described in this Section.
   EPHEDRINE. Any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal that
contains ephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine sulfate, pseudoephedrine
hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine or ephedrine.
   RETAILER. Any single geographic location of any retail business, company,
corporation, person, employee, or associate who furnished, distributes, sells,
or gives away products as described in this Section.
   SELL. To furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, or
supply, whether for monetary gain or not.
(Ord. 3700, passed - -1997)
§ 27.1203   Limitation on Sales.
   (a)   No retailer shall sell to a single customer more than three packages,
per transaction, of a product containing ephedrine. No retailer shall sell to a
single customer, per transaction, products containing ephedrine where the total
counts exceeds 100.
   (b)   No customer shall acquire more than three packages, per day, of a
product containing ephedrine. No customer shall acquire, per day, products
containing ephedrine where the total count exceeds 100.
(Ord. 3700, passed - -1997)
§ 27.1204   Penalties.
   Any person, customer, or retailer violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 3700, passed - -1997)
§ 27.1205   Severability.
   If any section, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this ordinance. The Board of Supervisors declares that it would
have enacted this ordinance and each section, subdivision, sentence, clause or
phrase hereof irrespective of any determination of invalidity.
(Ord. 3700, passed - -1997)
CHAPTER 13: COURTHOUSE SECURITY
Section
   
27.1301   Findings.
   
27.1302   Definitions.
   
27.1303   Restricted Entry.
   
27.1304   Penalty for Violation.
§ 27.1301   Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors finds and determines:
   (a)    The San Bernardino County Sheriff is charged with providing security
at the courthouses located within the County of San Bernardino;
   (b)    In order to detect weapons and other illegal devices, metal detection
equipment and/or other resources have been placed at County courthouses by the
San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department and the Courts;
   (c)    On numerous occasions individuals have attempted to enter County
courthouses with weapons and other illegal devices, have attempted to bypass
security screening equipment and other perimeter security resources, or have
otherwise refused to stop and submit to a search by security personnel;
   (d)    Persons who attempt to circumvent courthouse metal detectors or
perimeter security pose a heightened risk of entering the courthouse with
weapons and other illegal devices, thereby placing court personnel and the
public in danger of violent activity;
   (e)    The County Board of Supervisors desires to create criminal penalties
for those who circumvent or attempt to circumvent courthouse security measures.
§ 27.1302   Definitions.
   As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   COURTHOUSE. Any courthouse located in the County of San Bernardino.
   ENTRY SCREENING AREA.
      (1)    An entry area or main entryway that contains a metal detector; or
      (2)    for any Courthouse that does not contain a metal detector, an
entry area or main entryway designated as an Entry Screening Area by signs
posted at the facility.
   WEAPON. A firearm, knife, taser, stun gun or similar weapon or device as
defined in Penal Code §§ 171b, 244.5, 12020, 12401 or 12402, as well as a knife
or similar-type weapon with a blade over two inches long.
§ 27.1303   Restricted Entry.
   (a)   Each person entering a Courthouse shall enter by means of a designated
Courthouse Entry Screening Area and must either submit his or her person and
property to a screening for weapons or immediately leave the Courthouse and its
grounds. This Subdivision shall not apply to any peace officer entering a
Courthouse on official business and not present as a party to an action who
displays a current, valid, official photographic identification issued by a
governmental law enforcement agency, except for good cause otherwise reasonably
appearing to a weapons screener to conduct a weapons search of a peace officer.
This Subdivision shall also not apply to any person who has been specifically
authorized by the San Bernardino County Superior Court to be currently exempted
from Courthouse entry screening requirements entering a Courthouse on official
business and not present as a party to an action who displays a current, valid,
official photographic identification authorized for Courthouse entry by the San
Bernardino County Superior Court, except for good cause otherwise reasonably
appearing to a weapons screener to conduct a Weapons search of such a person.
Notwithstanding the above, a peace officer or currently-exempt person entering
a Courthouse as a party to an action shall be subject to entry and screening
for weapons via the Courthouse entry screening area.
   (b)    It is unlawful for any person to breach, defeat, bypass, or tamper,
or attempt to breach, defeat, bypass, or tamper, with any mechanism, system or
facility installed to prevent, bar, screen, or restrict access to a Courthouse
or to a Courthouse entry screening area with the intent to circumvent entry
screening, or to aid or attempt to aid another in such a breach, defeat,
bypass, or tampering, or attempted breach, defeat, bypass, or tampering.
   (c)    It is unlawful for any person to enter or exit a Courthouse with the
intent to circumvent or aid another to circumvent a Courthouse entry screening
area, by way of any access door, hallway, or entryway posted as “restricted” or
“no access,” unless expressly permitted to do so by a Sheriff’s Deputy or
designee whose formal duties and responsibilities include security of a
Courthouse.
   (d)    It is unlawful for any person who refuses to submit his or her person
and property to a screening for Weapons to refuse to immediately leave the
Courthouse and its grounds.
   (e)    The provisions of this Chapter are in addition to the authority of
the Sheriff to regulate parties and shall supplement, and not supplant, the
exercise of any other law including, but not limited to, arrest or citation
pursuant to the California Penal Code or local law.
§ 27.1304   Penalty for Violation.
   Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. Any person so convicted
shall be: guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not exceeding
$100.00 and not less than $50.00 for the first offense, unless that offense
includes moving past a Courthouse Entry Screening Area when directed not to do
so by a weapons screener or Sheriff’s Deputy, in which case the first offense
shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and
not less than $500.00, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months,
or by both such fine and imprisonment; guilty of an infraction offense and
punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00 and not less than $100.00 for a second
offense, unless that offense includes moving past a Courthouse entry screening
area when directed not to do so by a weapons screener or Sheriff’s Deputy, in
which case the second offense shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and not less than $500.00, or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The
third and any additional offenses shall constitute misdemeanors and shall each
be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and not less than $500.00, or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 3921, passed - -2004)
CHAPTER 14: REGULATION OF REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS (REPEALED BY ORD. 4374,
PASSED 1-7-2020)
CHAPTER 15: SYNTHETIC STIMULANTS AND SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS
Section
   
27.1501   Purpose and Intent.
   
27.1502   Definitions.
   
27.1503   Provision, Sale, and/or Distribution of Synthetic Drugs Prohibited.
   
27.1504   Provision, Sale, and/or Distribution of Substances Claimed or
Represented to be Synthetic Drugs Prohibited.
   
27.1506   Possession of Synthetic Drugs Prohibited.
   
27.1507   Seizure of Evidence.
   
27.1508   Summary Abatement.
   
27.1509   Modification, Suspension, or Revocation of Permit, License, or Other
Grant of Authority.
   
27.1510   Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   
27.1511   Exclusions.
   
27.1512   Severability.
§ 27.1501 Purpose and Intent.
   Recreational use of psychoactive bath salts, psychoactive herbal incense,
and similar products, commonly known as “synthetic drugs,” has been documented
to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and
homicidal ideations, cannibalism, and death. While State and Federal laws and
regulations prohibit some synthetic drugs, the makers of these drugs
continually alter the composition of the compounds in their products so as to
escape the purview of these laws and regulations. The purpose and intent of
this Chapter is to provide the County of San Bernardino with reasonable means
to address the dangers to the community posed by the provision, distribution,
sale, and/or possession of those synthetic drugs not regulated by State or
Federal law.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1502 Definitions.
   (a)   CONSUME ,  CONSUMING , or CONSUMPTION. To ingest, inhale, inject,
smoke, or snort (insufflate).
   (b)   DISTRIBUTE , DISTRIBUTING , or DISTRIBUTION. To furnish, give away,
exchange, transfer, deliver, or supply, whether for monetary gain or not.
   (c)   PERSON. Includes any natural person, business, firm, company,
corporation, public corporation, club, trust, partnership, association, and/or
similar organization.
   (d)   POSSESS , POSSESSING , or POSSESSION. To have for consumption,
distribution, or sale in a person’s actual or constructive custody or control,
or under a person’s authority or power, whether such custody, control,
authority, and/or power is exercised solely or jointly with others.
   (e)   PROVIDE , PROVIDING , or PROVISION. Offering to distribute or sell a
product or substance to any person.
   (f)   PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS. Any crystalline or powder product that
contains a synthetic chemical compound that, when consumed, elicits
psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects. The term PSYCHOACTIVE BATH
SALTS includes without limitation:
      (1)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects
and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds:
         (A)   Cathinone (2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone), 4-methylmethcathinone
(2-methylamino-1-(4-methylphenyl)propan-1-one), 4-methoxymethcathinone (1-(4-
methoxyphenyl)-2-(methylamino)propan-1 -one), MDPV
(methylenedioxypyrovalerone), MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine),
methylone (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylcathinone), methcathinone (2-
(methylamino)-1-phenyl-propan-1-one), flephedrone (4-fluoromethcathinone), 3-
FMC (3-fluoromethcathinone), ethcathinone (2-ethylamino-1-phenyl-propan-1-one),
butylone (-keto-N-methylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), a-PPP (-
pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MPPP (4'-methyl--pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MDPPP
(3',4'-methylenedioxy--pyrrolidinopropiophenone), -PVP (1-phenyl-2-(1-
pyrrolidinyl)-1-pentanone) or naphyrone (1-naphthalen-2-yl-2-pyrrolidin-1-
ylpentan-1-one);
         (B)   Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical
compounds;
         (C)   Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical
structure similar to the above listed compounds;
         (D)   Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating
chemical compounds; or
         (E)   Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound;
and
      (2)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects
and are marketed under any of the following trade names: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue
Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory
Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory,
Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White
Dove, White Night and White Lightning.
   The term PSYCHOACTIVE BATH SALTS shall not include any product, substance,
material, compound, mixture or preparation that is specifically excepted by the
California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (“UCSA”) (Health and Safety Code
§§ 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA’s schedules of controlled
substances (Health and Safety Code §§ 11053 through 11058), regulated by one of
the UCSA’s Synthetic Drug Laws (Health and Safety Code §§ 11357.5, 11375.5, and
11401), regulated by the Federal Controlled Substances Act (the “CSA”) (21
U.S.C. § 81 et seq.) or approved by the Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”).
   (g)   PSYCHOACTIVE HERBAL INCENSE. Any organic product consisting of plant
material that contains a synthetic stimulant compound that, when consumed,
elicits psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects. The term PSYCHOACTIVE
HERBAL INCENSE includes without limitation:
      (1)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects
and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds:
         (A)   Cannabicyclohexanol (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5-(2-
methylnonan-2-yl)phenol), JWH-018 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-
yl)methanone), JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-200
((1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone), HU-210 (
(6aR,10aR)- 9-(Hydroxymethyl)- 6,6-dimethyl- 3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol), CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-
hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-
hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) or AM-2201 (1-[(5-
fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-(naphthalen-1-yl)methanone);
         (B)   Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical
compounds;
         (C)   Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical
structure similar to the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds;
         (D)   Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating
chemical compounds; or
         (E)   Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound;
and
      (2)   Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects
and are marketed under any of the following trade names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie,
Smoke, Potpourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake,
Ocean Blue, Stinger, Serenity, Fake Weed, and Black Mamba. The term
"psychoactive herbal incense" shall not include any product, substance,
material, compound, mixture, or preparation that is specifically excepted by
the UCSA (Health and Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA’s
schedules of controlled substances (Health and Safety Code §§ 11053 through
11058), regulated by one of the USCA’s Synthetic Drug Laws (Health and Safety
Code §§ 11357.5, 11375.5, and 11401), regulated by the CSA (21 U.S.C. § 81 et
seq.), or approved by the FDA.
   (h)   PSYCHOACTIVE OR PSYCHOTROPIC STIMULANT EFFECTS. Affecting the central
nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness,
cognition, and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cocaine,
methylphenidate, or amphetamines.
   (i)   PSYCHOACTIVE OR PSYCHOTROPIC EUPHORIC EFFECTS. Affecting the central
nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness,
cognition, and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cannabis.
   (j)   SELL , SELLING , or SALE. To furnish, exchange, transfer, deliver, or
supply for monetary gain.
   (k)   SYNTHETIC DRUG. Includes psychoactive bath salts and psychoactive
herbal incense, as those terms are defined hereinabove.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1503 Provision, Sale, and/or Distribution of Synthetic Drugs Prohibited.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to provide, distribute, or sell any
synthetic drug.
   (b)   Merely disclaiming a synthetic drug as “not safe for human
consumption” will not avoid the application of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1504 Provision, Sale, and/or Distribution of Substances Claimed or
Represented to be Synthetic Drugs Prohibited.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to claim or represent that a product
that that person is providing, distributing, or selling is a synthetic drug.
   (b)   To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a product is
a synthetic drug, the enforcing officer may consider any of the following
evidentiary factors:
      (1)   The product is not suitable for its marketed use (such as a
crystalline or powder product being marketed as “glass cleaner”);
      (2)   The person providing, distributing, or selling the product does not
typically provide, distribute, or sell products that are used for that
product’s marketed use (such as a liquor store selling “plant food”);
      (3)   The product contains a warning label that is not typically present
on products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as “not for
human consumption,” “not for purchase by minors,” or “does not contain
chemicals banned by Health and Safety Code § 11357.5”);
      (4)   The product is significantly more expensive than products that are
used for that product’s marketed use (e.g., a half of a gram of a substance
marketed as “glass cleaner” costing multiple times the price of actual glass
cleaner);
      (5)   The product resembles an illicit street drug (such as cocaine,
methamphetamine, or marijuana); or
      (6)   The product’s name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an
illicit street drug (such as “Eight Ballz” or “Green Buddha”).
   (c)   Merely disclaiming a substance claimed or represented to be a
synthetic drug as “not safe for human consumption” will not avoid the
application of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1505 Possession of Synthetic Drugs Prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to possess any synthetic drug for the purpose
of providing, distributing, or selling the synthetic drug.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1506 Public Nuisance.
   (a)   It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, distribute, or sell
any synthetic drug.
   (b)   It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision,
distribution, or sale of any synthetic drug on property owned, controlled, or
managed by such person.
   (c)   It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, distribute, or sell
any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug.
   (d)   It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision,
distribution, or sale of any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic
drug on property owned, controlled, or managed by such person.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1507 Seizure of Evidence.
   Any product or substance provided, distributed, or sold, or possessed for
the purpose of providing, distributing, or selling the product or substance, in
violation of any provision of this Chapter, may be seized by any peace officer
who issues a criminal citation under this Chapter and removed and stored as
evidence in accordance with law.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1508 Summary Abatement.
   Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause
hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal
ideations, cannibalism, and death, any violation of this Chapter presents a
grave and imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug,
but also to the public at large. Thus if the enforcing officer, based on the
facts then known, determines that a violation of this Chapter has occurred or
is occurring, then that violation may be subject to the summary abatement
procedures authorized by the County Code or other law.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1509 Modification, Suspension, or Revocation of Permit, License, or Other
Grant of Authority.
   If a person violates any provision of this Chapter, such violation shall be
grounds for, in addition to any other enforcement action or remedy authorized
by the County Code or other law, modification, suspension, or revocation of any
permit, license, or other grant of authority by the County issued to the
person, or issued to any business, firm, company, corporation, public
corporation, club, trust, partnership, association, and/or similar organization
owned, controlled, or managed by such person, in accordance with the procedure
of the County Code or other law applicable to the respective permit, license,
or other grant of authority.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1510 Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   In addition to any enforcement action and remedy authorized by this Chapter,
a violation of any requirement of this Chapter may be subject to the
enforcement and remedy provisions of
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code and any other applicable
enforcement and remedy provisions of the County Code or provided under the law.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1511 Exclusions.
   (a)   This Chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully
prescribed or to chemical compounds that are approved by the Food and Drug
Administration or that are permitted by State law, including compounds that are
excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Health and Safety
Code §§ 11000 et seq.).
   (b)   This Chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances that are
prohibited by State or Federal law, including, without limitation, Health and
Safety Code §§ 11357.5, 11375.5, 11401 and the Federal Controlled Substances
Act.
   (c)   This Chapter shall not be deemed to prescribe any act that is
permitted, prohibited, or preempted by any State or Federal law or regulation.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
§ 27.1512 Severability.
   If any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction or preempted by State or Federal legislation, such
decision or legislation shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this Chapter. The Board of Supervisors declares that it would have passed
this Chapter and each and every subsection, sentence, clause or phrase not
declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to any such decision or
preemptive legislation.
(Ord. 4253, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 16: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF A CATALYTIC CONVERTER
Section
   
27.1601   Purpose and Intent.
   
27.1602   Unlawful Possession of a Catalytic Converter.
   
27.1603   Valid Proof of Ownership.
   
27.1604   Violations and Enforcement.
§ 27.1601 Purpose and Intent.
   Catalytic converter theft is an increasing problem within San Bernardino
County and causes significant financial damage to the victims. Due to the lack
of Federal or State legislation that requires showing proof of ownership of a
catalytic converter to law enforcement, criminal enforcement remedies are
limited. The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide San Bernardino
County with reasonable means to address the impact on the community and the
victims posed by increasing catalytic converter thefts.
(Ord. 4443, passed - -2022)
§ 27.1602 Unlawful Possession of a Catalytic Converter.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person, other than a core recycler as defined
in Business and Professions Code § 21610, to possess any catalytic converter
that is not attached to a vehicle unless the person has a valid proof of
ownership of the catalytic converter.
   (b)   This Section does not apply to a detached catalytic converter that has
been tested, certified, and labeled or otherwise approved for reuse, and is
being bought or sold for purposes of reuse in accordance with the Federal Clean
Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.) and regulations under the Clean Air Act, as
they may be amended from time to time.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly falsify or cause to be
falsified any information in a record intended to show valid proof of
ownership.
(Ord. 4443, passed - -2022)
§ 27.1603 Valid Proof of Ownership.
   For purposes of this Chapter, VALID PROOF OF OWNERSHIP means:
   (a)   A document containing all of the following information:
      (1)   The license plate number and vehicle identification number of the
car from which the catalytic converter was removed.
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the vehicle
from which the catalytic converter was removed.
      (3)   The signature of the vehicle owner authorizing removal of the
catalytic converter.
      (4)   The name, address, and telephone number of the current owner of the
catalytic converter.
   (b)   In the event the catalytic converter is in the possession of the
current owner of the vehicle from which it was removed, VALID PROOF OF
OWNERSHIP means:
      (1)   Ownership documentation for the vehicle;
      (2)   A valid receipt for a replacement catalytic converter; and
      (3)   Proof of installation of the replacement catalytic converter.
(Ord. 4443, passed - -2022)
§ 27.1604 Violations and Enforcement.
   Each violation of this Chapter constitutes a separate violation, including,
but not limited to, possessing multiple catalytic converter(s) during a single
contact by law enforcement, and is subject to all remedies and enforcement
measures authorized by Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code.
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment in the
County Jail for a term not exceeding six months, or both a fine and jail
sentence.
(Ord. 4443, passed - -2022)
DIVISION 8: PUBLIC PROTECTION
CHAPTER 1: LAND
Section
   
28.0101   Posted Property.
§ 28.0101   Posted Property.
   Any property may be posted against trespass in the manner provided in §
28.0101, Subdivision (a) hereof and thereby become “posted property” subject to
the provisions of this Chapter applicable to posted property, if such property
be used, or be designed to be used, for any one or more of the following
purposes:
      (1)   An oil well, oil field, tank farm, refinery, compressor plant,
absorption plant, pipeline, pumping station, or reservoir, used for the
extraction, treatment, handling, storage or transmission of oil, gas, gasoline,
petroleum, or any product or products thereof;
      (2)   A gas plant, gas storage station, gas meter or regulator station,
gas odorant station, gas pipeline, or appurtenances, or any other property used
in the transmission or distribution of gas;
      (3)   A reservoir, dam, generating plant, receiving station, distributing
station, transformer, transmission line, or any appurtenances, used for the
storage of water for the generation of hydro-electric power, or for the
generation of electricity by water or steam or by any other apparatus or method
suitable for the generation of electricity, or for the handling, transmission,
reception, or distribution of electric energy;
      (4)   The transmission of telegraphic or telephonic messages;
      (5)   A dam, reservoir, pumping plant, aqueduct, canal, tunnel, siphon,
conduit, or any other structure, facility or conductor for storing, diverting,
conserving, treating or conveying water for public use;
      (6)   The production, storage or manufacture of munitions, potash, soda
ash, borax, cement, chemicals, dynamite, giant powder, gun powder or other
explosives;
      (7)   A railroad bridge, railroad tunnel, railroad shops, railroad yard,
or other railroad facility;
      (8)   A hanger or mechanical shop used in connection with the training of
cadet flyers for the United States Government or any of the armed services
thereof;
      (9)   Any use appurtenant to or incidental to any of the uses above
described.
   (a)   Posted Property—Manner of Posting. Any property of a class or classes
described in §
28.0101 of this Chapter may be posted against trespass in the following manner:
      (1)   Any such property, if it be not enclosed within a fence and if it
be of an area not exceeding one acre, and if it have no lineal dimension
exceeding one mile, by posting “No Trespass” signs at each corner of the area
so posted and at each entrance thereto;
      (2)   Any such property, if it be not enclosed within a fence and if it
be of an area exceeding one acre or if it contain any lineal dimension
exceeding one mile, by posting “No Trespass” signs along or near the exterior
boundaries of the area so posted at intervals of not more than 600 feet and
also at each corner thereof, and if such property have definite entrance or
entrances thereto at each such entrance;
      (3)   Any such property, if it be enclosed within a fence and if it be of
an area not exceeding one acre and if it have no lineal dimension exceeding one
mile, by posting “No Trespass” signs at each corner of such fence at each
entrance thereto;
      (4)   Any such property, if it be enclosed within a fence and if it be of
an area exceeding one acre or if it have any lineal dimension exceeding one
mile, by posting “No Trespass” signs on, or along the line of, such fence at
intervals of not more than 600 feet and also at each corner thereof and at each
entrance thereto;
      (5)   Any such property, if it consist of poles or towers or appurtenant
structures for the suspension of wires or other conductors for conveying
electricity or telegraphic or telephonic messages, by affixing upon two or more
sides of such poles or towers “No Trespass” signs, but such posting shall
render only the pole or tower or appurtenant structure “posted property.”
   (b)   Definition of Words and Phrases. The following terms used in this
Subdivision shall, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the
respective meanings herein set forth, namely:
      (1)   The term NO TRESPASS SIGN shall mean a substantial sign affixed not
less than three feet nor more than six feet above the ground level at the place
of posting, as specified in §
28.0101, Subdivision (a) of this Chapter, which sign shall consist of wood,
metal, or other substantial material, with a face of not less than one square
foot in area and upon which, in letters not less than two inches in height
either in black against a white background or white against a black background,
appear the words “No Trespass.”
      (2)   The term POSTED PROPERTY means any property of a class specified in
§
28.0101 of this Chapter which shall have been posted in a manner provided in §
28.0101, Subdivision (a) of this Chapter.
      (3)   The term POSTED BOUNDARY shall mean a line running from “No
Trespass” sign to “No Trespass” sign and such line need not conform to the
legal boundary or legal description of any lot, parcel or acreage of land, but
only the area within the “posted boundary” shall constitute “posted property,”
except as otherwise provided in §
28.0101, Subdivisions (a)(5) hereof.
   (c)   Violation—Posted Property. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to enter
upon or go across any “posted property” without the written permission of the
owner, tenant, or occupant in legal possession or control thereof. Every person
who so enters upon such “posted property” without such written permission is
guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which he or she
enters upon or goes across or remains upon such “posted property.”
   (d)   Violation—Destroying “No Trespass” Signs. Every person is guilty of a
misdemeanor who, without authority, tears down, defaces or destroys any “No
Trespass” sign posted under the provisions of this Chapter.
   (e)   Exemptions to the Application of this Chapter. This Article does not
apply to any entry, in the course of duty, of any peace officer or other duly
authorized public officer, nor does it apply to the lawful use of an
established and existing right-of-way for public road purposes.
(Ord. 486, passed - -1940; Am. Ord. 487, passed - -1940; Am. Ord. 3096, passed
- -1986)
CHAPTER 2: BUILDINGS
Section
   
28.0201   Unlawful Entry.
   
28.0202   Unlawful Occupancy.
§ 28.0201   Unlawful Entry.
   It shall be unlawful in the County of San Bernardino and outside of
incorporated municipalities, for any person or persons to enter into any house,
cabin or other building designed and intended to be used as a dwelling house,
with intent to occupy the same, without the knowledge, consent and permission
of the owner of such building or without the knowledge, consent and permission
of the person or persons having the control, custody and right of possession of
such building.
§ 28.0202   Unlawful Occupancy.
   It shall be unlawful in the County of San Bernardino and outside of
incorporated municipalities, for any person or persons to occupy or live in any
house, cabin or other building designed and intended to be used as a dwelling
house, without the knowledge, consent and permission of the owner of such
building or without the knowledge, consent and permission of the person or
persons having the control, custody and right of possession of such building.
CHAPTER 3: SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY REGIONAL PARKS
Section
   
28.0301   Scope.
   
28.0302   Definitions.
   
28.0303   Authority of Director and Park Rangers.
   
28.0304   Boating and Waterways.
   
28.0305   Permit Required.
   
28.0306   Vehicle Use.
   
28.0307   General Use Regulations.
   
28.0308   Denial of Entry.
   
28.0309   Regulations Applicable to the Use of County-Owned or Operated
Skateboard/Skating Areas or Facilities.
§ 28.0301   Scope.
   (a)   The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all Regional
Parks owned or operated by the County of San Bernardino. Each Regional Park
shall be conducted as a public facility for recreational use and associated
activities, and shall be open for public use between the hours of daybreak and
dusk, or as posted, unless otherwise restricted by the Director or as specified
by an agreement approved by the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   These provisions are not intended to amend, modify, or supersede any
provisions of Federal or State law, or any specific contractual agreement of
the County with which they may conflict, provided that these provisions shall
be interpreted, insofar as is possible, in such manner that no conflict shall
exist.
   (c)   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall make it a violation for County
employees to perform work on Regional Parks at the time and in the manner
assigned by the Director.
(Ord. 1441, passed - -1968; Renumbered by Ord. 1610, passed - -1970; Am. Ord.
3254, passed - -1988)
§ 28.0302   Definitions.
   As used in this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every
liquid or solid which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by
volume and which may be consumed either alone or when mixed, diluted or
combined with other substances.
   BOARD. The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino.
   DEPARTMENT. The Regional Parks Department of the Environmental Public Works
Agency of the County of San Bernardino.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Regional Parks Department of the Environmental
Public Works Agency of the County of San Bernardino.
   PARK or REGIONAL PARK. Each Regional Park owned or operated by the County of
San Bernardino, except when otherwise specifically noted. It includes all
property within the boundaries of the park.
   PARK RANGER or RANGER. Deemed to mean and include the Director and any
Regional Parks Department employee so appointed by the Director.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association, organization, joint stock association or body politic; and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative
thereof.
(Ord. 1441, passed - -1968; Renumbered by Ord. 1610, passed - -1970; Am. Ord.
3254, passed - -1988)
§ 28.0303   Authority of Director and Park Rangers.
   (a)   The Director shall have the authority to establish policies, rules,
orders and directives which are not inconsistent with this Chapter. The
Director is empowered to post signs or employ other markings at any Park which
state or apply to this Chapter and any policies, rules, orders, or directives
adopted pursuant to this Chapter.
   (b)   The Director and any Park Ranger is empowered to revoke the permit of
any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or any rules, orders, or
directives adopted pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 1441, passed - -1968; Renumbered by Ord. 1610, passed - -1970; Am. Ord.
3254, passed - -1988)
§ 28.0304   Boating and Waterways.
   (a)   Inflatable boats, inner tubes, or rubber rafts are not allowed on
Regional Park lakes, except as designated.
   (b)   Boats shall be operated and docked only in designated areas. Motorized
boats with gas engines are not permitted at any Regional Park lake, except
within the Moabi Regional Park marina. Motorized boats shall not exceed speed
in excess of five miles per hour.
   (c)   All persons 12 years of age and under shall wear a Coast Guard-
approved vest-type personal flotation device at all times while using
pedalboats, aquacycles, rowboats, motorized boats or other water crafts on any
Regional Park lake or waterway. All persons over 12 years of age shall have a
Coast Guard-approved personal flotation device at all times while using
pedalboats, aquacycles, rowboats, motorized boats, or other water crafts on any
Regional Park lake or waterway.
(Ord. 1441, passed - -1968; Renumbered by Ord. 1610, passed - -1970; Am. Ord.
3254, passed - -1988)
§ 28.0305   Permit Required.
   (a)   No person shall enter any Regional Park, operate any boat or vehicle
therein, camp, picnic, ride horseback, swim, hike, or build or maintain a
campfire therein, without first obtaining from the County a permit to do so and
paying any fee as may be established from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors.
   (b)   Any permit issued pursuant to Subdivision (a) of this Section may be
revoked at any time without refund of any fee paid, for any violation of this
Chapter, any rules, orders or directives adopted pursuant to this Chapter, or
of other applicable local, State, or Federal law.
   (c)   Any person whose permit has been revoked by the Director or any Park
Ranger shall immediately leave the Park and shall not return to the same Park
for the remainder of the calendar day.
(Ord. 1441, passed - -1968; Renumbered by Ord. 1610, passed - -1970; Am. Ord.
3254, passed - -1988)
§ 28.0306   Vehicle Use.
   No person shall, within any Regional Park:
   (a)   Operate any vehicle at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit, or
operate any vehicle except upon established public roads and within parking
lots, unless otherwise approved by the Director;
   (b)   Operate any motor vehicle without a muffler system conforming to the
provisions of the California Vehicle Code;
   (c)   Cause or permit any vehicle to occupy or be parked in a campsite
except as authorized by the Director;
   (d)   Park and leave unattended any vehicle in areas other than those
designated for parking. Vehicles left unattended in areas not so designated, or
in other areas without permission, may be towed away and stored by the County
and said removal and storage costs shall be charged to and paid by the owner
prior to release;
   (e)   Operate an off-road vehicle except in designated areas established by
the Director;
   (f)   Ride a bicycle except on the designated roadways, parking lots, or
bicycle paths within the park.
(Ord. 3254, passed - -1988)
§ 28.0307   General Use Regulations.
   No person shall, without permission of the County, within a Regional Park:
   (a)   Camp, picnic, hike, fish, swim, or build or maintain a fire, campfire,
flame burning device used for any reason whatsoever, or engage in any activity
except in areas specifically designated for that purpose;
   (b)   Camp or occupy a campsite for more than 14 days in any 30-day calendar
period at any Regional Park, except designated areas;
   (c)   Occupy any designated campsite with the occupants of more than one
vehicle, which in no circumstances shall exceed a total of six persons at any
campsite without an additional permit, except designated group camp sites;
   (d)   Occupy any designated campsite unless at least one person in the
campsite group is 18 years of age or older;
   (e)   Fish, without possessing and displaying to any Park Ranger upon
request, a valid California State fishing license;
   (f)    Fish, except in designated areas and only during the established park
hours;
   (g)   Leave unattended any child, eight years of age or under, unless such
child is accompanied by a person 16 years of age or older;
   (h)   Pick flowers, foliage, berries or fruits, or cut, break, dig up, or in
any way mutilate or injure any tree, shrub, plant, fern, grass, turf, fence,
structure or any other object;
   (i)   Cut, carve, paint, mark, paste or fasten on any tree, fence, wall,
building, monument or other object, any bill, advertisement, or inscription;
   (j)   Dig up or remove any dirt, stones, rocks, or other substance whatever,
make any excavation, quarry any stone, or lay or set off any blast or cause or
assist in doing any of said things;
   (k)   Molest, injure, or kill any bird or mammal, or disturb its habitat;
   (l)   Despoil, place, or leave any broken glass, ashes, wastepaper, cans or
other rubbish or polluted matter, except in a receptacle provided for that
purpose;
   (m)   Bring into any park any broken glass, ashes, wastepaper, cans, or
other rubbish or polluted matter;
   (n)   Possess, discharge, or set off, over, onto, or through any regional
park any firearms, firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, air guns, slingshots, BB
guns, or other explosives or fireworks, except as permitted under the rules for
the Prado Tiro Shooting Range;
   (o)   Permit any animal to enter, swim, or bathe in any lake, pond, or swim
area located within a regional park;
   (p)   Ride, lead, or tie any horse, or other large animal, except in areas
designated for such use;
   (q)   Engage in soliciting, selling, or peddling any goods or services or to
distribute any circulars;
   (r)   Bring into a designated swim area any object including, but not
limited to, glass, which, if broken, could cause injury;
   (s)   Use any personal flotation device which is not Coast Guard-approved,
except at Moabi Regional Park;
   (t)   Possess or consume alcoholic beverages within designated swim areas or
on the Main Street of Calico Ghost Town Regional Park;
   (u)   Operate a radio or remote controlled boat or airplane except in
designated areas, with liability insurance in the amounts established by the
Director, and with a retrieval boat during any operation of radio or remote
controlled boats.
(Ord. 3254, passed - -1988)
§ 28.0308   Denial of Entry.
   Any person who in the course of any calendar year has any permit(s) revoked
and/or is convicted of violating any provision(s) of this Chapter a total of
three or more times, shall be denied entry to and use of all Parks for the
remainder of the same calendar year.
(Ord. 3254, passed - -1988)
§ 28.0309   Regulations Applicable to the Use of County-Owned or Operated
Skateboard/Skating Areas or Facilities.
   (a)   No person shall skateboard or skate, or otherwise be present within
any skateboard/skating area or facility, at times other than those established
by the Director of Regional Parks or his or her designee as the hours of
operation. Hours of operation shall be posted. The hours are subject to change
without prior notice
   (b)   No person shall use any skateboard/skating area or facility for any
use other than skateboarding and skating. No skateboarding or skating is
permitted on fences, steps or walkways or any other areas not specifically
designed for such use.
   (c)   Each person using any skateboard/skating area or facility must wear
proper safety equipment including a helmet, elbow pads and kneepads. All such
safety equipment must be functional and protective, properly sized and designed
for skateboarding or skating purposes.
   (d)   No person shall ride, use, or bring into the fenced skateboard/skating
area or facility any wheeled device other than roller skates, in-line skates,
or skateboards. Use of any other wheeled device including, but not limited to,
bicycles, scooters, unicycles, go-carts or wagons is prohibited.
   (e)   No person shall possess or use alcohol, drugs or tobacco products
within a skateboard/skating area or facility.
   (f)   No person shall litter or discard any materials in any skateboard/
skating area or facility. Each person using the skateboard/skating area or
facility must place any trash created at or brought to the skateboard/skating
area or facility in refuse containers provided by the County. If the County
provides no refuse container, each person shall be responsible for removing
such trash from the skateboard/skating area or facility and disposing of such
trash in an appropriate manner.
   (g)   No person shall cause graffiti, tagging or the attachment of any
stickers or unauthorized signs in or upon any part of a skateboard/skating area
or facility or anywhere in the surrounding park area or facility.
   (h)   No person shall ride or permit to be ridden, any skateboard or skates
in a skateboard/skating area or facility in a reckless manner or with willful
disregard for the safety of persons or property.
   (i)   Glass containers and other glass products are prohibited within the
skateboard/skating area or facility.
   (j)   No ramps, jumps or other obstacles may be brought into, nor may such
ramps, jumps or obstacles be used at, any skateboard/skating area or facility,
except for any such ramps, jumps or obstacles specifically built into the
skateboard/skating area or facility by the County or its operator.
   (k)   The skateboard/skating area or facility shall not be used if any
hazardous condition exists, including but not limited to inclement weather,
significant cracks, breaks or other visible irregularities in the skating
surface of the skateboard/skating area or facility.
   (l)   Personal stereos and boom box radios are prohibited within any
skateboard/skating area or facility.
   (m)   No animals are allowed in any skateboard/skating area or facility.
   (n)   All organized events must have the prior written approval of the
Director of Regional Parks or his or her designee.
   (o)   The County is not responsible for any items that are lost or stolen
within any skateboard/skating area or facility.
   (p)   Any person suffering an injury within a skateboard/skating area or
facility must promptly report the injury to the County of San Bernardino
Regional Parks Department and/or designated operator.
   (q)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Section may be
required to leave the skateboard/skating area or facility for a period of 48
hours by any County employee or police officer. Failing to leave, or returning
within 48 hours, shall be a violation punishable as an infraction. Any person
who in the course of any calendar year has been required to leave any
skateboard/skating area or facility pursuant to this Subdivision for a total of
three or more times, shall be denied entry to and use of any skateboarding/
skating area or facility for the following 12 months. Enforcement of this
Subdivision shall not limit the enforcement of any other applicable laws
relative to the specific act which gives rise to a violation of any provision
of this Section.
(Ord. 4001, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 4: OFF-HIGHWAY MOTOR VEHICLE USE
Section
   
28.0401   Definitions.
   
28.0402   Applicability.
   
28.0403   Operating Without Permission on Private or Public Property
Prohibited.
   
28.0404   Staging.
   
28.0405   Noise Limits.
   
28.0406   Disturbing the Peace and Quiet Prohibited.
   
28.0407   Criminal Penalty.
   
28.0408   Civil Actions.
   
28.0409   Administrative Citations and Penalties.
§ 28.0401   Definitions.
   For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
definitions and meanings set forth below:
   HIGHWAY. Any road, street, way, or place, publicly maintained and open to
use by the public for purposes of vehicular travel. For purposes of this
Chapter, the term HIGHWAY does not include fire trails, logging roads, service
roads regardless of surface composition, any dedicated roadway or easement for
road purposes that has not been accepted into the road system of the
appropriate governmental jurisdiction, or other roughly graded trails and roads
upon which vehicular travel by the public is permitted.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. The meaning set forth in Vehicle Code § 415.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTOR VEHICLE. The meaning set forth in Vehicle Code § 38006.
   STAGING. A formal or informal assembly or gathering of off-highway vehicles,
or other vehicles and equipment accessory thereto, including any related
camping or establishment of temporary accommodations, on private or public
property for purposes of coordinating the use and operation of such off-highway
vehicles on such property or the surrounding areas.
§ 28.0402   Applicability.
   Except for §
28.0405, this Chapter shall not apply to the proper and legal operation of an
off-highway motor vehicle on a highway or within any area, trail or route
specifically designated or authorized by a local, State, or Federal government
agency for use by off-highway motor vehicles.
§ 28.0403   Operating Without Permission on Private or Public Property
Prohibited.
   Every person who operates an off-highway motor vehicle upon the private
property of another or upon any public property, except a highway, at all times
while so operating shall maintain in his or her possession written permission
from the person or entity that is in possession of the property or that owns
the property granting permission to operate off-highway motor vehicles thereon;
except that if the same document grants permission to two or more persons, a
person named in such document need not have such document in his or her
possession while another person named in the same document, riding in the same
group, and not more than 300 feet from such person, has such document in his or
her possession. This Section shall not apply to the proper and legal operation
of an off-highway motor vehicle by a property owner on a dedicated roadway or
easement for road purposes (whether or not accepted into the road system of the
appropriate governmental jurisdiction), if such dedicated roadway or easement
is for access to and from the property owner’s property.
§ 28.0404   Staging.
   Staging shall be permitted on private property of no less than two and one-
half acres in size, consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and for no
longer than six days in a 30-day period.
(Am. Ord. 4103, passed - -2010)
§ 28.0405   Noise Limits.
   No off-highway motor vehicle shall exceed the noise standards established in
California Vehicle Code applicable to off-highway motor vehicles.
§ 28.0406   Disturbing the Peace and Quiet Prohibited.
   Notwithstanding any other provision in this Chapter, no person shall operate
any motor vehicle (including any off-highway motor vehicle), or the motor
thereof, nor shall any person organize, conduct, or participate in staging (as
defined herein), in a manner that disturbs the peace or quiet of any
neighborhood or person by noise, dust, smoke, or fumes caused by such motor
vehicle or staging activity. The Code Enforcement Division of Land Use Services
Department shall establish procedures for the investigation and enforcement of
this Section, which shall be substantially similar to those contained in §
32.0119 of the County Code, except that if the offending activity occurs in the
presence of a code enforcement officer or peace officer, the officer shall have
the authority to issue a citation to the offending party pursuant to applicable
provisions of this Code.
§ 28.0407   Criminal Penalty.
   (a)   Except as provided in subdivisions (b), (c) and (d), a violation of
this Chapter is an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00.
   (b)   A second violation of this Chapter that is committed within three
years after a prior violation for which there was a conviction is an
infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $400.00.
   (c)   A third violation of this Chapter that is committed within three years
after two violations for which there were convictions is an infraction,
punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00.
   (d)   A fourth or subsequent violation of this Chapter that is committed
within three years after three or more prior violations for which there were
convictions is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00
or by imprisonment in County jail for not more than 90 days, or by both fine
and imprisonment.
(Ord. 1590, passed --1970; Am. Ord. 3096, passed --1986; Am. Ord. 3973, passed
--2006; Am. Ord. 4103, passed - -2010)
§ 28.0408 Civil Actions.
   All violations of this Chapter may be subject to enforcement through the
initiation of a civil action in accordance with this Section and in the same
manner and under the same authority as provided at §
11.0207 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4103, passed - -2010)
§ 28.0409 Administrative Citations and Penalties.
   As an alternative to the criminal or civil enforcement of this Chapter, all
violations of this Chapter may be subject to enforcement through the use of
administrative citations in accordance with Government Code § 53069.4 and this
Section, and in the same manner and under the same authority as provided at §
11.0208 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4103, passed - -2010)
CHAPTER 5: TRESPASS
Section
   
28.0501   Trespass by Refusal to Leave.
   
28.0502   Trespass by Prohibited Entry.
   
28.0503   Form of Notification.
   
28.0504   Exceptions.
§ 28.0501   Trespass by Refusal to Leave.
   It is unlawful for any person to remain on any private property or business
premises after being notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge
thereof to remove therefrom.
(Ord. 2076, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3096, passed - -1987)
§ 28.0502   Trespass by Prohibited Entry.
   It is unlawful for any person, without permission, express or implied, of
the owner or lessee or other person in charge of private property or business
premises, to enter upon such private property or business premises after having
been notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof to keep
off or keep away therefrom.
(Ord. 2076, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3096, passed - -1987)
§ 28.0503   Form of Notification.
   Within the meaning of §§
28.0501 and
28.0502, notification by the owner or lessee or other person in charge of the
property or premises may be satisfied by direct verbal communication by any
such person or by his or her duly delegated agent, including a peace officer or
private patrol officer, or by sign conspicuously posted on the property or
premises giving notice of the prohibition of the particular form of trespass
involved.
(Ord. 2076, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3096, passed - -1987)
§ 28.0504   Exceptions.
   This Chapter shall not apply in any of the following instances:
   (a)   Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited
by the Unruh Civil Rights Act (which forbids a business establishment generally
open to the public from unreasonably and arbitrarily excluding any prospective
customer, and from practicing any racial or other prohibited discrimination);
   (b)   Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited
by any other provisions of law relating to unlawful discrimination against any
person on account of color, race, religion, creed, ancestry or national origin;
   (c)   Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited
by Penal Code § 365 or any other provision of law relating to duties of
innkeepers and common carriers;
   (d)   Where its application would result in an interference with or
inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities;
   (e)   Where its application would result in an interference with or
inhibition of any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of
freedom of speech such as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of
political or religious opinions, not involving conduct otherwise punishable
criminally under such laws as Penal Code §§ 647c (Obstruction of a Street,
Sidewalk, or Other Public Area) or 415 (Disturbing the Peace);
   (f)   Where the person who is upon another’s private property or business
premises is there under claim or color of legal right. This exception is
applicable, but not limited to, the following types of situations involving
disputes wherein the participants generally have civil remedies readily
available to them: marital and post-marital disputes; child custody or
visitation disputes; disputes regarding title to or rights in real property;
landlord-tenant disputes; disputes between members of the same family or
between persons residing upon the property concerned up until the time of the
dispute; employer-employee disputes; business-type disputes such as those
between partners; debtor-creditor disputes; and instances wherein the person
claims rights to be present pursuant to order, decree or process of a court.
(Ord. 2076, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3096, passed - -1987)
CHAPTER 6: ACCESS: CUCAMONGA CANYON
Section
   
28.0601   Prohibition of Unauthorized Access to Cucamonga Canyon.
§ 28.0601   Prohibition of Unauthorized Access to Cucamonga Canyon.
   (a)   No person shall enter or remain upon any private or public land in the
area of Cucamonga Canyon between the time period of one hour after sunset on
any given day to one hour before sunrise on the following day, without having
written permission from the owner of such lands, or the owner’s agent or
lessee, authorizing such entry onto such private or public lands.
   (b)   For the purpose of this Section, “the area of Cucamonga Canyon” shall
mean any and all private or public property, excluding roadways open to the
public, within the unincorporated area of the County, south of the San
Bernardino National Forest, north of the City of Rancho Cucamonga city limits,
and west of what would be the northerly extension of Sapphire Street if said
Sapphire Street extended northward to the San Bernardino National Forest.
   (c)   The terms and provisions of this Section shall not apply to the
following:
      (1)   The owner or lessee of such lands, or owner’s or lessee’s agent,
together with persons having visible or lawful business with said owner,
lessee, agent or person in lawful possession;
      (2)   Any Federal, State or local law enforcement, fire protection or
safety personnel;
      (3)   Any public utility or related service personnel while actively
engaged in the performance of such public utility or related service;
      (4)   Any fenced and privately owned land containing structures,
dwellings or other improvements of an owner or person in lawful possession of
such property; and,
      (5)   The area of the Forest Service access easement to the San
Bernardino National Forest commonly known by the names “Big Tree Road” or
“Cucamonga Canyon Truck Road.”
   (d)   The County Administrative Officer may designate a County Department to
post any necessary signs.
(Ord. 3267, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3268, passed - -1988)
CHAPTER 7: GRAFFITI PREVENTION
Section
   
28.0701   Findings.
   
28.0702   Definitions.
   
28.0703   Removal of Graffiti.
   
28.0704   Aerosol Paint Containers and Felt Tip Markers.
   
28.0705   Property Maintenance.
§ 28.0701   Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors finds that graffiti, on public and private
properties, is a blighting factor on the neighborhood, encourages other acts of
malicious vandalism, and depreciates the value of adjacent and surrounding
properties. The Board also finds that graffiti is inconsistent with the
County’s property maintenance goals, aesthetic standards, and that it is
important to remove graffiti as quickly as possible. The Board further finds
that aerosol paint containers and felt tip markers are used to create graffiti
and that there is a need for retailers to keep such items under lock and key,
available only on special request, to reduce their use for purposes of
graffiti.
(Ord. 3537, passed - -1993)
§ 28.0702   Definitions.
   For purposes of this Chapter:
   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER. Any aerosol container, regardless of the material
from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying
paint capable of defacing property.
   FELT TIP MARKER. Any broad-tipped indelible marker or similar implement
containing ink or dye that is not water-soluble, and which has a flat or angled
writing surface one-half inch long or greater.
   GRAFFITI. Includes any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or design that
is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any structural component of
any building, structure, or other facility, regardless of the nature of the
material of that structural component.
(Ord. 3537, passed - -1993)
§ 28.0703   Removal of Graffiti.
   County funds may be used to remove graffiti from public or privately owned
permanent structures located in the unincorporated portion of the County,
provided:
   (a)   The funds are only used to remove the graffiti itself, and not for
painting or repair of a more extensive area;
   (b)   In the case of a publicly-owned structure, only after securing the
consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure;
   (c)   In the case of a privately-owned structure, only after securing the
consent of the owner.
(Ord. 3537, passed - -1993)
§ 28.0704   Aerosol Paint Containers and Felt Tip Markers.
   Every retailer selling or offering for sale in the unincorporated portion of
the County of San Bernardino aerosol paint containers or felt tip markers shall
keep, store and maintain such items in a place that is locked and secure, or
otherwise unavailable except by special request.
(Ord. 3537, passed - -1993)
§ 28.0705   Property Maintenance.
   Graffiti on any residence, rental housing, multi-residential, commercial or
industrial building, structure, sidewalk or driveway is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. The criminal penalties for graffiti as a public nuisance and
the civil procedures for abatement of graffiti as a public nuisance shall be as
provided in
Title 3, Division 3, Chapters
1,
2 and
3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 3537, passed - -1993)
CHAPTER 8: LITTERING AND ILLEGAL DUMPING
Section
   
28.0801   Purpose.
   
28.0802   Definitions.
   
28.0803   Authority.
   
28.0804   Littering and Illegal Dumping.
   
28.0805   Criminal Penalties.
   
28.0806   Powers of an Illegal Dumping Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement
Officer.
   
28.0807   Civil actions.
   
28.0808   Administrative Citations and Penalties.
   
28.0809   Severability
§ 28.0801 Purpose.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors has determined that littering and illegal
dumping are serious concerns that endanger the public health and safety within
the unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors has further determined that persons who
commit the act of littering or illegal dumping damage neighborhoods and the
environment. The results of littering or illegal dumping can be severe. The
blight, decay and unhealthful conditions created by littering and illegal
dumping negatively impact the quality of life of County residents and lead to
diminished property values. Illegally dumped waste quickly becomes hazardous to
the environment. Tires, refrigerators, household hazardous materials,
television and auto parts often contain toxins. Mice, rats and mosquitoes make
illegally dumped waste their breeding habitat. These vectors can spread
diseases such as West Nile virus, malaria, encephalitis and Lyme disease.
Littering frequently becomes a public nuisance. The Board of Supervisors finds
that there is a need to provide additional deterrents to littering and illegal
dumping. The Board of Supervisors has further determined that anyone caught
committing the act of littering or illegal dumping faces citation and arrest or
administrative or civil enforcement actions.
   (c)   The procedures contained in this Chapter for the citation and arrest
of, or administrative or civil action against, persons caught committing the
act of littering or illegal dumping are expressly intended as a deterrent and
remedy to further the abatement of littering and illegal dumping; to protect
residents and the public at large from harm to their health, safety and
welfare; to avoid destruction and injury to lives and property; and to
compensate the County for damages incurred as a result of the occurrence of the
nuisance activities. Examples of such damages are the costs of cleaning up
litter and illegal dump sites and diverting limited public agency resources to
address the nuisance activities through direct enforcement or other programs
designed to prevent littering and illegal dumping.
(Ord. 4367, passed - -2019)
§ 28.0802 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITATION OFFICER. A representative of any County department authorized by
the San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter under §
28.0803 by issuing citations, but who is not authorized to arrest violators.
   COMMERCIAL QUANTITIES. Any amount of waste matter generated in the course of
a trade, business, profession, or occupation, or an amount of waste matter
equal to or in excess of one cubic yard.
   CUBIC YARD. The volume of a cube with all sides being one yard (three feet/
36 inches) in length.
   ILLEGAL DUMPING. The willful throwing, dropping, placing or depositing of
any waste matter, bulky item, hazardous waste, solid waste or liquid waste on
any public or private property in the unincorporated area of the County that is
not approved and appropriately permitted as a disposal site for the disposal of
the type of waster matter thrown, dropped, placed or deposited at the site.
   ILLEGAL DUMPING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER means a
citation officer or code enforcement officer who is also defined and authorized
under Penal Code § 830.7(j), to arrest illegal dumpers and litterers to the
extent necessary to enforce laws related to illegal waste dumping or littering
pursuant to this Chapter. An ILLEGAL DUMPING OFFICER or CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER is a public officer. An ILLEGAL DUMPING OFFICER or CODE ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER shall be appointed by the Director of the Land Use Services Department.
   LITTER and LITTERING. The discarding, dropping, or scattering of small
quantities of waste matter ordinarily carried on or about the person or the
person’s non-commercial vehicle, including, but not limited to, beverage
containers and closures, packaging, wrappers, wastepaper, newspapers, cigarette
butts, and magazines, in a place other than a place or container for the proper
disposal thereof, and including waste matter that escapes or is allowed to
escape from a container, receptacle, package, or vehicle.
   NUISANCE. The same meaning as set forth in Civil Code § 3479.
   PERSON. An individual, trust, firm, partnership, joint stock company, joint
venture, or corporation.
   PUBLIC AGENCY. Any County department and any Federal, State, or local
agency.
   WASTE MATTER. Any form of physical matter described by the following:
      (1)   BULKING ITEM. Any discarded furniture, home or industrial appliance
or abandoned vehicle or any part of an abandoned vehicle.
      (2)   SOLID WASTE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid
and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes,
industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, dewatered, treated or
chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable
or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid
wastes.
      (3)   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste as defined in the Health and Safety Code
§ 25117, or as the statue may be amended or reenacted.
      (4)   LIQUID WASTE. All forms of liquid waste not otherwise defined in or
otherwise deemed to fall within the coverage afforded by the Health and Safety
Code § 25117; including but not limited to gray water, black water, water-based
or oil-based paints; chemical solutions; non-potable water contaminated with
any substance rendering it unusable for irrigation or construction; oils,
fuels, hydrocarbon liquids, and other petroleum distillates or by-products.
(Ord. 4367, passed - -2019)
§ 28.0803 Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code and other relevant State
law, the Board of Supervisors authorizes the following County departments and
divisions to enforce the provisions of this chapter: Land Use Services
Department, Environmental Health Services Department, County Fire Protection
District, County Sheriff’s Department, and Solid Waste Management Division.
(Ord. 4367, passed - -2019)
§ 28.0804 Littering and Illegal Dumping.
   (a)   Any person who illegally dumps waste matter, or causes, maintains and/
or permits waste matter to be illegally dumped, shall be guilty of an
infraction or a misdemeanor and such action shall be punishable as an
infraction or a misdemeanor.
   (b)   Any person who illegally dumps commercial quantities of waste matter,
or causes, maintains and/or permits the illegal dumping of commercial
quantities of waste matter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Any person who litters, or causes, maintains, and/or permits littering
in or upon public or private property shall be guilty an infraction or a
misdemeanor and such action shall be punishable as an infraction or a
misdemeanor.
   (d)   Any of the acts prohibited by this Section shall also be deemed to be
a public nuisance subject to the enforcement and abatement procedures set forth
in
Chapter 3 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code.
(Ord. 4367, passed - -2019)
§ 28.0805 Criminal Penalties.
   (a)   Any person convicted of an infraction for littering or illegal dumping
in violation of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of $100.00 upon a
first conviction, a fine of $200.00 for a second conviction, and a fine of
$500.00 upon a third or subsequent conviction.
   (b)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for littering or illegal dumping
in violation of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00
upon a first conviction, by a mandatory fine of not less than $250 and up to
$1,500.00 for a second conviction, and by a mandatory fine of not less than
$500 and up to $3,000.00 upon a third or subsequent conviction, or by
imprisonment in the County jail for not more than six months and by a fine.
   (c)   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for illegal dumping of
commercial quantities of waste matter in relation to this Chapter shall be
punished by a mandatory fine of not less than $500.00 and not to exceed
$3,000.00 upon a first conviction, by a mandatory fine of not less than $500.00
and not to exceed $6,000.00 upon a second conviction, and a mandatory fine of
not less than $500.00 and not to exceed $10,000.00 or imprisonment in the
County jail for a period of not more than six months or by both fine and
imprisonment upon a third or subsequent conviction.
   (d)   Each and every day that the litter or waste matter illegally dumped in
violation of this Chapter remains in place and unabated (that is, not properly
removed and the area properly cleaned up) is a separate and distinct violation
of this Chapter.
   (e)   In addition to any fine imposed upon a conviction of an infraction or
misdemeanor under this Chapter, the court shall require that the person
convicted under this Chapter pay the reasonable cost of removing any litter or
waste matter that the convicted person dumped, and/or caused to be dumped and/
or maintained.
   (f)   The court may, in addition to the fine imposed upon a conviction,
require as a condition of probation, in addition to any other condition of
probation, that any person convicted of a violation of this Section pick up
litter or waste matter at a time and place within the jurisdiction of the court
for not less than eight hours.
(Ord. 4367, passed - -2019)
§ 28.0806 Powers of an Illegal Dumping Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement
Officer.
   An illegal dumping enforcement officer or code enforcement officer may
exercise the powers of arrest granted to him or her, provided that all of the
necessary provisions of Penal Code § 830.7(j) have been met vesting them with
the authority to arrest litterers or illegal dumpers.
(Ord. 4367, passed - -2019)
§ 28.0807 Civil Actions.
   All violations of this Chapter may be subject to enforcement through the
initiation of a civil action in accordance with this Section and in the same
manner and under the same authority as provided at §
11.0207 of the County Code.
(Ord. 4367, passed - -2019)
§ 28.0808 Administrative Citations and Penalties.
   As an alternative to the criminal or civil enforcement of this Chapter, all
violations of this Chapter may be subject to enforcement through the use of
administrative citations in accordance with Government Code § 53069.4 and this
Section, and in the same manner and under the same authority as provided in §
11.0208 of the County Code. The remedies are cumulative and discretionary, not
exclusive.
(Ord. 4367, passed - -2019)
§ 28.0809 Severability.
   If any provision of this Chapter is found to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and
effect.
(Ord. 4367, passed - -2019)
CHAPTER 9: UNLAWFUL CAMPING AND OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
   
28.0901   Definitions.
   
28.0902   Unpermitted Camping on Public Property Prohibited.
   
28.0903   Obstruction of Public Access to Sidewalks, Trails, Public Facilities,
and Other Public Rights-of-Way, and Other Public Offenses.
   
28.0904   Abatement of Encampments and Camp Facilities and Materials.
   
28.0905   Enforcement.
§ 28.0901 Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
following meanings:
   CAMP. To place, pitch, establish or occupy any temporary structure or
materials including but not limited to the laying down of bedding or erecting a
tent for the purpose of temporarily, irregularly, or permanently sleeping,
staying, living, or residing. An activity shall constitute camping or lodging
when it reasonably appears, in light of all circumstances, that the individual
(s), in conducting these activities, are in fact using the area as living
accommodations regardless of the intent of the individual(s) or the nature of
any other activity in which they may be engaging.
   CAMP FACILITIES OR MATERIALS. Includes but is not limited to, tents, huts,
tarpaulins, cardboard boxes, blankets, bedrolls, mattresses, cots, sleeping
bags, hammocks, lawn and folding chairs, cooking equipment, fire starters,
materials used for fire fuel, ice chest, and similar items, or vehicles,
including recreational vehicles (RV), operable or otherwise.
   ENCAMPMENT. Places where a group of individuals reside that is not intended
for long-term, continuous occupancy.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Shall have the same meaning as defined in §
11.0202 of the County Code.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Tangible personal belongings or possessions, which shall
include any movable or tangible thing that is subject to ownership; property or
chattels that can be seen, weighed, measured, felt, or touched, including, but
not limited to, furniture, appliances, items used for camping such as tents or
bedding, money, books, and shopping carts.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Includes but is not limited to, public buildings, streets,
sidewalks, trails, alleys, medians, greenways, easements, parks, waterways,
canal banks, county highways (as defined in §§ 25, 960.5 and 1480 of the Cal.
Streets and Highways Code, or as amended), and other rights-of-way dedicated
for public use and lawfully accepted by the County, and other public amenities.
   STORE and STORING. To put aside or accumulate for later use, to put for
safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.
(Ord. 4494, passed - -2025)
§ 28.0902 Unpermitted Camping on Public Property Prohibited.
   (a)   It is unlawful and a violation of this code for any person(s) to camp,
occupy camp facilities, or use camping materials on public property not
specially designated for day and/or overnight campgrounds.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to public property specifically
designated for camping or where camping has been authorized by a responsible
local, state, or federal agency. Persons desiring to camp on County owned,
controlled, or maintained public property designated for camping must comply
with Chapter 3 of Division 8 of Title 2 of this Code and the permitting
requirements of §
28.0305 of this Code. Persons desiring to camp on public property owned,
controlled, or maintained by a department of the United States, the California
Department of Parks and Recreation, or other local public agencies must comply
with the applicable laws, regulations and permitting requirements of the
responsible department of the United States, the California Department of Parks
and Recreation, or other local public agencies.
   (c)   Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the possession or
transportation of camping facilities or materials on public property, unless
otherwise in violation of this Chapter.
   (d)   Persons desiring to use county-owned grounds or buildings for public
meetings and other approved uses must apply for a public use permit if required
by this Code or County policy.
   (e)   In the situation where an unpermitted camp is erected and no exigent
circumstances exist to public safety, notification to vacate shall be provided
at least 72 hours prior to enforcement action.
   (f)   Notwithstanding subsection (e), if a camp or an encampment poses an
imminent threat to life, health, safety or infrastructure, advanced notice to
vacate shall be provided only as reasonably necessary under the circumstances.
   (g)   Nothing in this Chapter shall be read to permit camping on private
property in violation of the San Bernardino County Code including §
84.25.070.
(Ord. 4494, passed - -2025)
§ 28.0903 Obstruction of Public Access to Sidewalks, Trails, Public Facilities,
and Other Public Rights of Way, and Other Public Offenses.
   (a)   No individual shall obstruct a street, sidewalk, alleyway, trail,
county highway (as defined in § 25, 960.5 and 1480 of the Cal. Streets and
Highways Code, or as amended), entrance to public facilities, driveway, or
other public right of way by sitting, lying or sleeping, or using or storing
personal property in, or upon any street, sidewalk, alleyway, trail, or county
highway.
   (b)   Immediate Removal: Personal property in violation of this Section
shall be subject to immediate removal by Enforcement Officers.
(Ord. 4494, passed - -2025)
§ 28.0904 Abatement of Encampments and Camp Facilities and Materials.
   (a)   Notwithstanding §
28.0903(b), the County may abate or remove camp facilities and materials,
personal property (subject to §
28.0904(d)), or an encampment established in violation of this chapter after
providing written notice of such abatement. Any camp facilities and materials,
or encampments established in violation of this chapter may be subject to
abatement without advanced written notice by the County, if the encampment
poses an imminent and substantial threat to public health or safety, as
determined by the Enforcement Officer.
   (b)   Except in circumstances governed by §
28.0903 or where there is an immediate threat to public health or safety, prior
to abatement the County will, to the extent possible, provide homeless outreach
services to affected individuals in an effort to connect unhoused residents to
services. This subsection is directory, not mandatory, and the failure to
provide homeless outreach services specified in this subsection does not affect
the validity of an abatement action.
   (c)   Abatement pursuant to this section may include, but is not limited to,
removal of camp facilities and materials, personal property, trash, debris,
junk, hazardous waste, infectious waste, and vehicles.
   (d)   Personal property taken that does not constitute a health or safety
hazard, shall be collected, inventoried, and stored for at least 90 days.
Personal property that constitutes a health or safety hazard may be immediately
discarded. Examples of personal property that constitutes a health or safety
hazard and may be immediately discarded includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Sharp objects, such as needles, scissors, knives, that can pierce
skin and potentially contribute to the spread of disease.
      (2)   Chemicals: bleach, paint, oils, etc.
      (3)   Items (including bedding and clothing) soiled by infectious
materials, including human waste and bodily fluids.
      (4)   Moldy, mildewed items.
      (5)   Items that may be infested by rodents and insects, including rats,
mice, fleas, lice, and bed bugs.
      (6)   Items that pose a risk of fire or explosion, combustibles and
propane tanks; any item containing fuel or corrosives or other unidentified
liquids.
      (7)   Perishable items such as food.
      (8)   Controlled substances and contraband.
      (9)   Backpacks and closed containers that have been determined by an
individual who is licensed to identify and handle hazardous materials to
contain one or more of the items listed above. Such backpacks and closed
containers may be discarded where no individual who is licensed in hazardous
materials is present to make a determination.
      (10)   If personal belongings are co-mingled or littered with needles,
human waste, or other health risks, the entire pile of belongings may be
disposed of. The presence of clothing in a backpack or container shall not be
the sole reason to discard the backpack or container.
(Ord. 4494, passed - -2025)
§ 28.0905 Enforcement.
   (a)   A violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and
subject to the penalties stated herein.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the San Bernardino County Code,
each person violating, causing, or allowing a violation of any provision of
this Chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is
specifically declared to be a misdemeanor.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided herein, upon conviction or upon a plea of
nolo contendere (commonly called "no contest"), by a base fine not exceeding
$100.00 for a first violation; a base fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second
violation of this Chapter within one year; and a base fine not exceeding
$500.00 for each additional violation of this Chapter within one year of the
first violation. The maximum fines imposed in this Section are based upon the
provisions of Cal. Government Code § 25132 and will be increased automatically
and without amendment to this Section upon any amendment to Cal. Government
Code § 25132 increasing the amount of fines permitted. Any court costs that the
court may otherwise be required to impose pursuant to applicable State law or
local ordinance shall be imposed in addition to the base fine.
   (d)   As an alternative to a fine, the County would encourage the Court to
grant diversion or probation with a condition the offender complete a
rehabilitation program or treatment plan.
   (e)   Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as limiting an
Enforcement Officer from impounding a vehicle used in violation of this Chapter
if permitted by Cal. Vehicle Code § 22651.
(Ord. 4494, passed - -2025)
DIVISION 9: PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1: SWIMMING POOLS (REPEALED BY ORD. 3560, PASSED - -1993)
CHAPTER 2: SCHOOL PROTECTION ACT
Section
   
29.0201   Purpose and Authority.
   
29.0202   Definitions.
   
29.0203   Notification Requirement.
   
29.0204   Restrictions on Application Methods.
   
29.0205   Restrictions on Timing.
   
29.0206   Exemptions.
   
29.0207   Violations.
§ 29.0201 Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish, pursuant to Food and
Agricultural Code §§ 11503 and 11503.5, timing, notification, and method of
application regulations concerning the agricultural use of pesticides by those
persons engaged in commercial agriculture at sites adjacent to public and
private school sites in order to protect the persons at the school sites from
exposure to pesticides.
(Ord. 4079, passed - -2009)
§ 29.0202 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases are
defined and shall be construed as having the following meaning:
   ADJACENT. Sharing a common property line or point on the perimeter of the
properties. Properties separated by a roadway or easement less than 100 feet
wide shall be considered to be adjacent. Parcels forming a single commercial
agriculture operation shall be considered a single property. The requirements
of this Chapter shall not extend to portions of an adjacent commercial
agriculture operation more than one-quarter of a mile from the adjacent school
site.
   AGRICULTURAL COMMISSIONER. The Agricultural Commissioner for the Department
of Agriculture/Weights and Measures of the County of San Bernardino.
   COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE. Any person engaged in the business of raising crops,
nursery stock, animals, or producing animal products for profit.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, business, or association.
   PESTICIDE. As defined in Food and Agricultural Code § 12753.
   SCHOOL SITE. Any public or private facility used as a child day care
facility, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 1596.750, or for kindergarten,
elementary, or secondary school purposes. The term includes the buildings or
structures, playgrounds, athletic fields, vehicles, or any other area of the
property visited or used by pupils.
(Ord. 4079, passed - -2009)
§ 29.0203 Notification Requirement.
   (a)   Any person intending to apply a pesticide for commercial agriculture
at sites adjacent to public and private school sites shall provide notification
to the Agricultural Commissioner no less than 24 hours prior to the start of
the pesticide application. Notification shall be provided to the Agricultural
Commissioner in person, in writing, by phone, or by fax in the same manner as
the notification for applying a restricted material.
   (b)   The date, time and method of the application, the pesticide to be
applied, and the name of the adjacent school site shall be included in the
notification.
   (c)   The Agricultural Commissioner may forward all notifications received
to the appropriate school site.
(Ord. 4079, passed - -2009)
§ 29.0204 Restrictions on Application Methods.
   Any person applying a pesticide for commercial agriculture at sites adjacent
to public and private school sites shall comply with the following restrictions
on application methods:
   (a)   No pesticide shall be applied by aircraft.
   (b)   Pesticides applied by powered equipment when the application is to
foliage or trees higher than 36 inches from the ground and the spray is not
directed perpendicular to the ground, are subject to the restrictions on timing
as described in §
29.0205 below.
   (c)   Pesticides applied by a vector control agency or during a declared
emergency are exempt from the restrictions on application methods.
(Ord. 4079, passed - -2009)
§ 29.0205 Restrictions on Timing.
   Any person applying a pesticide for commercial agriculture at sites adjacent
to public and private school sites shall not apply a pesticide bearing the
signal word “DANGER-POISON” within one hour of the start of formal classroom
instruction or within two hours of the end of formal classroom instruction of
the adjacent school site, or within one hour of the start or opening of the
preschool or day care center, or within two hours of their closing.
(Ord. 4079, passed - -2009)
§ 29.0206 Exemptions.
   The following types of pesticides are exempt from the requirements of §§
29.0203 and
29.0205 of this Chapter:
   (a)   Pesticides bearing the signal word “CAUTION” on the product label
unless the application method is by air or the spray is not directed downward.
   (b)   Rodent control pesticides placed below ground regardless of toxicity
level.
   (c)   Pesticides bearing the signal word “WARNING” when applied using non-
powered handheld or backpack sprayers.
   (d)   Pesticides applied within a structure such as a greenhouse if the
ventilation of the structure is not directed towards the school site.
(Ord. 4079, passed - -2009)
§ 29.0207 Violations.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provision of this
Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter
specified.
   (b)   Each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a
new and separate offense.
   (c)   Any person so convicted shall be:
      (1)   Guilty of an infraction and punished by a fine not exceeding
$100.00 for a first offense;
      (2)   Guilty of a misdemeanor for the second and any additional offenses
and punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or six months in jail, or both.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the above, a first offense may be charged and
prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
   (e)   Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence shall not relieve a
person from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the
violation.
   (f)   In addition to all other remedies provided by this Chapter or state
law, in the event of continuing violation of the provisions of this Chapter,
the Agricultural Commissioner may seek injunctive relief to restrain further
violation.
   (g)   In lieu of criminal prosecution, the Agricultural Commissioner may
impose a civil penalty pursuant to the provisions of California Food and
Agricultural Code § 12999.5 and California Code of Regulations § 6130.
(Ord. 4079, passed - -2009)
DIVISION 10: VALIDITY OF TITLE 2
CHAPTER 1
Section
   
28.1001   Validity of Title 2.
§ 28.1001 Validity of Title 2.
   This Title and the various parts, divisions, chapters, sections and clauses
thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of
this Title shall not be affected thereby. The County Board of Supervisors
hereby declares that it would have passed this Title and each part thereof,
regardless of the fact that one or more parts hereof be declared
unconstitutional or invalid.
TITLE 3: HEALTH AND SANITATION AND ANIMAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
DIVISION 1: ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL REGULATIONS
   
1.   Health Officer
   
2.   Nuisances
   
3.   Smoking
   
4.   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
   
5.   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
   
6.   Hearing Procedure
   
7.   (Repealed by Ord. 4209, passed - -2013)
   
8.   Ambulances
   
9.   Vital Statistics
   
10.   Reserved
   
11.   Emergency Medical Care Committee
DIVISION 2: ANIMALS
   
1.   Animal Control
   
2.   Rabies (Biting and Bitten Animals: Vaccination and Licensing)
   
3.   Dog Kennels
   
4.   Hogs—Garbage-Feeding Hog Ranches
   
5.   Livestock
   
6.   Cattle Tuberculosis Suppression
   
7.   Transportation and Movement of Livestock Over Public and Private Lands
   
8.   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
   
9.   Apiaries
   
10.   Commercial Calf Growers
   
11.   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
   
12.   Catteries
   
13.   Animal Food and Food Scraps
   
14.   Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Animals
   
15.   Circumstances Under Which Dogs Must be Spayed or Neutered.
DIVISION 3: ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
   
1.   Authority and Administration
   
2.   Permits and Hearing Procedures
   
3.   Public Nuisance Abatement
   
4.   Food Protection
   
5.   Dairy Products
   
6.   Domestic Water Sources and Systems
   
7.   Hazardous Materials and Toxics Control (Repealed by Ord. 3846, passed - -
2002)
   
8.   Waste Management
   
9.   Insect, Rodent and Other Vector Control
   
10.   Housing and Institutions
   
11.   Recreational Health
   
12.   Vehicle Abatement and Removal Program
   
13.   Medical Waste
   
14.   Inspection Grading of Food Facilities
   
15.   Food Recovery
   
16.   Industrial Hemp Agricultural Registration and Regulations
DIVISION 4: FOOD AND SANITATION
   
1.   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
   
2.   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
   
3.   Hospitals—Rest Homes
   
4.   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
   
5.   Administration
   
6.   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
DIVISION 5: MONITORING, CONTROL AND ELIMINATION OF POLLUTANTS INTO THE STORM
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
   
1.   Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Regulations
DIVISION 6: (REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986)
DIVISION 7: PUBLIC NUISANCES
   
1.   Public Nuisances
   
2.   (Repealed by Ord. 4367, passed - -2019)
DIVISION 8: (REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986)
DIVISION 9: VALIDITY OF TITLE 3
 
Editor's Note:
   Ordinance 4046, passed April 8, 2008, repealed and reenacted Title 3.
DIVISION 1: ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: HEALTH OFFICER
Section
   
31.0101   Health Officer—Appointment and Duties.
   
31.0102   Authorized Representative of the Health Officer.
   
31.0103   Preparation and Promulgation of Rules and Regulations.
   
31.0104   Interference with Health Officer.
§ 31.0101   Health Officer—Appointment and Duties.
   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 101000, the Health Officer of the
County of San Bernardino shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors. It
shall be the duty of the Health Officer of the County of San Bernardino, or his
or her authorized representative, to enforce in the County of San Bernardino,
outside of incorporated cities, the terms of the Health Code for the County of
San Bernardino.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 1805, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 1843, passed
- -1973; Am. Ord. 2606, passed - -1981)
§ 31.0102   Authorized Representative of the Health Officer.
   (a)   Powers. For the purposes of enforcement within the provisions of this
Division of the San Bernardino County Code, whenever the words HEALTH OFFICER
appear, they shall be deemed to mean and include the Health Officer of the
County of San Bernardino, or any duly appointed and authorized representative
of the Health Officer.
   (b)   Arrests. The Health Officer and every Communicable Disease
Investigator of Tuberculosis of the Health Department of the County of San
Bernardino, who has the duty to enforce a statute or ordinance relating to
communicable diseases of tuberculosis, may arrest a person for violation of
such statute or ordinance as provided in Penal Code § 836.5. The authority
conferred by this Section shall not make such officers safety members of the
County Retirement System.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 1753, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 1843, passed
- -1973)
§ 31.0103   Preparation and Promulgation of Rules and Regulations.
   The Health Officer shall prepare and promulgate rules and regulations for
the purpose of control and regulation of the various places and businesses
subject to the provisions of this Code, and for the information and guidance of
the owners, operators and employees of such places and businesses. Such rules
and regulations shall include and be in accord with the provisions of this Code
and all other applicable ordinances, statutes and recognized public health and
safety practices.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
§ 31.0104   Interference with Health Officer.
   No person shall resist or attempt to resist the entrance of the Health
Officer into any railway car, stage, vehicle, building, room, lot or other
place in the County of San Bernardino in the performance of his or her duty or
shall refuse to obey any lawful order of the Health Officer made in the
performance of his or her duties within the power conferred upon him or her by
law or by this Code.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
CHAPTER 2: NUISANCES
Section
   
31.0201   Penalty.
   
31.0202   Dead Animals.
   
31.0203   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0204   Domestic Animals.
   
31.0205   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0206   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0207   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0208   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0209   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0210   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0211   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0212   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0213   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0214   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
   
31.0215   (Repealed by Ord. 4212, passed - -2013).
§ 31.0201   Penalty.
   Whenever a public nuisance shall be ascertained to exist on any premises, or
in any house or other place, the Health Officer shall notify in writing any
person or persons owning or having control of, or acting as agent for, such
premises, house or other place, to abate or remove such nuisance within a
reasonable time, to be stated in such notice.
   Upon the neglect or refusal of any owner, occupant, or agent, or other
person having control of such house or other place, to comply with such notice,
such owner, occupant or agent, or other person having control shall be guilty
of an infraction and each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence
shall be a new and separate offense. Upon conviction, the penalty for such
offense shall be a fine not exceeding $50.00 for a first violation, a fine not
exceeding $100.00 for a second violation within one year, and a fine not
exceeding $250.00 for a third violation within one year. The fourth and
additional violations within one year shall each constitute a misdemeanor and
shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00 or six months in jail, or both.
Payment of any penalty herein provided shall not relieve the defendant from the
responsibility of correcting the condition of the violation. The Health Officer
or the Director of Environmental Health Services may abate the nuisance; and
the owner, agent or occupant or other person having control of such house or
place, in addition to the penalties provided by this Code, shall be liable to
the County of San Bernardino for the cost of such abatement, to be recovered in
a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. If no person can be
found upon whom to serve such notice, the Health Officer shall proceed to abate
such nuisance at the expense of the County, at a cost of not to exceed $25.00
per day.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 2771, passed - -1983)
§ 31.0202   Dead Animals.
   No person shall dispose of the carcass of any dead animal in such a manner,
or leave any such carcass in such a place, as to create a public or private
nuisance.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
§ 31.0203   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0204   Domestic Animals.
   No person shall keep any animal, fowl, or bird, wild or domestic, other than
cats, dogs, canaries or birds of the psitacinae family, within 70 feet of any
school, church, hospital, public place or business, or any residence or
dwelling house or other building used for the habitation of human beings, other
than his or her own personal and private dwelling or residence. No such animal
or fowl shall be kept or maintained in any yard, coop, or building which is in
a foul or unsanitary condition. The provisions of this Section shall not apply
to accredited laboratories regulated by the State Department of Public Health.
   No person shall keep, maintain, or allow to continue upon the premises in
his or her control or belonging to him or her any condition resulting in the
breeding of flies, mosquitoes, gnats, or other insects or rodents.
(Ord. 1353, passed - -1967; Am. Ord. 2018, passed - -1975; Am. Ord. 2586,
passed - -1981)
§ 31.0205   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0206   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0207   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0208   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0209   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0210   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0211   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0212   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0213   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0214   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 31.0215   (Repealed by Ord. 4212, passed - -2013).
CHAPTER 3: SMOKING
Section
   
31.0301   Purpose and Findings.
   
31.0302   Definitions.
   
31.0303   Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Places of Employment.
   
31.0304   County Facilities.
   
31.0305   Unenclosed Places.
   
31.0306   Smoking Waste.
   
31.0307   Duty of Employer or Business.
   
31.0308   Vendor Assisted Sales.
   
31.0309   Penalties and Enforcement.
   
31.0310   Other Applicable Laws or Regulations.
§ 31.0301 Purpose and Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino hereby finds and
declares:
   (a)   Scientific studies have concluded that cigarette smoking causes
chronic lung disease, coronary heart disease, stroke, cancer of the lungs,
larynx, esophagus, mouth, and bladder, and contributes to cancer of the cervix,
pancreas, and kidneys; and
   (b)   The use of cigars is known to cause lung, larynx, esophageal, and oral
cancer; and
   (c)   More than 440,000 people die in the United States from tobacco-related
disease every year, making it the nation’s leading cause of preventable
illness; and
   (d)   The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that by 2030, tobacco
will account for ten million deaths per year, making it the greatest cause of
death worldwide; and
   (e)   The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has found
secondhand smoke to be a risk to public health, and has classified secondhand
smoke as a group A carcinogen, the most dangerous class of carcinogen; and
   (f)   Exposure to secondhand smoke is the third leading cause of preventable
death in this country, killing over 49,000 non-smokers each year, including an
estimated 400 deaths from lung cancer; and
   (g)   It is estimated that 46,000 nonsmokers die of ischemic heart disease
from secondhand smoke each year in the U.S.; and
   (h)   Secondhand smoke exposure adversely affects fetal growth with elevated
risk of low birth weight, and increased risk of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
(SIDS) in infants of mothers who smoke; and
   (i)   Secondhand smoke exposure causes as many as 300,000 children in the
United States to suffer from lower respiratory tract infections, such as
pneumonia and bronchitis, exacerbates childhood asthma, and increases the risk
of acute chronic middle ear infection in children; and
   (j)   The total cost of smoking in California was estimated to be $500.00
per resident or $3,400.00 per smoker per year, for a total of nearly $18.1
billion in smoking-related costs in 2004 alone; and
   (k)   Smoking-related health care costs in California in 2004 totaled $9.6
billion, an estimated 43 percent of which is paid for by public sources; and
   (l)   Almost 90 percent of adult smokers started smoking at or before age
18; and
   (m)   It is estimated that 13.8 percent of California high school students
smoke; and
   (n)   The National Visible Litter Survey and Litter Cost Study conducted by
Keep America Beautiful in 2009 found that tobacco products, primarily cigarette
butts, comprised nearly 38% of all collected litter items from roadways and
streets; and
   (o)   State law acknowledges the harms of exposure to secondhand smoke by
prohibiting the sale or furnishing of cigarettes, tobacco products and smoking
paraphernalia to minors, as well as the purchase, receipt, or possession of
tobacco products by minors; and
   (p)   With certain exceptions, State law prohibits smoking inside an
enclosed place of employment; and
   (q)   State law prohibits public school students from smoking or using
tobacco products while on campus, while attending school-sponsored activities,
or while under the supervision or control of school district employees; and
   (r)   State law prohibits smoking in playgrounds and tot lots and within 20
feet of the main entrances and exits of public buildings while expressly
authorizing local communities to enact additional restrictions; and
   (s)   It is the intent of the County Board of Supervisors in enacting the
ordinance that adds this Chapter, to provide for the public health, safety, and
welfare by discouraging the inherently dangerous behavior of tobacco use around
non-tobacco users; by protecting children from exposure to smoking and tobacco
while they play; by reducing the potential for children to associate smoking
and tobacco with a healthy lifestyle; by protecting the public from smoking and
tobacco-related litter and pollution; and by affirming and promoting the family
atmosphere of the County’s public places.
(Ord. 4212, passed - -2013)
§ 31.0302 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall govern
unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   BUSINESS. An employer, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation,
partnership, or association and also includes a business organized for profit
and a nonprofit business, but does not include a sole proprietor.
   COUNTY BUILDING. A building owned and occupied (in whole or in part) by the
County, but only that portion of a building leased and occupied by the County,
whether located in the unincorporated area of the County or an incorporated
city.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is hired by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profit; or any person who volunteers his or her
services for an employer.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, partnership, corporation, association, nonprofit,
volunteer or similar entity, including a municipal corporation or public
entity, that employs or retains the service of one or more persons, or
supervises volunteers.
   ENCLOSED. Closed in by a full or partial roof and full or partial walls
where a wall is any structure that impedes the free flow of outside air and may
include a number of windows and doors.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or treatment
of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to
hospitals, medical research and treatment sites, long-term health care
facilities as defined in Health and Safety Code § 1418, clinics, including
weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill,
laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists,
physicians, dentists and all specialists within these professions.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed place, and the premises appurtenant
thereto, where employment is carried on, including health care facilities.
   SELF SERVICE DISPLAY. The open display of tobacco products or tobacco
paraphernalia in a manner that is accessible to the general public without the
assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer.
   SMOKING. Inhaling into the mouth or lungs the smoke or vapor from, or the
possession of, a lighted pipe, lighted cigar, lighted cigarette, an activated
electronic cigarette or other similar electronic device, whether or not such
electronic device delivers nicotine, or any other lighted smoking equipment.
Smoking includes, but is not limited to, smoking tobacco, marijuana, any other
plant or plant derivative, and synthetic substances.
   SPORTS COMPLEX. Any sport pavilion, arena, stadium, gymnasium, health spa,
boxing arena, swimming pool, roller or ice rink, bowling alley, or similar
place specifically designed to be used for physical exercise or athletic
competition.
   SPORTS COMPLEX SEATING AREA. Any spectator seating area, including outdoor
athletic recreation bleachers or similar area used for the viewing of sports
and athletic competition.
   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA. Cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of
smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item
designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not
limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping
tobacco, or any other preparation of tobacco.
   VENDING MACHINE. A machine, appliance, or other mechanical device operated
by currency, token, debit card, or credit card that is designed or used for
vending purposes, including, but not limited to, machines or devices that use
remote control locking mechanisms.
   VENDOR ASSISTED SALES. Sales in which only a store or tobacco retailer
employee has access to the tobacco product and supplies the customer the
tobacco product in such way that the customer does not take possession of the
tobacco product until it is purchased.
(Ord. 4212, passed - -2013)
§ 31.0303 Prohibition of Smoking in Enclosed Places of Employment.
   (a)   Enclosed Places of Employment. Smoking shall be prohibited in all
enclosed places of employment within the unincorporated area of the County of
San Bernardino, except in places listed in Subdivision (b) below, and except in
such places in which smoking is already prohibited by State or Federal law, in
which case the State or Federal law applies.
   (b)   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, enclosed places of employment
shall not include:
      (1)   Private residential units, except those meeting the definition of
“enclosed” in this Chapter when serving as a licensed child care facility, a
licensed home for the aging or a licensed home for the chronically ill;
      (2)   Up to 25 percent of hotel and motel guest rooms, if the hotel or
motel permanently designates particular guest rooms as non-smoking rooms such
that 75 percent or more of its guest rooms are non-smoking and ashtrays and
matches are permanently removed from such non-smoking rooms; and
      (3)   Retail stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco products
and tobacco paraphernalia and in which minors are never permitted to enter.
(Ord. 4212, passed - -2013)
§ 31.0304 County Facilities.
   (a)   Smoking shall be prohibited in the following areas, within the County,
except in such places in which smoking is already prohibited by State or
Federal law, in which case the State or Federal law applies:
      (1)   By employees and members of the public in any County building;
      (2)   Within 20 feet of a main entrance, exit, operable windows or
ventilation ducts of a County building;
      (3)   In a passenger vehicle owned or leased by the County;
      (4)   Ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots under
the authority of the County;
      (5)   Sports complex seating areas under the authority of the County; and
      (6)   All means of public transit under the authority of the County,
while within the boundaries of the County.
   (b)   The prohibition in Subdivision (a) does not apply to County buildings
that are used as residences by out-stationed County employees.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, smoking is
prohibited within any area of the Arrowhead Regional Medical Center Campus
(“ARMC”), whether inside or outside of the buildings, including parking lots,
sidewalks, streets, and driveways, located with the ARMC Campus. This
Subdivision (c) shall not apply to ARMC offsite family health centers.
(Ord. 4212, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4260, passed - -2014)
§ 31.0305 Unenclosed Places.
   Smoking shall be prohibited in the following areas, within the
unincorporated area of the County, except in such places in which smoking is
already prohibited by State or Federal law, in which case the State or Federal
law applies:
   (a)   Sports complex seating areas; and
   (b)   Ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots; and
   (c)   All means of public transit within the boundaries of the County.
(Ord. 4212, passed - -2013)
§ 31.0306 Smoking Waste.
   No person shall dispose of waste (including ashes) from smoking within the
boundaries of an area in which smoking is prohibited, including inside the
perimeter of any entranceway, doorway, operable window or ventilation duct
where smoking is prohibited.
(Ord. 4212, passed - -2013)
§ 31.0307 Duty of Employer or Business.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any employer or business to fail to comply
with the applicable provisions of this Chapter.
   (b)   No employer or business owner shall knowingly permit smoking in an
area which is under the legal or de facto control of the employer or business
owner and in which smoking is prohibited by this Chapter and the employer and
business owner is not otherwise compelled to act under State or Federal law.
   (c)   No employer or business owner shall knowingly or intentionally permit
the presence or placement of smoking waste or ash receptacles, such as, for
example, ash trays or ash cans, within an area which is under the legal or de
facto control of the employer or business owner and in which smoking is
prohibited.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, any employer or
business owner who controls any property, establishment, or place of employment
regulated by this Chapter may declare any part of such area in which smoking
would otherwise be permitted to be a non-smoking area.
   (e)   No employer or prospective employer shall discharge, refuse to hire,
or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment
because such employee or applicant for employment exercises any rights afforded
by this Section.
   (f)   “No smoking” or “Smoke Free” signs, with letters of no less than one
inch in height or the international “No smoking” symbol (consisting of a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in
every enclosed and unenclosed place in which smoking is prohibited by this
Section, by the person, employer or business that has legal or de facto control
of such place. Notwithstanding this provision, the presence or absence of signs
shall not be a defense to the violation of any other provision of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4212, passed - -2013)
§ 31.0308 Vendor Assisted Sales.
   (a)   Except for retail stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco
products and tobacco paraphernalia, and in which minors are never permitted to
enter, it shall be unlawful for any person or business to sell, dispense,
permit to be sold or offer for sale any tobacco product or electronic cigarette
by means other than vendor assisted sales, including the selling, offering for
sale, dispensing and displaying of any tobacco product or electronic cigarette
by self-service displays.
   (b)   Self-service displays prohibited by this Section in place as of the
date the ordinance adopting this Section is approved shall be removed not later
than one year after the effective date of this ordinance.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business, or tobacco retailer to
locate, install, keep, maintain, use or permit the location, installation,
keeping, maintenance or use of a vending machine for the purpose of selling or
distributing any tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, electronic cigarette
or other similar electronic device.
(Ord. 4212, passed - -2013)
§ 31.0309 Penalties and Enforcement.
   (a)   Violations of this Chapter shall be prosecuted as infractions and
shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation,
$200.00 for a second violation occurring within one year, and $500.00 for a
third or subsequent violation occurring within one year.
   (b)   A violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute
a public nuisance and may be abated by the County or by an affected employee or
resident of the County through the use of administrative citations or civil
processes by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction
or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance.
   (c)   All remedies and penalties provided in this Chapter shall be
cumulative and discretionary and not exclusive of other applicable provisions
in this Chapter, this Code or other applicable State or Federal law.
   (d)   Enforcement of this Chapter shall be the responsibility of the County
Health Officer or his or her designees. Any peace officer or code enforcement
official also may enforce this Chapter.
   (e)   Any person who desires to register a complaint hereunder may initiate
enforcement consideration with the County Health Officer or his or her
designee.
(Ord. 4212, passed - -2013)
§ 31.0310 Other Applicable Laws or Regulations.
   This Chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where
it is otherwise restricted by other applicable law or regulations of property
owners, managers or employers.
(Ord. 4212, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 4: REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986
CHAPTER 5: REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986
CHAPTER 6: HEARING PROCEDURE
Section
   
31.0601   Applicability of this Hearing Procedure.
   
31.0602   Hearing Officer.
   
31.0603   Notice.
   
31.0604   Hearing Procedures.
   
31.0605   The Hearing Officer’s Determination.
§ 31.0601   Applicability of this Hearing Procedure.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this County Code, the following
administrative hearing procedure shall be applied for any hearing pertaining to
the denial, suspension, revocation, or denial of reissuance of any license,
permit, certificate or entitlement when such action and an appeal hearing is
required in any of the provisions of Title 3 of this Code, except when a
hearing before the Board of Supervisors is otherwise provided. This procedure
is applicable to an appeal from any of the above-mentioned actions. Such an
appeal shall be made in writing to the Director within ten working days of the
denial, suspension, revocation, or denial of reissuance and shall contain the
address to which the notice of hearing shall be sent, in order for the appeal
to be valid.
(Ord. 2646, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2892, passed - -1984)
§ 31.0602   Hearing Officer.
   The Hearing Officer for hearings pursuant to this Chapter shall be the
Director of the Department of Environmental Health Services or his or her
appointee for such purpose. Any such appointee shall be a person who has no
knowledge of the facts of the particular case at the outset of the hearing, and
a person not immediately involved with regulation of the particular Code
provisions concerned.
(Ord. 2646, passed - -1982)
§ 31.0603   Notice.
   At least ten days written notice of the hearing shall be given to the holder
of the right prior to the hearing date. The hearing date may be postponed or
continued by stipulation of the parties. If the party notified does not respond
or appear, no further hearing procedure shall be required.
(Ord. 2646, passed - -1982)
§ 31.0604   Hearing Procedures.
   Witnesses shall swear or affirm to tell the truth. The oath or affirmation
shall be taken by the hearing officer.
   The enforcing officer shall present his or her case first, with oral
testimony and documentary evidence or other exhibits. The responding party
shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right of
cross-examination.
   The responding party may present its response after the enforcing officer
has presented his or her case. The enforcing officer shall have the right of
cross-examination.
   After both sides have completed presenting evidence, the enforcing officer
may comment on the evidence and argue.
   After the enforcing officer has commented on the evidence and/or argued, the
responding party may do the same.
(Ord. 2646, passed - -1982)
§ 31.0605   The Hearing Officer’s Determination.
   No determination or order shall be based solely on the basis of hearsay
evidence.
   The Hearing Officer shall make his or her determination within five working
days of the end of the hearing, unless the responding party stipulates to a
greater period of time. The determination shall be in writing, and shall state
the findings upon which the determination is made. Final determination is the
responsibility of the Director, and shall be made in writing within five
working days of the Hearing Officer’s report. There shall be no further non-
court proceedings or appeal, unless specifically so provided elsewhere in this
Code.
(Ord. 2646, passed - -1982)
CHAPTER 7: REPEALED BY ORD. 4209, PASSED - -2013
CHAPTER 8: AMBULANCES
Section
   
31.0801   Definitions.
   
31.0802   Permits.
   
31.0803   Permit Fees.
   
31.0804   Application for a Permit or Renewal of a Permit.
   
31.0805   Investigation by Health Officer.
   
31.0806   Issuance or Denial of Permit.
   
31.0807   Content of Permit.
   
31.0808   Amendment of Permits.
   
31.0809   Renewal of Permits.
   
31.0810   Suspension and Revocation of Permits.
   
31.0811   Suspension, Conditional Operation, and Temporary Variance.
   
31.0812   Appeal Procedure.
   
31.0813   Service Requirements.
   
31.0814   Conformance with Operating Areas.
   
31.0815   Communications Requirements.
   
31.0816   Standards for Operation of an Ambulance Service.
   
31.0817   Standards for Dispatch.
   
31.0818   Ambulance Safety and Emergency Equipment Requirements.
   
31.0819   Ambulance Personnel.
   
31.0820   Ambulance Rates.
   
31.0821   Continuation of Call.
   
31.0822   Temporary Permit.
   
31.0823   Emergency and Disaster Operations.
   
31.0824   Mutual Aid Requirements.
   
31.0825   User Complaint Procedures.
   
31.0826   Enforcement Responsibilities.
   
31.0827   Specialized Transportation Services.
§ 31.0801   Definitions.
   Unless otherwise stated, words and terms are defined as follows:
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS) OR LIMITED ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (LALS)
AMBULANCE. An ambulance which has the basic equipment set forth in
Administrative Code Title 13 as well as additional equipment and supplies as
specified by the local EMS Agency.
   AMBULANCE. Any privately or publicly owned vehicle or boat specially
designed, constructed, modified, equipped, arranged, maintained, and operated
as well as specifically licensed by the California Highway Patrol for the sole
purpose of transporting sick, injured, wounded, invalid, expectant mother,
convalescent, or otherwise incapacitated persons.
   AMBULANCE ATTENDANT. A qualified person acting as an attendant on an
ambulance that is transporting a patient and who occupies the patient
compartment.
   AMBULANCE SERVICE. Any private or public corporation, partnership,
association, individual, or agency that operates one or more ambulances.
   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT (BLS) AMBULANCE. An ambulance that has equipment and
supplies as specified by Administrative Code Title 13.
   BOARD. The Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County.
   CODE 3. A term used to describe use of red warning lamps and siren as
permitted by Vehicle Code § 21055 if a vehicle is being used in such a
situation where speed is essential to save a life, prevent undue suffering or
to reduce or prevent disability.
   COMPETITIVE EXCLUSIVE OPERATING AREAS. Refers to those areas (if any) under
the County’s Emergency Medical Services Plan where an ambulance provider has,
by approved application to the County, been granted a renewable five-year term
of exclusive operating area in a particular designated geographical locale.
   DEPARTMENT. The Public Health Department of San Bernardino County.
   DRIVER. A qualified person who operates an ambulance, as specified by §
31.0818(a) of this Chapter.
   EMERGENCY CALL. A request for the dispatch of an ambulance to transport or
provide other assistance for a person who apparently has a sudden or unforeseen
need of medical attention.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES. The services needed to provide urgent medical
care in a condition or situation in which an individual has a need for
immediate medical attention or where the potential for such need is perceived
by emergency medical personnel, a public safety agency, or with respect to
interfacility transfers qualified medical personnel of the transferring
facility. Any transportation needs pursuant to a request for an emergency
ambulance operating under a permit issued by the Commissioner of the California
Highway Patrol or the attendance of certified emergency medical personnel or
licensed medical personnel shall be deemed the providing of emergency medical
services.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-I AMBULANCE (EMT-IA). A person trained and
certified to provide basic life support according to standards prescribed by
the Health and Safety Code Division 2.5 and the local EMS Agency.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-II (EMT-II). A person trained and certified to
provide limited advanced life support according to standards provided by Health
and Safety Code Division 2.5 and the local EMS Agency.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC (EMT-P) PARAMEDIC OR MOBILE INTENSIVE
CARE PARAMEDIC. A person specially trained and certified to provide advanced
life support according to standards prescribed by Health and Safety Code
Division 2.5.
   EXCLUSIVE OPERATING AREAS. Specific geographic areas of the County
designated in the Emergency Medical Services Plan for the County and authorized
by Health and Safety Code §§ 1797.6, 1797.85 and 1797.224.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE. The type of emergency medical services that may be
provided by a permittee, and will be specified as basic life support, limited
advanced life support and advanced life support provided by personnel certified
as specified in Health and Safety Code Division 2.5 and Administrative Code
Title 22, Division 9.
   MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE NURSE (MICN). A nurse who has been certified by the
Medical Director of the local EMS Agency as qualified in the issuance of
emergency instructions to EMT-IIs and EMT-Ps.
   NONEXCLUSIVE OPERATING AREAS. Those areas of the County defined
geographically but not designated in the EMS Plan for the County as exclusive
operating areas.
   PATIENT. A sick, injured, wounded, invalid, expectant mother, convalescent,
or otherwise incapacitated person.
   PERMITTEE. Any ambulance service possessing a current permit granted by the
Board to provide ambulance service within the County.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, agency,
or group or combination acting as a unit.
   SPECIAL EVENTS. Any situation where a previously announced event places a
grouping or gathering of people in one general locale sufficient in number, or
subject to activity that creates the need to have one or more ambulances at the
site.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0802   Permits.
   (a)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agency
or otherwise, to operate, conduct, advertise or engage in or profess to be
engaged in the business or service of the transportation of patients upon the
streets or any public way or place in the unincorporated territory of the
County, except in conformance with a valid permit to do so issued by the
Department.
   (b)   Exceptions. The equipment and personnel standards specified in this
Chapter apply to all ambulance services; however, the licensing and permit
requirements shall not apply to:
      (1)   Vehicles operated as ambulances at the request of local authorities
during any “state of war emergency,” duly proclaimed “state of emergency” or
“local emergency,” as defined in the California Emergency Services Act
(Government Code Chapter 7 of Division I of Title 2), as amended; or
      (2)   Ambulances based in adjoining counties or states operating in the
under serviced border areas of the County where the County Health Office has
conducted an investigation to describe the service area, assure conformity with
County policy and established a letter or agreement between the Department and
appropriate regulatory agencies within the adjacent county or state. Such
agreement shall contain a description of the service area.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0803   Permit Fees.
   Permit fees shall be those specified in the County Code § 16.0213A(a)(5).
All permits shall be issued to expire on June 30 of each year, and the annual
fee therefor may be prorated on a quarterly basis for the first year. Permit
fees may be waived by the Board of Supervisors if public need and necessity
require it.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0804   Application for a Permit or Renewal of a Permit.
   (a)   Procedure and Information Required. Prerequisite to the issuance of a
permit or renewal of a permit for an applicant shall include filing with the
Department an application in writing on a form to be furnished by the
Department, which shall provide the following minimum information:
      (1)   Name and description of applicant;
      (2)   Business address and residence address of record of the applicant;
      (3)   Trade or firm name, or DBA as recorded;
      (4)   If a corporation, a joint venture or a partnership or limited
partnership, the names of all partners, or the names of corporate officers,
their permanent addresses and their percentage of participation in the
business;
      (5)   A statement of facts for new applicants showing the past experience
of the applicant in the operation of an ambulance service and at what level and
that the applicant is qualified to render efficient 24-hour ambulance service;
      (6)   A photocopy of the license(s) issued by the Commissioner of the
California Highway Patrol to privately owned ambulances (in accordance with
Vehicle Code § 2501 and Administrative Code Title 13) shall be provided to the
Department prior to the start of ambulance operations;
      (7)   The geographical operating area as specified in the OEMs Plan for
the County for which the permit is requested;
      (8)   The level or levels of service which the applicant proposes to
provide;
      (9)   A statement in initial and renewal applications that the applicant
owns or will have under his or her control required equipment to adequately
conduct an ambulance service in the operating area for which he or she is or
proposes to be permitted, which meet the requirements established by the
California Vehicle Code, and that the applicant owns or has access to suitable
and safe facilities for maintaining his or her ambulance service in a clean,
sanitary and mechanically sound condition;
      (10)   A list for initial and renewal applications amended as required
during the year for any changed, substituted, loaned, or leased vehicles,
giving a complete description of each ambulance vehicle operated by the
applicant, including the patient capacity thereof, and a copy of the most
recent Ambulance Inspection Report issued by the California Highway Patrol for
each vehicle;
      (11)   An affirmation for initial and renewal applications that each
permitted ambulance and its appurtenances conform to all applicable provisions
of this Chapter, the California Vehicle Code, the California Administrative
Code, and any other applicable State or local directives;
      (12)   A statement for renewal applications that the applicant employs
sufficient personnel adequately trained and available to deliver ambulance
services of good quality at all times in the applicant’s permitted operating
area. When an initial application is submitted, a statement that the applicant
will employ sufficient personnel adequately trained and available to deliver
ambulance services of good quality at all times in the applicant’s permitted
operating area;
      (13)   A list amended as required during the year for any personnel
changes, giving a description of the level of training for each ambulance
employee, and a copy of each certificate or license issued by the State,
County, or local EMS Agency establishing qualifications of such personnel in
ambulance operations. An initial applicant shall submit a list of personnel and
their qualification prior to attaining operational status;
      (14)   A proposed schedule of any special rates to be charged by the
permittee for ambulance services;
      (15)   A statement in the initial application that shows to the
satisfaction of the Department that the issuance of a permit is in the public
interest and there is a need for a permit to be issued, in that there is a
requirement for ambulance service which can be legally serviced by the
applicant;
      (16)   A statement signed by the applicant that as a condition of the
County’s issuing a permit, applicant agrees to appear and defend all actions
against the County arising out of the exercise of said permit, and shall
indemnify, defend, and save the County, its officers, employees and agents
harmless of and from all claims, demands, actions, or causes of actions of
every kind and description resulting directly or indirectly and arising out of,
or in any way connected with exercise of this permit unless this is a conflict
of interest;
      (17)   Such other facts or information as the Department may require.
      (18)   Permits for “special events” shall meet all the requirements of
this Section.
         (A)   The ambulance service or services shall be provided by either
the ambulance service possessing a regular permit for the area or a special
events operator as selected by the special event promoter.
         (B)   Rates for “special events” ambulance services shall be
determined by common agreement between the event’s promoter and the permittee.
         (C)   All special events shall be reported to the Department at least
seven days in advance of the event.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0805   Investigation by Health Officer.
   (a)   In nonexclusive operating areas and upon receipt of a new application,
the Health Officer shall conduct an investigation to determine if the public
health, safety, welfare, convenience, and necessity require the granting of an
original or additional permit for the operating area for which the application
has been made and shall further determine if the applicant meets all
requirements of this Chapter. Upon completion of his or her investigation and
within 45 days, the Health Officer shall issue a report, present a copy to the
applicant, and request that a meeting of the Emergency Medical Care Committee
(EMCC) be called within 14 days to consider that report and other testimony.
After due deliberation the EMCC shall make its recommendation to the Health
Officer. Within 14 days the Health Officer shall advise the Board that a permit
be granted or denied for the operating area. No permit shall be issued by the
Health Officer until the Board of Supervisors has determined that the public
health, safety, welfare, convenience, and necessity require the granting of
such permit for the particular operating area.
   (b)   In competitive exclusive operating areas, the Board will only consider
the application when the process designated in the Emergency Medical Services
(EMS) Plan for San Bernardino County has been completed.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0806   Issuance or Denial of Permit.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors may order the issuance of a permit to conduct
an ambulance service in a nonexclusive operating area upon finding that the
applicant has demonstrated that the public health, safety, welfare,
convenience, and necessity require the availability of such ambulance service
and that the applicant meets all requirements of this Chapter. The Board may
also order the issuance of a permit for an exclusive operating area to a
provider selected by the process as described in the EMS Plan for the County of
San Bernardino.
   (b)   Whenever a new application is filed under the provisions of this
Chapter for a permit to provide ambulance service in a part of the County that
is not an exclusive operating area and where services already exist, the Board,
after due investigation, may find and determine, as a matter of fact, that the
applicant has failed to demonstrate there exists in the area sufficient
potential need for ambulance service to justify the granting of an additional,
separate and distinct permit for use within that operating area. Predicated on
such findings, the Board of Supervisors may deny the application for permit on
the grounds that the granting of such new permit is not economically or
financially feasible and not in the public interest and welfare.
   (c)   The Board of Supervisors may order the denial or revocation of a
permit if the applicant or any partner, officer, or director thereof:
      (1)   Was previously the holder of a permit issued under the ordinance
which permit has been revoked or not reissued and the terms or conditions of
the suspension have not been fulfilled or corrected;
      (2)   Is committing any act, which, if committed by any permittee, would
be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this
Chapter;
      (3)   Has committed any act involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit
whereby another is injured or where the applicant has benefitted;
      (4)   Has acted in the capacity of a permitted person or firm under this
Chapter without having a permit therefor;
      (5)   Has entered a plea of guilty to, or been found guilty of, or been
convicted of a felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude, and the time for
appeal has elapsed or the judgment of conviction has been affirmed on appeal,
irrespective of an order granting probation following such conviction
suspending the imposition of sentence, or of a subsequent order under the
provisions of Penal Code § 1203.4 allowing such person to withdraw his or her
plea of guilty and to enter a plea of not guilty, or setting aside the plea or
verdict of guilty, or dismissing the accusation of information.
   (d)   Liability Insurance.
      (1)   The permittee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of
said permit comprehensive general liability insurance issued by a company
authorized to do business in the State of California, insuring the owner, and
also naming the County as an additional insured of such ambulance against loss
by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from
negligent operation or defective maintenance of such ambulance, or from
violation of the chapter or local EMS Agency protocols or of any other law of
the State of California or the United States. Said policy shall be in a sum
determined annually by County Risk Management for personal injury to or death
of any one person in any single accident; or destruction of property in any one
accident. Workers’ Compensation insurance shall be carried covering all
employees of the permit holder. Before the Health Officer shall issue a permit,
copies of the policies or certificates evidencing such policies shall be filed
with the Department. All policies shall contain a provision requiring a 30-day
notice be given to the Department prior to cancellation, modification, or
reduction in limits.
      (2)   Public providers shall show evidence of liability protection in the
form of copies of insurance policies, official action of their governing body
or other legal documents.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0807   Content of Permit.
   The permit shall specify the dates of issuance and of expiration, the
operating area(s) of the County within which the permittee may provide
ambulance service, the number of ambulance units to be used by the permittee,
the level or levels of service to be provided, and any special conditions
regarding communication, equipment, personnel, special rates, or waiver of
requirements deemed appropriate by the Health Officer.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2511, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 3251,
passed - -1998)
§ 31.0808   Amendment of Permits.
   Upon request by the permittee, the Health Officer may amend the conditions
specified in a permit if he or she finds such changes in substantial compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter. Such amendment shall not affect the
expiration date of the existing permit, or shall it authorize a change in
ownership from that specified in the original permit.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0809   Renewal of Permits.
   Permits shall be renewed annually by the Health Officer upon application of
the permittee if the permittee proposes no substantial change in the content of
the permit, and if the Health Officer determines that the permittee has during
the period of the expiring permit operated in conformity with the provisions of
this Chapter and the rules and regulations of the Department, and that he or
she is capable of continuing operation in conformity with the rules and
regulations of the Department.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0810   Suspension and Revocation of Permits.
   (a)   The Health Officer, after conducting a hearing pursuant to §§
31.0601—
31.0605, shall be empowered to suspend or revoke the permit issued under the
provisions of this Chapter to operate an ambulance service when it has been
found after investigation that the permittee or any partner, officer, or
director:
      (1)   Violates any section of this Chapter or the EMS Plan, or any rules
or regulations that are promulgated by the Department or the local EMS Agency
which relate to his permit activities;
      (2)   Is convicted of any felony;
      (3)   Is convicted of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      (4)   Is convicted of any offense relating to the use, sale, possession,
or transportation of narcotics or habit-forming drugs;
      (5)   Commits any act involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit whereby
another is injured, or whereby the permittee has benefitted, or any act
involving moral turpitude;
      (6)   Has misrepresented a material fact in obtaining a permit, or is no
longer adhering to the conditions specified in his permit;
      (7)   Aids or abets an unlicensed or uncertified person to evade the
provisions of this Chapter;
      (8)   Fails to make and keep records showing his transactions as a
permittee, or fails to have such records available for inspection by the Health
Officer or his or her duly authorized representative for a period of not less
than three years after completion of any transaction to which the records
refer, or refuses to comply with a written request of the Health Officer to
make such record available for inspection;
      (9)   Accepts an emergency call within permitted area when either unable
or unwilling to provide the requested service or fails to inform the person
requesting such service of any delay and fails to obtain the consent of such
before causing an ambulance to respond from a location more distant than the
one to which the request was directed;
      (10)   Fails to pay required fees or penalties.
   (b)   If any of the managers of an ambulance service are found after hearing
to have acted in the manner set forth in Subdivisions (a)(2), (3), (4), or (5)
hereof, the ambulance service shall not have its permit suspended or revoked
unless it shall have failed, for more than 15 days after the completion of said
hearing to have removed the manager or managers found to have so acted.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0811   Suspension, Conditional Operation, and Temporary Variance.
   In the event of any interruption of service of more than 24 hours duration,
or any substantial change in the ambulance service, which causes, or threatens
to cause, the ambulance service to be carried out different from that specified
in the current permit, the permittee shall notify the Health Officer
immediately in writing, stating the facts of such change.
   Upon request by the permittee, the Health Officer may grant a temporary
variance in writing from the conditions specified in the original permit if he
or she finds that such change is in substantial compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter. If the Health Officer finds that such change is not in
substantial compliance with this Chapter, he or she may suspend, revoke or
amend the permit by written notice.
   No permit shall be transferred to another person except upon prior approval
of the Board after timely review and report thereon by the Health Officer.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0812   Appeal Procedure.
   (a)   If the renewal of a permit is denied by the Health Officer or if the
Health Officer suspends or revokes a permit, the permittee shall be given
written notice specifying the action taken, and the effective date thereof.
Such notification shall be by registered or certified mail. The permittee
shall, upon written request, be entitled to a hearing as provided in
Title 3, Division 1, Chapter 6 of this Code (§§
31.0601—
31.0605). The permittee’s request for a hearing shall be made within ten days
of receiving the notice of denial, revocation, or suspension. The permittee
shall then be afforded a hearing prior to the effective date of denial,
suspension, or revocation. When a permittee is, or becomes, unable to provide
the required level of ambulance service because of a lack of an operating
vehicle, properly equipped vehicle, insurance, or personnel to serve and such a
lack or failure constitutes a substantial decrease in ability to provide the
level of ambulance service required by this Chapter, then the suspension or
revocation of the Health Officer shall be effective when notice of such is sent
to the permittee, and shall be in effect thenceforth unless that disposition is
changed after a hearing requested by the permittee. The hearing shall be held
within seven days of the suspension or revocation. The Health Officer may,
after such hearing, affirm, modify, or set aside the original decision. The
Health Officer shall notify all public safety agencies, County Communications
Division, and all hospitals in the respective permit area if the permit renewal
is denied or if a permit is suspended or revoked.
   (b)   If the Health Officer denies the renewal of or suspends or revokes a
permit, the permittee shall have the right to demand a hearing by the Board of
Supervisors. A request for a hearing shall be made in writing to the Clerk of
the Board within 20 calendar days following the denial, suspension, or
revocation of the permit. Upon receipt of a written request, the Clerk of the
Board shall set the matter for hearing as soon as reasonably possible but not
more than 60 days following receipt of the written request and give notice to
the appellant and the Health Officer of the date set for the hearing. The
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the County
Administrative Hearing Process. The decision of the Board of Supervisors upon
any such appeal shall be final unless within 30 days of mailing of written
notice of such decision the emergency service provider shall have filed an
action with the Superior Court under the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure
§ 1094.5 for review pursuant to administrative mandamus.
   Pending any appellate procedure herein provided, no change shall occur
unless the Health Officer shall, in his or her discretion, determine that an
emergency situation exists requiring the substitution of another emergency
services provider on an interim basis.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0813   Service Requirements.
   (a)   Each ambulance service shall provide ambulance service (of the level
or levels specified in his or her permit) on a continuous 24 hours per day
basis, excluding acts of God or labor disputes. If for any reason an operator
stops providing the prescribed level or levels of ambulance service on a
continuous 24 hours per day basis, he or she shall immediately stop any
advertisement of emergency services which have been discontinued and
immediately notify the Health Officer.
   (b)   Exceptions: Special events permittees.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0814   Conformance with Operating Areas.
   No ambulance service shall, but for the exceptions below, provide emergency
medical services for ambulance calls originating within the County outside the
territorial limits fixed in the permit issued to him or her.
   (a)   Exceptions. A permittee may provide service for ambulance calls
outside the territorial limits fixed in the permit issued to him or her:
      (1)   Upon request by any law enforcement or governmental agency having
jurisdiction pursuant to written mutual aid agreements approved by the Health
Officer;
      (2)   Upon request of a permittee in an adjoining service area/zone, when
such permittee does not have an ambulance or level of service immediately
available in the operating area from which a request originates, and when
ambulance service is immediately required;
      (3)   To provide medically required specialized transportation services
not immediately available for a patient in another operating area if such
specialized services have heretofor been approved in accordance with §
31.0827.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0815   Communications Requirements.
   Each ambulance service operating in the County shall establish and maintain
radio contact with a central point designated by the County or the local EMS
Agency and its local base of operation where technically feasible. Radio
procedures prescribed by the County Communications Division shall be utilized.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0816   Standards for Operation of an Ambulance Service.
   Each ambulance service shall operate in accordance with Administrative Code
Title 13 and those standards and guidelines established by the local EMS Agency
and the State of California Emergency Medical Services Authority.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0817   Standards for Dispatch.
   Upon a request in writing by a local fire agency, an ambulance service shall
enter into an agreement with the fire agency that would direct the ambulance
company to report any emergency calls received directly from private parties to
the fire agency dispatch center.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0818   Ambulance Safety and Emergency Equipment Requirements.
   Ambulances shall be maintained at all times in good mechanical repair and in
a clean and sanitary condition.
   (a)   Minimum Equipment. All ambulances shall be equipped with all safety
and emergency equipment required for ambulances by the California Vehicle Code
and the California Administrative Code and administrative rules of the County
Health Officer and the local EMS Agency as the same are now written, or
hereafter amended.
   (b)   ALS and LALS Ambulance Equipment. In addition to the regular ambulance
equipment and supplies, the ALS and LALS ambulances shall also be equipped as
required by administrative rules of the County Health Officer and the local EMS
Agency.
   (c)   Maintenance of Emergency Equipment and Supplies. Dressings, bandaging,
instruments, and other medical supplies used for care and treatment of patients
shall be protected so they are suitable for use from a medical standpoint.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0819   Ambulance Personnel.
   (a)   Ambulance Driver. Every person who drives an ambulance within the
County, while responding to emergency calls, shall comply with the requirements
in the California Administrative Code for ambulance drivers. The driver shall
also hold a certificate as an EMT-IA, EMT-II, or EMT-P.
   (b)   Ambulance Attendant. An ambulance attendant shall he trained and
competent in the proper use of all emergency equipment required by this
Chapter, and shall hold the required certification to satisfy the level of
service as specified in the permit.
   (c)   Attendant Required. Each ambulance being operated within the County,
in response to an emergency call, shall be staffed by both a driver and
attendant, unless the ambulance service operator has been exempted. The
attendant of an ambulance responding to an emergency call shall occupy the
patient compartment while transporting any person in apparent need of medical
attention.
   This Section shall not apply during any “state of emergency,” or “local
emergency” as defined in the Government Code of the State of California.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2841, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 3251,
passed - -1998)
§ 31.0820   Ambulance Rates.
   (a)   Ambulance Rates. The schedule of maximum rates that may be charged for
ambulance service shall be established and published by the Local Emergency
Medical Servies Agency ("LEMSA") in the Inland Counties Emergency Medical
Agency ("ICEMA") Ground Based Ambulance Rate Setting Policy for San Bernardino
County ("ICEMA Policy", which is currently No. 3060 as initially approved by
the ICEMA Board of Directors) and as adjusted on an annual basis thereafter by
the Emergency Medical Services ("EMS") Administrator as provided in this
Section and ICEMA Policy, or as otherwise approved by the ICEMA Board of
Directors.
   (b)   Rate Adjustment. The current maximum rates shall be adjusted by the
LEMSA through its rate setting policies referred to above in an amount
necessary to properly compensate ambulance providers for changes (increases or
decreases) in their reasonable costs based on the change in the Consumer Price
Index (CPI), the Annual Rate Comparison Study, or the Mileage Charge Rate
Adjustments, as set forth within the ICEMA Policy formulas. The LEMSA EMS
Administrator shall be responsible for calculating the rate adjustments
according to the ICEMA Policy rate adjustment procedure.
      (1)   The rate adjustments shall be calculated by April 15 of each year.
The CPI adjustment shall be effective as of the first day of July of each year.
      (2)   In addition to, and not in lieu of, annual adjustments stated
above, rate increases or decreases in an amount equal to the ambulance
providers' extraordinary increases or decreases in their cost of operations may
also be granted by the ICEMA Board of Directors. The LEMSA EMS Administrator
shall determine the application process for such extraordinary cost increases
or decreases. Such extraordinary cost increases or decreases shall be subject
to ICEMA Board of Directors' approval.
      (3)   The LEMSA EMS Administrator at the time of any request for an
extraordinary adjustment under Subdivision (2) above, may request an audit of
books and records of an authorized EMS provider for the purpose of verifying
revenue and cost data specifically associated with the extraordinary rate
increase request. Such an audit shall be carried out by a person selected by
the provider and approved by the EMS Administrator. If the EMS Administrator
and provider cannot agree on a person to perform the audit, the audit shall be
carried out by a Certified Public Accountant selected by the EMS Administrator.
If there is any charge, cost or fee for such an audit, it shall be paid by the
provider. The EMS Administrator may deny any extraordinary adjustment if an
audit is requested and not performed and provided to the EMS Administrator.
Every audit shall be done within a reasonable period of time under the
circumstances, but not to exceed 90 days from the selection and appointment of
the auditor, unless provider has delayed or not reasonably cooperated with the
audit process which will result in the denial of the adjustment request.
      (4)   Rate adjustments greater than what is allowable under ICEMA Policy
are subject to ICEMA Board of Directors' approval.
   (c)   Collection of Fees Prior to Delivery of Services. Under no
circumstances shall ambulance personnel dispatched on a Code 3 call attempt to
collect for services provided prior to the delivery of the patient at an
appropriate medical facility.
   (d)   Rates Applicable to All Ambulance Providers. At the direction of the
LEMSA, and when authorized pursuant to the local EMS Plan, the ambulance rates
established under this Section shall apply to all providers of ambulance
services which are subject to the regulatory authority of the LEMSA and the EMS
Plan.
   (e)   Nothing in this §
31.0820 shall be construed to opine on what amount is an appropriate rate, cost
or expense a provider may charge. This Section only sets the maximum rates that
may be charged by a provider for ambulance service.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2511, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 3718,
passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3914, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 3965, passed - -2005;
Am. Ord. 4478, passed - -2024)
§ 31.0821   Continuation of Call.
   An ambulance based and properly licensed outside the County shall be
authorized to transport a patient to or through the County but shall not be
authorized to transport patients originating in the County, except under the
conditions of §
31.0802. In order to maintain proper medical support, communications shall be
maintained with the ambulance dispatch center for the area. ALS ambulances
shall establish and maintain communications with and medical control from a
base station in conformance with the rules of the local EMS Agency.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0822   Temporary Permit.
   The County Health Officer may authorize a temporary permit to an ambulance
service based outside the County and properly licensed by the California
Highway Patrol up to 30 days for special events. Such temporary permit shall
conform to the requirements of §
31.0807 and shall contain such additional conditions and restrictions that the
County Health Officer deems appropriate for the operation.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0823   Emergency and Disaster Operations.
   During any “state of war emergency,” “state of emergency,” or “local
emergency,” as defined in the California Emergency Services Act (Government
Code Chapter 7 of Division I of Title 2), as amended, each ambulance service
shall within reason provide equipment, facilities, and personnel as requested
by the County Health Officer.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0824   Mutual Aid Requirements.
   (a)   Whenever the County Health Officer or his or her designee determines
that ambulance resources within the County are inadequate to respond to a
County emergency/disaster, a request for emergency ambulance mutual aid may be
made to any County Health Officer or his or her designee within any county of
the state or adjoining states. Whenever the County Health Officer or his or her
designee receives a request involving emergency ambulance mutual aid from any
County Health Officer or his designee, such resources shall be provided as are
available.
   (b)   Where a permittee needs additional equipment or personnel beyond that
which he or she is usually able to supply, he or she shall request such
additional resources from adjacent area providers within the County who shall
provide such resources as are available, except when the adjacent provider
determines that such mutual aid would unreasonably remove adequate
transportation equipment from the adjacent provider permitted area.
   (c)   Whenever the County Health Officer or his or her designee determines
that ambulance resources within an operating area are inadequate or nonexistent
because the ambulance service’s permit has either been suspended, revoked or
not renewed, then the Health Officer or his or her designee may order another
permittee to provide service in the operating area until a permanent provider
can be selected. In such instance the EMCC shall be notified, and the problem
shall be acted upon by the EMCC. No permittee shall be required to service the
vacated area for more than 30 days during which time the Health Officer shall
attempt to obtain the service of another provider.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0825   User Complaint Procedures.
   Any user or subscriber to an ambulance service contending that he or she has
been required to pay an excessive charge for service or that he or she has
received unsatisfactory service, may file a written complaint with the
Department setting forth such allegations. The Department shall notify the
ambulance service of the details of such complaint, and shall investigate the
matter to determine the validity of the complaint. If the complaint is
determined to be valid, the Department shall take reasonable and proper actions
to secure compliance with the conditions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0826   Enforcement Responsibilities.
   (a)   The Department shall make all rules and regulations deemed necessary
and reasonable, subject to the approval of the Board, covering ambulance
service operation, ambulance equipment, ambulance vehicles, ambulance personnel
and rates and for the effective and reasonable administration of this Chapter.
   (b)   The Department shall inspect the records, facilities, vehicles,
equipment, and methods of operations whenever such inspections are deemed
necessary.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
§ 31.0827   Specialized Transportation Services.
   (a)   Upon receiving an application, the Health Officer shall conduct a
hearing into whether any specialized transportation services are necessary and
appropriate for any or all portions of the County.
   (b)   The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with §
31.0805 hereof.
   (c)   If such specialized transportation services are found necessary and
appropriate, an annual permit shall be provided to the applicant upon the same
terms and conditions required for nonspecialized ambulance services.
   (d)   Where such specialized transportation services are found necessary and
appropriate, the ambulance service currently supplying BLS, LALS, or ALS
service shall be given the first right to provide such additional service in
its area.
(Ord. 2084, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 3251, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 9: VITAL STATISTICS
Section
   
31.0901   Disposition of Records of Births, Deaths and Marriages.
§ 31.0901   Disposition of Records of Births, Deaths and Marriages.
   The County Auditor-Controller/Recorder and the County Health Officer, local
registrar of births and deaths, with the approval and under the supervision of
the State Registrar, hereby receive approval of the Board of Supervisors for
the disposition of this County’s and local registrar’s records of births,
deaths, and marriages for events which occurred after July 1, 1905, on file in
the Office of the County Auditor-Controller/Recorder, providing that the
original records are determined to be on file in the Office of the State
Registrar. If the County Health Officer, local registrar or County Auditor-
Controller/Recorder does not have copies of such records, one may accept them
from the other. These provisions are pursuant to Health and Safety Code §
102380.
(Ord. 2639, passed - -1982)
CHAPTER 10: RESERVED
CHAPTER 11: EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE COMMITTEE
Section
   
31.1101   San Bernardino County Emergency Medical Care Committee.
   
31.1102   Definitions.
   
31.1103   Purpose and Scope.
   
31.1104   Membership, Appointment of Members.
   
31.1105   EMCC Meetings.
   
31.1106   Review of Local Operations.
§ 31.1101   San Bernardino County Emergency Medical Care Committee.
   This Chapter shall be known and cited as the San Bernardino County Emergency
Medical Care Committee Chapter.
(Ord. 3495, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. ICEMA 11-01, passed - -2011)
§ 31.1102   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations, shall have the meaning set forth herein. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, plural words include the singular, and
singular words include the plural. All references to gender shall include both
masculine and feminine. Words not specifically defined shall be given their
common meaning. The word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
   BOARD OF SUPERVISORS (BOARD). The Board of Supervisors for the County of San
Bernardino.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino.
   EMCC. The Emergency Medical Care Committee for the County of San Bernardino.
   EMS. Emergency medical services.
   EMS ADMINISTRATOR. The EMS Administrator of the Inland Counties Emergency
Medical Agency.
   EMS AUTHORITY. The Emergency Medical Services Authority of the State of
California.
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Executive Officer of the Inland Counties Emergency
Medical Agency.
   ICEMA. The Inland Counties Emergency Medical Agency, the local EMS Agency
for San Bernardino County pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 1797.200.
   LEVEL I TRAUMA HOSPITAL. A hospital designated by the governing board of
ICEMA as having complied with the requirements of California Code of
Regulations (CCR), Division 9, Chapter 7, for a Level I Trauma Hospital.
   LEVEL II TRAUMA HOSPITAL. A hospital designated by the governing board of
ICEMA as having complied with the requirements of CCR, Division 9, Chapter 7,
for a Level II Trauma Hospital.
(Ord. 3495, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. ICEMA 11-01, passed - -2011; Am. Ord.
4297, passed - -2016)
§ 31.1103   Purpose and Scope.
   It is the purpose of this Chapter to establish the County’s EMCC. It is the
responsibility of the EMCC to act in an advisory capacity to the Board of
Supervisors, and ICEMA on all matters relating to emergency medical services
and to perform such other duties as the Board of Supervisors may specify.
(Ord. 3495, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. ICEMA 11-01, passed - -2011)
§ 31.1104   Membership, Appointment of Members.
   (a)   Appointment. The members of the EMCC shall be appointed by the Board
of Supervisors. The members of the EMCC serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Supervisors. The EMCC shall consist of the following:
      (1)   An emergency department physician or trauma surgeon from an ICEMA
designated Level I Trauma Hospital. A Level I Trauma Hospital shall not appoint
the same specialty (i.e., emergency physician or trauma physician) as a Level
II Trauma Hospital.
      (2)   An emergency department physician or trauma surgeon from an ICEMA
designated Level II Trauma Hospital. A Level II Trauma Hospital shall not
appoint the same specialty (i.e., emergency physician or trauma physician) as a
Level I Trauma Hospital.
      (3)   A licensed registered nurse with a minimum of three (3) years’
experience in an emergency department located in San Bernardino County and
currently certified as an ICEMA Mobile Intensive Care Nurse.
      (4)   A fire chief with a minimum of three (3) years’ experience at a
Chief Officer level within San Bernardino County.
      (5)   A private ambulance provider with a minimum of three (3) years’
experience providing ambulance service within San Bernardino County.
      (6)   A representative of an approved EMT-P training program located
within San Bernardino County with a minimum of three (3) years’ teaching
experience in EMS.
      (7)   A hospital administrator currently employed by a hospital located
within San Bernardino County with a minimum of three (3) years’ related
experience.
      (8)   A physician with a minimum of three (3) years’ practicing
experience in a basic emergency department (non-trauma) located within San
Bernardino County.
      (9)   A city manager, deputy city manager, or assistant city manager,
located within San Bernardino County with a minimum of three (3) years’
experience.
      (10)   A representative of a permitted/authorized air ambulance provider
with a minimum of three (3) years’ experience providing air ambulance service
within San Bernardino County.
      (11)   A law enforcement representative with a minimum of three (3)
years’ experience, currently providing service within San Bernardino County.
      (12)   A representative currently assigned to emergency medical
dispatching in a secondary Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP) providing
service within San Bernardino County with a minimum of (3) three years’ related
experience.
      (13)   A consumer advocate who has resided in San Bernardino County a
minimum of three (3) years.
      (14)   A licensed, ICEMA accredited field emergency medical
technicianparamedic, currently functioning within the San Bernardino County
pre-hospital care setting, with a minimum of three (3) years’ experience in the
private sector.
      (15)   A licensed, ICEMA accredited field emergency medical
technicianparamedic, currently functioning within the San Bernardino County
pre-hospital care setting, with a minimum of three (3) years’ experience in the
public sector.
   (b)   Voting. Each member of the EMCC shall have one vote. A majority vote
with a quorum in attendance shall be required to take action on a matter before
the EMCC. The establishment of a quorum will be determined as specified in the
EMCC By-laws.
   (c)   Election of a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. A Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson shall be elected annually from the voting members of the EMCC
at the first meeting of each calendar year by a simple majority of the EMCC
members present. The Vice-Chairperson shall assume the responsibilities of the
Chairperson in his or her absence.
   (d)   Term of Appointment. Appointment shall be for four years. Terms shall
expire on January 31 of the appropriate years and subsequent new terms shall
begin February 1 of that year. The terms shall be staggered so that no more
than two-thirds of the terms of the total number of members of the EMCC shall
expire in any one-year period. Committee members shall serve at the pleasure of
the Board of Supervisors and may be removed from the EMCC at any time only by
the Board of Supervisors.
   (e)   Staff Support. The ICEMA shall provide staff support to the EMCC.
(Ord. 3495, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. ICEMA 11-01, passed - -2011)
§ 31.1105   EMCC Meetings.
   The EMCC shall meet, at regular intervals necessary to fulfill its Board-
approved scope of operations at a time and location to be determined by ICEMA.
(Ord. 3495, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. ICEMA 11-01, passed - -2011)
§ 31.1106   Review of Local Operations.
   The EMCC shall:
   (a)   Annually review the ambulance services operating within the County;
and
   (b)   Annually review emergency medical care offered within the County; and
   (c)   Review and comment on proposed EMS legislation, EMS plans, protocols
and policies to be adopted by ICEMA, and report its findings to the ICEMA
Executive Officer and the ICEMA EMS Administrator and the Board as appropriate.
   (d)   Perform additional duties and responsibilities as directed by State
law, the Board of Supervisors or §§
31.1101 through
31.1106 (or any successor sections) of the County Code.
   (e)   Annually report its observations and recommendations to the Board and
ICEMA relative to its review of the ambulance services, emergency medical care
and all other EMS matters relating to EMS in the County.
(Ord. 3495, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. Ord. ICEMA 11-01, passed - -2011; Am. Ord.
4297, passed - -2016)
DIVISION 2: ANIMALS
CHAPTER 1: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
   
32.0101   Definitions.
   
32.0102   Impoundment of Animals—Persons Charged with Enforcement.
   
32.0103   Disposition of Impounded Animals.
   
32.0104   Record of Impounded Animals
   
32.0105   Disposition of Dead Animals.
   
32.0106   (Deleted by Ord. 2100, passed - -1976).
   
32.0107   Abandoned Animals.
   
32.0108   Control of Animals.
   
32.0109   Female Dogs and Puppies.
   
32.0110   Wild, Exotic or Nondomestic Animals in Captivity.
   
32.0111   Licensing of Animal Establishments Other Than Dog Kennels and
Catteries.
   
32.0112   Application for a License to Operate.
   
32.0113   General Regulations Relating to Animals.
   
32.0114   Expiration of License.
   
32.0115   Renewal of License.
   
32.0116   Inspection.
   
32.0117   Revocation of License.
   
32.0118   License not Transferable.
   
32.0119   Animals Which Habitually Make Noise.
   
32.0120   Enforcement Remedies and Penalties are Cumulative and Discretionary;
Not Exclusive.
   
32.0121   Authority to Inspect.
   
32.0122   Continuing Violations.
   
32.0123   Acts Including Causing, Aiding and Abetting.
   
32.0124   Criminal Actions.
   
32.0125   Civil Actions.
   
32.0126   Administrative Citations and Penalties.
§ 32.0101   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED ANIMAL. Any animal left unattended for a minimum of 24 hours
without receiving proper care and/or treatment by its owner or caretaker.
Community cats returned to their original point of pick-up following treatment
in a Trap-Neuter-Vaccinate-Return program shall not be considered abandoned.
   ALTERED DOG. Any dog which has been certified in writing by a veterinarian
as being nonreproductive.
   ANIMAL. Any mammal, poultry, fowl, reptile, fish, or any other living
creature.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person duly appointed by the Health Officer and
authorized to act on his or her behalf in the enforcement of the Animal Care
and Control Program.
   ANIMAL MENAGERIE. Any place where wild animals are kept or maintained for
private or commercial purposes, including places where wild animals are
boarded, trained, or kept for hire.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. All places where impounded animals are to be confined,
whether by the County or by a private person or persons under contract or
agreement with the County.
   CAT. All domesticated felines belonging to the genus Felis catus.
   CHIEF OFFICER. The San Bernardino County Public Health Program Manager
assigned to the Animal Care and Control program or any other person so
designated.
   COMMUNITY CAT. Any free-roaming, unowned cat living in an outdoor
environment that may or may not be a part of a cat colony. A community cat may
or may not be feral.
   DEPARTMENT. The San Bernardino County Department of Public Health.
   DOG. Any dog of any age, female or male.
   EAR-TIPPING. The removal of the distal 1/4 of a community cat’s left ear,
which is approximately 3/8-inch, or one cm, in an adult and proportionally
smaller in a kitten. This procedure is performed under sterile conditions while
the cat is under anesthesia, in compliance with any applicable federal or state
law, and under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. Ear-tips are
designed to identify a community cat as being sterilized and lawfully
vaccinated for rabies.
   ENCLOSURE. A pen or structure suitable to confine an animal determined
potentially dangerous or vicious. The ENCLOSURE shall be designed to prevent
the animal from escaping and to prevent the entry of young children and other
persons.
   GUARD DOG. Any dog used for the purpose of guard duty.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The San Bernardino County Health Officer or any other person
duly authorized to act on his or her behalf.
   IMPOUNDMENT. The picking up of an animal by a duly authorized person and
bringing it into an animal shelter for confinement, custody, and disposition.
   LEASH. Any rope, leather strap, chain or other material not exceeding six
feet in length being held in the hand of a person capable of controlling the
animal to which it is attached.
   LICENSE TAG. A piece of metal or other durable material inscribed with a
date and number which has been issued by the County or a municipal dog
licensing agency.
   LIVESTOCK. All domesticated bovine, equine, caprine, ovine and porcine
species.
   OWNER or KEEPER. Any person who owns or maintains an animal, or who harbors
or keeps an animal for 15 or more consecutive days, except a veterinarian or an
operator of a grooming shop, a kennel or a pet shop engaged in the regular
practice of this business.
   PERIMETER FENCE. A fence which shall guard and contain the enclosure and
shall be totally separate from such enclosure and shall be a minimum of six
feet in height and shall be at least six feet from the enclosure on all sides
to prevent contact between the animal and the public
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any animal which, unprovoked, on two separate occasions within any
36-month period, engages in any behavior that requires defensive action by any
person to prevent bodily injury, but only if the person and the animal are off
the property of the owner or keeper of the animal when the animal behavior
occurs;
      (2)   Any animal, which, unprovoked, bites a person causing a less than
severe injury, as defined below in this Subdivision;
      (3)   Any animal, which, unprovoked, kills, seriously bites, or otherwise
inflicts or causes injury to a domestic animal, but only if such occurs off the
property of the owner or keeper of the attacking animal.
   REGISTRATION. Any animal which has been declared potentially dangerous or
vicious shall be registered as such with the Animal Care and Control Program.
   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury to a human being, which results in tears
or disfiguring lacerations or which requires multiple sutures or corrective or
cosmetic surgery.
   SHELTERKEEPER. The San Bernardino County Public Health Animal Shelter
Supervisor assigned to the Animal Care and Control program or any other person
so designated by the Health Officer.
   STRAY. Any animal, excluding community cats, with no identification or with
no known owner or keeper.
   TRAP-NEUTER-VACCINATE-RETURN (TNVR). A program whereby a community cat is
trapped, or otherwise obtained, and provided rabies vaccination, sterilized,
ear-tipped, and returned and released at the point of pickup following a
determination that the community cat is healthy and capable of living
independently.
   UNLICENSED DOG. Any dog for which a current license has not been paid, or to
which the current tag provided for in this Code is not attached.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any animal seized under Penal Code § 599aa (fighting animals) and
fighting dogs as provided in Subdivision (a) of Penal Code § 597.5 when there
has been a conviction of the owner or keeper of the subject dogs under that
subdivision of the Penal Code;
      (2)   Any animal, which, unprovoked, inflicts severe injury on a human
being, as such injury is defined above in this Subdivision, or kills a human
being;
      (3)   Any animal previously determined and currently listed as a
potentially dangerous animal, which, after its owner or keeper has been
notified of this determination, continues the behavior described in the
definition of POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL above or is maintained in violation
of §
32.1405 of this code.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any wild, exotic, dangerous or venomous animal, including but
no limited to mammals, fowl, fish, or reptile.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1455, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1603, passed
- -1970; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed - -2000; Am. Ord.
3908, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4473, passed - -2024)
§ 32.0102   Impoundment of Animals—Persons Charged with Enforcement.
   (a)   The Sheriff and his or her deputies, Animal Control Officers, every
shelterkeeper and any person employed or designated for that purpose by the
Board of Supervisors are hereby authorized and empowered to:
      (1)   Capture, receive, take up and impound:
         (A)   Any dog or other animal found running at large in violation of
this Code or of any law of the State of California;
         (B)   Any dog or other animal which is harassing any person;
         (C)   Any dog, which is harassing an animal upon the premises of any
person’s property or public place, including the owner’s or keeper’s property;
         (D)   Any animal, including wild animals, being kept or maintained
within a person’s property in violation of this Code or of any law of the State
of California;
         (E)   Stray or abandoned animals;
         (F)   Dogs, which are not licensed or not vaccinated, in violation of
this Code;
         (G)   Any animals delivered for disposition, by its owner, when the
owner has paid the required fee and signed forms releasing all title and
interest in the animal;
         (H)   Any animal which cannot be cared for by its owner or custodian
because of the owner or custodian’s imprisonment, illness, bankruptcy,
litigation, or other contingency, or because the owner or custodian cannot be
found.
      (2)   Regularly and adequately provide food, water and otherwise care for
all animals impounded under the provisions of this Code;
      (3)   Take up and impound any sick or injured animal whose owner is
unknown or unidentified; to humanely destroy any such injured animal, when, in
the opinion of the officer, registered veterinary technician or a licensed
veterinarian, such destruction is necessary and humane; and make proper
disposition of such destroyed animal. Should the owner of an injured or
destroyed animal be identified, the owner shall be immediately notified of its
injury or destruction;
      (4)   Perform any other acts necessary to carry out the provisions of
this Code and of the laws of the State of California relating to animals.
   (b)   The officer having custody of any impounded animal may, by humane
methods, summarily destroy the animal if:
      (1)   The animal is suffering from any incurable or contagious disease as
certified to by a licensed veterinarian or registered veterinary technician and
the destruction has been approved by the Chief Officer, or designee, of the
Animal Care and Control Program;
      (2)   The animal is in the field and it is too severely ill or injured to
move or where a veterinarian is not available and it would be more humane to
dispose of the animal and the destruction is approved by the Chief Officer, or
designee, of the Animal Care and Control Program;
      (3)   The animal is in the act of killing, wounding or persistently
pursuing a human being.
   (c)   Except as provided in Food and Agricultural Code §§ 31752 or 31108 for
owner redemption, any officer having in his or her custody any unlicensed,
impounded animal not suffering from any infectious or communicable disease may
release the animal to any adult person who will pay the pound fees and charges
as specified in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees. If a resident
of an unincorporated area, the person shall also pay rabies vaccination and
license fees for a dog.
   (d)   All the provisions of this Code pertaining to impounded, unlicensed
dogs, except the licensing provisions thereof, shall apply to impounded cats.
   (e)   The shelterkeeper or any duly authorized person shall have the right
to receive and dispose of animals delivered into his or her possession by their
owners and shall charge a fee for each animal delivered into custody pursuant
to San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
   (f)   Any impounded animal that has not been redeemed or adopted may be
disposed of by euthanasia in accordance with State and County laws.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1455, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1603, passed
- -1970; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.0103   Disposition of Impounded Animals.
   (a)    An impounded animal may be redeemed by payment of a specified shelter
fee in addition to the daily charges and other charges, if any, for each day
the animal has been impounded, pursuant to the San Bernardino County Code
Schedule of Fees.
   (b)   Any dog over the age of four months that has been impounded shall not
be released from the pound, or from any shelter that is under contract with the
County of San Bernardino, unless it shall first be licensed in accordance with
the provisions of this Code.
   (c)   Any officer acting under the provisions of this Code and impounding a
licensed dog or otherwise identifiable animal, shall give notice of the
impounding of the animal in person or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the last known address of the owner. If the animal is not redeemed and the
owner or possessor does not pay the license fee, obtain a license tag, and pay
the fees required as specified in this Code after notice has been given, the
officer shall destroy or dispose of such animal.
   (d)   In accordance with Food and Agricultural Code, §§ 30503(c) (dogs:
spay/neuter), 31108(b) (impounded dog) and 31752(b) (cats: spay/ neuter) in
which the County is authorized to release any stray dog or cat that is
impounded prior to it being euthanized to an animal rescue group that has
entered into an agreement with the County, the adoption fee and spay/neuter
deposit shall be waived on said animal and authority is given to the Health
Officer to enter into such agreements.
   (e)   For community cats that have been impounded, upon determination that
the community cat is healthy, it shall be sterilized, vaccinated for rabies,
have its ear-tipped, and then returned and released at or near the original
point of pick-up.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1753, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 1764, passed
- -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 4473, passed - -2024)
§ 32.0104   Record of Impounded Animals.
   Each shelterkeeper, Animal Control Officer, or any other duly authorized
person, shall keep a record of all animals impounded by him or her that shall
show:
   (a)   Date of impoundment;
   (b)   License tag number, if any;
   (c)   Complete description of animal;
   (d)   Date and manner of its disposal; and
   (e)   If redeemed, sold or rescued, the name and address of the person by
whom redeemed, purchased or rescued, the amount of all fees and other monies
received or collected by him or her and the disposition thereof.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1753, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 1764, passed
- -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.0105   Disposition of Dead Animals.
   When any dog or other animal owned by or in the custody or control of any
person or found in any person’s private property dies, such person shall,
within 24 hours, provide for the burial, incineration, or other disposition of
the body of such dead animal in a safe and sanitary manner.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of the body of such dead
animal in any public or private property, other than his or her own, without
proper authorization from the County Health Department.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1753, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 1764, passed
- -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.0106   (Deleted by Ord. 2100, passed - -1976).
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 1767, passed
- -1972; Am. Ord. 1779, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 1821, passed - -1973; Am. Ord.
3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.0107   Abandoned Animals.
   It shall be unlawful to abandon any animal in San Bernardino County.
Community cats shall not be considered abandoned when returned and released at
or near the original point of pick-up as part of a community cat management
program.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1603, passed - -1970; Am. Ord. 1753, passed
- -1972; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed - -2000; Am. Ord.
4473, passed - -2024)
§ 32.0108   Control of Animals.
   (a)   Except as to community cats returned and released to their point of
pick-up as part of a TNVR program, no person owning or having control of any
animal shall permit such animal to stray, to run at large upon any private or
public street, sidewalk, school ground, public park, playground, place of
public assembly or any other public place or upon any unenclosed private lot or
other unenclosed private place or upon any private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control thereof. Parkways comprising the area between
the street and sidewalk shall be included as private property for purposes of
this Section.
   (b)   Any person who finds any animal which has strayed or is running at
large upon his or her own property or any other place contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter, may take possession of and hold same provided,
within four hours after securing possession thereof, he or she shall notify the
Health Officer or Animal Control Officer or the Sheriff of the fact that he or
she has such animal in his or her possession and give the Health Officer,
Animal Control Officer, or Sheriff full information in regard to the animal,
including a complete description of the animal and license number, if any, and
shall surrender the animal to the Health Officer, Animal Control Officer, or
Sheriff upon demand.
   (c)   No person may lawfully bring his or her dog out of his or her property
unless:
      (1)   The dog is restrained by a leash and is in the charge of a person
competent to restrain the dog; or
      (2)   The dog is properly restrained and enclosed in a vehicle, cage or
similar enclosure.
   (d)   Any dog found running at large, running loose or unrestrained may be
impounded by the Health Officer, Animal Control Officer, or Sheriff for a
period of not less than 96 hours. Any unclaimed dogs shall then be destroyed or
disposed of in accordance with §
32.0103 of this Code.
   (e)   There shall be a reclaiming fee for all impounded dogs, as set forth
in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
   (f)   A person having custody of any dog shall not permit, either willfully
or through failure to exercise due care or control, any such dog to defecate or
urinate upon a public street or sidewalk; the floor of any common hall in any
apartment house, hotel or other multiple dwelling; upon any entrance way,
stairway, or wall immediately abutting on a public sidewalk; or upon the floor
of any theater, shop, store, office building, or other building used by the
public.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 1767, passed
- -1972; Am. Ord. 1779, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 1821, passed - -1973; Am. Ord.
3804, passed - -2000; Am. Ord. 4473, passed - -2024)
§ 32.0109   Female Dogs and Puppies.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any female dog that is
owned, harbored or controlled by that person, when said female dog is in heat
or in season or breeding condition, to be unconfined and in such a manner that
it attracts stray male dogs.
   (b)   All dogs under four months of age and until vaccinated shall be
confined to the premises of or kept under physical restraint by the owner or
keeper. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent the sale or
transportation of a puppy younger than four months of age.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2100, passed
- -1976; Am. Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.0110   Wild, Exotic or Nondomestic Animals in Captivity.
   No person shall have, keep, maintain, breed, sell, trade or let for hire,
any wild, exotic, dangerous, or nondomestic animal without first applying to
any receiving special authorization from the Health Officer. The keeping or
maintenance of such animals shall also conform to the appropriate zoning codes
as well as laws and regulations promulgated by the State of California and the
Federal government.
   The Health Officer may authorize the keeping or maintaining of any wild,
exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal when, in his or her opinion, any such
animal may be kept or maintained without endangering the safety of any person,
any animal or property, nor create a nuisance; provided however, that the
Health Officer may require any such animal be properly caged, tethered, or
restrained, and may create such additional requirements as may be necessary and
proper under the circumstances. The Health Officer shall also require that the
owner or keeper of any privately-owned wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic
animal pay a license fee as specified in the County Schedule of Fees; the
initial fee to be paid at the time of application. The Health Officer may
revoke such authorization when, in his or her opinion, the safety of any
person, other animal or property is endangered, or the keeping of such animal
creates a nuisance.
   The provisions of this Section shall not be applicable to licensed circuses,
carnivals, zoos, or other collections of wild animals under jurisdiction of a
city, or the State or Federal government.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1512, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1764, passed
- -1972; Am. Ord. 2995, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.0111   Licensing of Animal Establishments Other Than Dog Kennels And
Catteries.
   No person shall conduct or operate any pet shop, pet grooming parlor, public
aquarium, game bird farm, petting zoo, wild animal breeding or boarding
facility, or animal menagerie, without first obtaining a license from the
County Health Officer. Any such establishment shall also conform to the
appropriate zoning codes.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed
- -2000)
§ 32.0112   Application for a License to Operate.
   An application for a license to operate a pet shop, pet grooming parlor,
public aquarium, game bird farm, petting zoo, wild animal breeding or boarding
facility, or animal menagerie, shall be made in writing to the Health Officer.
Not later than ten days after receipt of the application by the Health Officer,
the facilities for which said license is requested will be examined by the
Health Officer. No license shall be issued or renewed unless and until all
general regulations relating to animals, as set forth by the Health Officer,
are complied with, and an annual fee as specified in the County Schedule of
Fees is paid. Any building or structure used in the housing or maintaining of
said animals shall be approved by the County Building Department.
§ 32.0113   General Regulations Relating to Animals.
   Every person within the County of San Bernardino who owns, conducts,
manages, or operates any animal establishment for which a license is required
by this Chapter, shall comply with each of the following conditions:
   (a)   Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall
be maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury and restrict
entrance of other animals.
   (b)   All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (c)   All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good wholesome food and
water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require.
   (d)   Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and maintained
as to prevent the escape of animals.
   (e)   All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from
the animals and animals from the public.
   (f)   Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be
properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling
shall be provided as required according to the physical needs of the animals.
   (g)   All animal rooms, cages, and runs shall be of sufficient size to
provide adequate space for clean water and proper housing for animals kept
therein.
   (h)   All animal runs shall be approved construction and shall be provided
with adequate waste and manure disposal and for drainage into an approved sewer
or individual sewer disposal installation.
   (i)   All animals shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian for examination
and treatment if so ordered by the Health Officer.
   (j)   Every precaution shall be taken to avoid the production of nuisances
and any hazard to the public health as a result of the presence of any wild,
dangerous and/or exotic animals.
   (k)   Every violation of applicable regulation shall be corrected within a
reasonable time to be specified by the Health Officer.
   (l)   Failure of the applicant for said license to comply with any of the
foregoing conditions shall be deemed just cause for the denial of any license,
whether original or renewal.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed
- -2000)
§ 32.0114   Expiration of License.
   Any license issued under this Chapter shall expire at the end of such fiscal
year in which the license is issued.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed
- -2000)
§ 32.0115   Renewal of License.
   The procedure for the renewal of any license shall be subject to the same
conditions and shall be done in the same manner as the issuance of an original
license.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed
- -2000)
§ 32.0116   Inspection.
   The Health Officer shall have the authority to enter upon any area or
premises to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed
- -2000)
§ 32.0117   Revocation of License.
   The Health Officer may revoke any license issued pursuant to this Chapter,
whenever he or she shall determine from an inspection that any animal
establishment fails to meet all conditions contained in §
32.0113, or for any other violation of this Chapter.
   Any revocation of a license shall be effective until all conditions of §
32.0113 have been met and complied with or such other violation of this Chapter
has been remedied, to the satisfaction of the Health Officer and written notice
of this fact has been given to the licensee. Upon receipt of notice of
compliance the license shall be deemed in full force and effect for the
remainder of the original term for which issued.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed
- -2000)
§ 32.0118   License Not Transferable.
   Licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall not be transferable, except
when the owner of such property sells the original property that included a
licensed animal establishment within such property, and the licensed animal
establishment remains within the confines of the original property.
(Ord. 962, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3804, passed
- -2000)
§ 32.0119 Animals Which Habitually Make Noise.
   (a)   Excluding noise from property not zoned for residential purposes
(property without “R” in its zoning classification), it shall be unlawful for
any person owning or having control of one or more of any animal, either
willfully or through failure to exercise proper control, to allow such animal
to habitually bark, howl, crow, or make any other loud noises in such a manner
as to at any time, day or night, cause general annoyance or discomfort to a
neighboring inhabitant. The standard of general annoyance or discomfort is a
“reasonable person” standard, i.e., the noise is such that a reasonable person,
under the same or similar circumstances, would suffer annoyance or discomfort.
   (b)   Evidence of a violation may be based upon complaints from neighboring
inhabitant(s), hereby defined as persons living within 200 yards of such animal
owner or keeper’s premises, or if said animal wanders outside of said premises,
within 200 yards of any place where such animal wanders outside of said
premises.
   If there is more than one neighboring inhabitant, as defined above, evidence
of a violation requires complaints from at least two neighboring inhabitants
living in separate residences.
   If there is only one neighboring inhabitant, evidence of a public nuisance
may be based on a complaint from only one person or persons in that household.
   If there is more than one neighboring inhabitant, as defined above, evidence
of a public nuisance may, upon application of a single complaining neighboring
inhabitant, be established by that person by seeking a waiver from the Chief
Officer of the two-complainant requirement. To obtain such a waiver, a single
complainant shall provide to the Animal Control Officer additional credible
evidence of a violation, which may include, but is not limited to, tape
recordings, videotapes, sound monitoring logs, photographs, maps, or
declarations of other persons.
   If the complainant(s) lives in excess of 200 yards of such animal owner or
keeper’s premises, that person or those persons may establish evidence of a
violation by seeking a waiver from the Chief Officer of the 200 yard
requirement. To obtain such a waiver, a complainant or complainants living more
than 200 yards from the noise shall provide to the Animal Control Officer
additional credible evidence that he, she or they are experiencing a level of
noise comparable to a person residing within 200 yards of the noise, which
evidence may include, but is not limited to, tape recordings, videotapes, sound
monitoring logs, photographs, maps, or declarations of other persons living a
similar distance away from the noise.
   (c)   The Animal Control Officer will substantially follow the procedures
below in responding to all complaints of noisy animals, however, the procedures
and timelines set forth herein are discretionary and not mandatory. Should a
particular stage in the process take longer than the period set forth, or
should exceptional circumstances require any of the periods be shortened, the
process may proceed to the next step without the necessity of repeating any
prior step.
      (1)   Upon receiving an initial complaint from any person, either orally
or in writing, the owner(s) or keeper(s) of the animal that may be violating
this Section will be sent a courtesy abatement letter. The letter will notify
the owner(s) or keeper(s) that San Bernardino County Animal Care and Control
has received a complaint or complaints regarding his, her or their animal(s)
that may be in violation of this Section, describing the substance of the
complaint. The letter will also explain the process and potential costs/
consequences for all parties of the process going to citation, will encourage
the parties to attempt to resolve the complaint themselves, and, if that is
unsuccessful, to seek mediation services, and will provide information on free
and low cost mediation services available. Upon sending out the initial
courtesy abatement letter, Animal Care and Control personnel will enter the
date and address of the animal owner or keeper in the nuisance animal noise
letter log that is kept on file. A blind copy of the letter will be sent to the
complainant, with a cover memo requesting the complainant contact animal care
and control if the noise has not abated by the end of the two-week period
specified in the letter. At the same time the initial letter is sent, the
complainant will be sent a nuisance animal noise information sheet along with
two nuisance animal noise complaint forms, with instructions that, if the
nuisance has not abated by the end of the two week period, to complete the form
and have at least one neighboring inhabitant in a separate household complete
the second form. The complainants must complete and sign the forms under
penalty of perjury, and return them to animal care and control. The letter
shall also contain a waiver application form, and advise a single complainant,
or complainants or a complainant that lives further than 200 yards from the
animal owner(s) or keeper(s), that he, she or they may, by filling it out,
obtain from the Chief Officer a waiver of the two-complainant requirement. Upon
sending out the nuisance animal noise information sheet and nuisance animal
noise complaint form, animal care and control personnel will enter the date,
complainant’s name and address and the alleged violator’s name and address on
the nuisance animal noise complaint form log that is kept on file.
      (2)   If, at the end of the two-week period, the complainant(s) advise(s)
animal care and control that the noise is not abated, the complainant(s) will
be advised that he, she or they may file a formal written complaint by
submitting the nuisance animal noise complaint form. At the time of this second
contact, in which the complainant(s) indicate(s) that a nuisance animal noise
problem still exists, the nuisance animal noise letter log will be checked to
verify that an initial letter has been sent to the animal owner or keeper.
      (3)   Upon receipt of two or more completed nuisance animal noise
complaint forms, or one if there is only one neighboring inhabitant or a waiver
of the two-complainant rule is granted, an Animal Control Officer will be
assigned to serve a notice of violation on the animal owner(s) or keeper(s).
The notice shall be served in person, or sent first class mail, postage
prepaid, and shall advise the animal owner or keeper that he or she will be
given two-weeks from the mailing or service of the notice to comply with the
provisions of this Section in order to avoid further enforcement action. A file
will be kept on the residential address of the animal owner or keeper. The
completed nuisance animal noise complaint form(s) and a copy of the notice of
violation will be kept on file. A blind copy of the notice of violation will be
sent to the complainant(s), with a cover memo requesting the complainant(s)
contact animal care and control if the noise has not abated by the end of the
two-week period specified in the notice of violation.
      (4)   If, at the end of the two-week period specified in the notice of
violation, the complainants or complainant advises animal care and control that
the noise is not abated, either a criminal or an administrative citation may be
issued in accordance with §§
32.0124(b) or
32.0126 of this Chapter, respectively.
      (5)   Each subsequent day, or portion thereof, that an animal owned or
kept by a party receiving a notice of violation creates an animal noise
nuisance beyond the two-week period specified in Subdivision (4) above, shall
constitute a separate violation and a separate criminal or administrative
citation may be issued. For each criminal citation issued, in addition to the
procedures set forth at §
11.0206(b), steps (6) and (7) below shall be followed.
      (6)   Once a criminal citation(s) has been issued to the animal owner or
keeper, the issuing Animal Control Officer must complete an investigation
report. The immediate supervisor or Supervising Animal Control Officer II will
review the court’s copy of the criminal citation(s) and the completed
investigation report. After the report has been approved and typed, the
following documents will be attached and forwarded to the appropriate court:
         (A)   Court’s copy of the criminal citation(s);
         (B)   Investigation report;
         (C)   Copy of the notice of violation;
         (D)   All copies of the nuisance animal noise complaint form or forms
received from the complainant or complainants, if there is more than one
complainant.
      (7)   A complete copy of the documents that are forwarded to the
appropriate court will be placed in the file kept on the animal owner or
keeper.
(Ord. 3280, passed --1988; Am. Ord. 3804, passed --2000; Am. Ord. 4092, passed
- -2009)
§ 32.0120 Enforcement Remedies and Penalties are Cumulative and Discretionary;
Not Exclusive.
   All remedies and penalties provided for in this Chapter shall be cumulative
and discretionary, and not exclusive, in accordance with this Section and in
the same manner and under the authority as provided by §
11.0202 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 3280, passed --1988; Am. Ord. 3804, passed --2000; Am. Ord. 4092, passed
- 2009)
§ 32.0121 Authority to Inspect.
   All persons authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter are
authorized to conduct investigations and inspections in accordance with this
Section and in the same manner and under the same authority as provided by §
11.0203 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 3804, passed --2000; Am. Ord. 4092, passed - -2009)
§ 32.0122 Continuing Violations.
   Each and every day, and any portion of which, any violation of this Division
is committed, continued, or permitted shall be deemed a new and separate
offense and shall be punishable or actionable as set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 4092, passed - -2009)
§ 32.0123 Acts Including Causing, Aiding and Abetting.
   Whenever in this Division any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall
include causing, permitting, aiding or abetting such act or omission.
(Ord. 4092, passed - -2009)
§ 32.0124 Criminal Actions.
   (a)   Criminal Penalties for Violations. It is unlawful for any person,
firm, partnership, corporation or other entity (hereafter “person”) to violate
any provision of this Division constituting a public offense. Any person
violating any such provision, unless as otherwise specified for certain
sections or for sections within a certain chapter of this Division, shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified. To any
person so convicted, the following shall apply:
      (1)   A first offense shall constitute an infraction offense and be
punished by a base fine not exceeding $100.00.
      (2)   A second offense within one year shall constitute an infraction
offense and punished by a base fine not exceeding $200.00.
      (3)   The third and any additional offense within one year, shall
constitute either an infraction or a misdemeanor offense, and if it is an
infraction offense, shall be punishable by a base fine not exceeding $500.00,
or if a misdemeanor offense, punishable by up to six months in jail, and/or
base fine not exceeding $1,000.00.
      (4)   Any court costs that the court may otherwise be required to impose
pursuant to applicable State law or local ordinance shall be imposed in
addition to the base fine (Government Code § 25132).
      (5)   Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged
and prosecuted as a misdemeanor, punishable by up to six months in jail, and/or
base fine not exceeding $1,000.00.
      (6)   Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence shall not relieve
a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity from the
responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation.
      (7)   The owner, manager, and operator of every activity or facility
subject to this Division shall be responsible for any violation of this
Division by an employee.
   (b)   Criminal citations. Criminal citations shall be issued in the same
manner and under the same authority as provided by §
11.0206(b) of this Code.
(Ord. 4092, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4114, passed - -2010)
§ 32.0125 Civil Actions.
   All violations of this Division may be subject to enforcement through the
initiation of a civil action in accordance with this Section and in the same
manner and under the same authority as provided at §
11.0207 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4092, passed - -2009)
§ 32.0126 Administrative Citations and Penalties.
   As an alternative to the criminal or civil enforcement of this Division, all
violations of this Division may be subject to enforcement through the use of
administrative citations in accordance with Government Code § 53069.4 and this
Section, and in the same manner and under the same authority as provided at §
11.0208 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4092, passed - -2009)
CHAPTER 2: RABIES (BITING AND BITTEN ANIMALS: VACCINATION AND LICENSING)
Section
   
32.0201   Duty to Report Animal Bites.
   
32.0202   Confinement of Biting Animal.
   
32.0203   Reporting and Confinement of Rabid Animals.
   
32.0204   Disposition of Animals Bitten by Rabid Animals.
   
32.0205   Posting of Quarantine Sign.
   
32.0206   Prohibiting the Keeping and Sale of Skunks.
   
32.0207   Possession of Unvaccinated Dogs.
   
32.0208   Vaccination.
   
32.0209   License Responsibility.
   
32.0210   License Application.
   
32.0211   License Fees.
   
32.0212   Exceptions to Vaccination.
   
32.0213   Penalty Fee.
   
32.0214   Effective Duration of License.
   
32.0215   Duplicate License Tag.
   
32.0216   Wearing of Tag.
   
32.0217   Falsification of License Tag.
   
32.0218   Unlawful Use of Tag.
   
32.0219   Exemption of Payment of License Fee.
   
32.0220   Categories of Dogs Not Requiring License.
   
32.0221   Transfer of Ownership.
   
32.0222   Renewal of License.
   
32.0223   Authority to Enter Any Premises.
   
32.0224   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
§ 32.0201   Duty to Report Animal Bites.
   It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge that any animal subject
to rabies, whether or not the animal is suspected of having rabies, has bitten
any human being within the unincorporated areas of the County to immediately
report that fact to the Health Officer or to the Sheriff with full information
in regard to the incident.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0202   Confinement of Biting Animal.
   Upon receipt of a report that a person has been bitten by an animal subject
to rabies (all warm-blooded mammals), any person authorized to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter, is hereby empowered to enter upon any private
property, including the home or residence where the biting animal is kept or
has strayed, to inspect and strictly isolate, and to seize and impound if
necessary, in a place and manner approved by the County Health Officer, any
such animal for a period of ten days (for dogs and cats) and 14 days (for other
animals). Excepted are rodents, (members of the order Rodentia) rabbits and
hares (members of the order Lagomorpha).
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the Health Officer may authorize,
with permission of the owner, if known, and other legal restrictions
permitting, the euthanasia of a biting animal for the purpose of laboratory
examination for rabies using the fluorescent rabies antibody (FRA) test in the
County Health Department Laboratory.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of isolation or
quarantine, any animal which has been isolated or quarantined under the
provisions of this Chapter, without the consent of the Health Officer.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0203   Reporting and Confinement of Rabid Animals.
   It is the duty of any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an
animal known to have or suspected of having rabies to report the fact
immediately to the Health Officer. If such person is the owner or possessor or
has custody of such animal, he or she shall immediately confine it and keep
said animal strictly confined until it shall be established to the satisfaction
of said official that such animal has or has not rabies.
   Where such owner or possessor does not have the proper facility for such
confinement, or where the owner of such rabid or suspected rabid animal is not
known, such animal shall be isolated in strict confinement under proper care
and under the observation of a licensed veterinarian in a pound, veterinary
hospital, or other adequate facility in a manner approved by the County Health
Officer, and shall not be killed or released for at least ten days after the
onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies. If such animal creates a menace to the
public health and safety, the Health Officer or his or her representative may
kill or destroy the animal forthwith and examine it for rabies in the
laboratory using the fluorescent rabies antibody (FRA) test in the County
Health Department Laboratory.
   Whenever any such owned biting animal is quarantined in a place other than
the premises of its owner, all expenses incurred in its confinement shall be
the liability of the owner, possessor or custodian of such biting animal.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0204   Disposition of Animals Bitten by Rabid Animals.
   Any animal that is subject to rabies which has been exposed to a known rabid
animal or suspected rabid animal shall, upon notification of its owner,
possessor or custodian, be:
   (a)   Immediately securely confined in a place and manner approved by the
Health Officer for a period of six months; or
   (b)   Immediately destroyed unless the biting animal is determined by
laboratory examination to be negative from rabies; except that in the case of
dogs and cats, the following alternative is permitted:
      (1)   The dog or cat shall be revaccinated and then quarantined for a
period of 30 days provided such dog or cat bas been vaccinated not less than 30
days, with a rabies vaccine approved by the California State Department of
Public Health.
      The Health Officer may, in his or her discretion, kill or quarantine the
animal so bitten, in case the owner, possessor or custodian, thereof shall fail
to do so immediately, or in case the owner, possessor or custodian thereof is
not readily accessible or is not known.
      The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies will, upon demand, be
surrendered to the Health Officer. Upon the discretion of the Health Officer,
the County Health Laboratory shall examine for rabies specimens of high-risk or
medium-risk animals involved in a biting incident. Specimens of low-risk
animals may be examined upon payment of reasonable laboratory fees.
(Am. Ord. 1512, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2354,
passed - -1979)
§ 32.0205   Posting of Quarantine Sign.
   It shall be the duty of any person authorized to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter to post an appropriate sign in a conspicuous place at a location
where a dog or cat or any biting, vicious or rabid animal is being quarantined
or confined to warn the public of this fact. It shall be unlawful for anyone to
obstruct the posting of such a sign or to remove or destroy such a posted sign
without permission of the Health Officer.
(Am. Ord. 1512, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0206   Prohibiting the Keeping and Sale of Skunks.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to (a) trap or
capture skunks for pets; (b) trap, capture or hold skunks in captivity for
sale, barter, exchange or gift; and (c) transport skunks from or into the
County, except that the importation or exportation of skunks may be permitted
by the Health Officer for recognized zoological gardens or research
institutions.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0207   Possession of Unvaccinated Dogs.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the County of San Bernardino,
outside municipal corporations, to own, have an interest in, harbor and feed,
or have the care, charge, custody, or possession of a dog over the age of four
months, whether such dog is confined or not, unless such dog has a current
vaccination with the rabies vaccine approved by the California State Department
of Public Health and is officially tagged as provided for in this Chapter. The
vaccine shall be used exclusively to vaccinate all dogs within the County of
San Bernardino. Vaccination with said vaccine shall be valid for a period not
to exceed one year when administered to a dog under one year of age, or three
years when administered to a dog over one year of age.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3402, passed - -1990)
§ 32.0208   Vaccination.
   (a)   Said rabies vaccination shall be performed only by a veterinarian who
is duly licensed to practice in the State of California. Vaccination for rabies
may be done in any veterinary clinic or hospital or in a low-cost rabies
vaccination clinic sponsored by the County or any incorporated city.
   (b)   A licensed veterinarian in the San Bernardino County Department of
Public Health's jurisdiction who vaccinates an animal against rabies must
immediately issue a certificate of vaccination signed by the veterinarian to
the owner or custodian of the animal, stating:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner or custodian of the vaccinated
animal;
      (2)   The type of vaccine used, the name of the manufacturer, the
manufacturer's serial or lot number, and the date of the vaccination; and
      (3)   The breed, age, color, and sex of the vaccinated animal.
   (c)   A duplicate certificate of vaccination must be submitted to the San
Bernardino County Department of Public Health via mail, electronic
transmission, or personal delivery on the 10th of each month, for any animal so
vaccinated during the previous month. Electronic transmission is preferred.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 4473, passed - -2024)
§ 32.0209   License Responsibility.
   (a)   Every resident in the unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County
who owns, has an interest in, harbors and feeds, or has the care, charge,
custody, or possession of a dog four months of age or over, and whether such
dog is confined or not, shall obtain a San Bernardino County dog license for
such a dog. Each dog shall have a current rabies vaccination as evidenced by a
valid rabies certificate issued by the veterinarian who performed the
vaccination as a requisite to licensing. Provided further that rabies
vaccination certificate shall not be required if the license is obtained at the
time the dog is vaccinated at a County or City low-cost clinic.
   (b)   While a dog is being used as a guard dog within the unincorporated
area of San Bernardino County, it must have a San Bernardino County dog license
and the license tag must be securely fixed to the dog’s collar regardless of
where the owner resides and whether a license has been obtained for that
jurisdiction.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2354, passed - -1979)
§ 32.0210   License Application.
   Each application for a license shall be in writing upon a form to be
furnished by the Health Officer, and shall contain such information as the
Health Officer, by rule or regulation, shall require.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0211   License Fees.
   Each application for a dog license shall be accompanied by a license fee as
specified in the County Fee Schedule, and shall be obtained;
   (a)   Within a period of 30 days after expiration of a San Bernardino County
dog license;
   (b)   Within 30 days after said dog attains the age of four months;
   (c)   Within 15 days after the purchase or obtaining control, care or
custody of a dog which previously attained the age of four months, and provide
further the proof of recent acquisition as indicated by the date of purchase
receipt as shown at the time of application; or
   (d)   Within 30 days after the date of establishing residency in the County
provided further that said dog had a current license from another county or a
city, and within 15 days if said dog has no current license.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 1795, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 2000,
passed - -1975; Am. Ord. 3208, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3402, passed - -1990)
§ 32.0212   Exceptions to Vaccination.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, a dog may be exempted from
rabies vaccination if such vaccination would jeopardize the health of such dog
due to infirmity or other disability provided the owner has in his possession a
written certification from a licensed veterinarian attesting to such infirmity
or disability. The owner or custodian of such dog shall, within ten days after
the termination of such infirmity or disability, cause such dog to be
vaccinated and licensed. Any such dog with infirmity or disability shall be
securely confined within its owner’s or harborer’s premises so that it does not
come in contact with any other animal or person.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0213   Penalty Fee.
   Any person who obtains a license not in conformity with any of the
provisions of §
32.0211 shall pay a penalty fee as specified in the County Fee Schedule in
addition to the regular license fee.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0214   Effective Duration of License.
   The San Bernardino County dog license shall remain valid for a period not
less than one month and not greater than 36 months.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3402, passed - -1990)
§ 32.0215   Duplicate License Tag.
   When the original license tag is lost, a duplicate tag shall be obtained
upon submission to the Health Officer such proof as he or she may require. The
cost of each duplicate tag shall be as specified in the County Fee Schedule.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0216   Wearing of Tag.
   It shall be the responsibility of every County resident who owns, harbors,
cares for, or has in custody a licensed dog, to securely attach or fasten the
license tag to the dog’s collar or harness so that such tag is worn by the dog
at all times except while such dog remains indoors or in any enclosed yard or
pen where the dog cannot escape.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0217   Falsification of License Tag.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon or attach to a dog any
false, counterfeit or unauthorized tag for the purpose of evading the
provisions of this Chapter.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0218   Unlawful Use of Tag.
   It shall be unlawful to attach a license tag on a dog to which said tag was
not originally issued.
   It shall be unlawful to attach a license tag to any dog that does not have a
current rabies vaccination.
   It shall be unlawful for an unauthorized person to remove from any dog, any
collar or harness or other device to which is attached a San Bernardino County
license tag for the current year or remove such tag therefrom.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0219   Exemption of Payment of License Fee.
   (a)   The Health Officer may, upon his or her discretion, issue a license
without payment of the required license fee to an owner or custodian of a dog,
if such dog meets the following conditions:
      (1)   Such dog is a guide dog and the owner is blind or deaf and can
submit proof that such dog has been successfully trained to lead the blind or
aid the deaf as a guide dog.
      (2)   Such dog is a service dog and the owner is handicapped and can
submit proof that such dog has been successfully trained to aid the handicapped
as a service dog.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3402, passed - -1990)
§ 32.0220   Categories of Dogs Not Requiring License.
   San Bernardino County license is not required for the following categories
of dogs, however, they must have a current rabies vaccination:
   (a)   Any dog within the unincorporated areas of the County when the owner
thereof resides in any municipality within the County, and such dog is wearing
or has attached to it a license tag for the current year issued by such
municipality.
   (b)   Any dog owned by or in the charge of any person who is a nonresident
of the County and is traveling through the County or temporarily sojourning
therein for a period of not exceeding 30 days.
   (c)   Any dog brought into the County and kept therein for a period not
exceeding 30 days for the exclusive purpose of entering the same in any bench
show or dog exhibition or field trials or competition.
   (d)   Any dog brought or sent into the unincorporated territory of the
County from any point outside thereof for the exclusive purpose of receiving
veterinary care in any dog hospital, in the event that such dog is kept at all
times strictly confined within such hospital.
   (e)   Dogs kept for the sole purpose of being used for research in research
institutions approved by the California State Department of Public Health.
   (f)   Dogs over four months of age which are offered for sale in a duly
licensed pet shop or dog kennel. However, all Pit Bulls (American Pit Bull
Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, or any
mixed breed of a dog which contains, as an element of its breeding, any of
these breeds so as to be identifiable as partially of the breeds listed
herein), used for breeding and housed, harbored, or otherwise kept in a
licensed dog kennel, must be licensed pursuant to §
32.0209.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed --1972; Am. Ord. 4114, passed - -2010)
§ 32.0221   Transfer of Ownership.
   If a currently licensed dog is sold or title to the dog is otherwise
transferred to a new owner, such new owner may apply to the Health Officer for
a transfer of such dog’s tag and license and pay a transfer fee as specified in
the County Fee Schedule. Upon receipt of such application fee, the Health
Officer shall issue a certificate of transfer of such tag and the name and
addresses of the owner and new owners.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3402, passed - -1990)
§ 32.0222   Renewal of License.
   Each San Bernardino County dog license shall expire on the date recorded on
the license receipt and shall be renewed:
   (a)   Prior to expiration or within a period of 30 days after expiration.
   (b)   Within 120 days after license expiration, or 30 days after expiration
of the vaccination, whichever date is later if rabies vaccination expires
during the period of July 1, 1990, through October 31, 1990.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 3402, passed - -1990)
§ 32.0223   Authority to Enter Any Premises.
   The Health Officer shall have the authority to enter upon any area or
premises to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
(Am. Ord. 1764, passed - -1972)
§ 32.0224   ( Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
CHAPTER 3: DOG KENNELS
Section
   
32.0301   Definitions.
   
32.0302   Requirement of a Permit.
   
32.0303   Regulation.
   
32.0304   Construction.
   
32.0305   Required Vaccinations.
   
32.0306   Kennel Operations.
   
32.0307   Penalties.
§ 32.0301   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall be used:
   BOARDING AND BREEDING KENNEL. A kennel in which dogs are kept for boarding,
breeding, training, marketing, or other purposes.
   BOARDING KENNEL. A kennel in which dogs owned by persons other than the
kennel owner/operator are being cared for.
   BREEDING KENNEL. A kennel in which dogs are kept for the primary purpose of
breeding.
   COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER. The San Bernardino County Health Officer or any other
person duly authorized to act on his or her behalf.
   DOG. A domesticated animal of the canine type; young animals (puppies) of
this type are considered as dogs.
   KENNEL. A place where five or more dogs over four months of age are kept.
The term KENNEL shall not apply to animal shelters operated by governmental
agencies, or nonprofit societies for the care of stray dogs nor shall the term
apply to veterinary hospitals keeping animals in the course of medical
treatment.
(Ord. 1093, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 1455, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3908,
passed - -2004)
§ 32.0302   Requirement of a Permit.
   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in operating, control, or
management of a kennel as herein defined shall obtain a permit from the County
Health Officer and shall pay an annual permit fee as specified in the County
Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 1093, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 1455, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3908,
passed - -2004)
§ 32.0303   Regulation.
   (a)   No kennel shall be allowed to exist/operate unless proper land use
regulations are met through the Office of Planning and/or Environmental Health
Services prior to applying for a kennel permit from the Department of Public
Health.
   (b)   Any building or structure used in the housing or maintaining of said
animals shall be approved by the County Building and Safety Department.
   (c)   All dogs owned by, under the control of or in the possession of a
kennel operator shall be subject to provisions of this Chapter upon attaining
the age of four months. The County Health Officer shall have the power, upon
the giving of ten days notice by United States Postal Service to any permittee
under this Chapter and an opportunity to be heard, to revoke any permit granted
to a kennel operator for violation of this Chapter. Orders of the County Health
Officer revoking a permit issued under this Chapter shall be appealable to the
County Board of Supervisors who may appoint a hearing officer to conduct a
hearing on their behalf pursuant to County Code §§
12.2700 et seq. Permittee shall request an appeal hearing within 30 days from
the mailing of notice of revocation to the permittee. The decision of the Board
of Supervisors on such revocation appeal shall be final.
   (d)   All dogs being kept or boarded in kennels shall be vaccinated pursuant
to §
32.0305 of this Chapter and licensed in the name of their owner. Failure to
comply with this requirement shall be considered a violation of this Chapter by
the permittee.
(Ord. 1093, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 1455, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3908,
passed - -2004)
§ 32.0304   Construction.
   (a)   Adequate housing shall be provided for the protection of dogs from the
elements.
   (b)   Kennel runs shall be effectively enclosed by suitable fencing such as
chain link, smooth concrete block, or other suitable fencing material. The
exterior area of the premises shall be completely fenced or otherwise enclosed.
   (c)   Outside runs or properly constructed indoor runs shall be provided in
all kennels.
      (1)   Boarding kennel runs shall be constructed of concrete or other
suitable type nonporous material. The floor shall slope one-fourth inch per
foot to a drain or to a drainway. All drains shall be properly plumbed,
trapped, and vented and shall be connected to an approved underground disposal
system which shall consist of a septic tank or seepage pit or leaching line as
required by the Health Officer. Adequate ventilation must be provided for
kennels with indoor runs. Each run shall be separated by a solid partition.
      (2)   Breeding kennel outdoor runs may be constructed of four inch
minimum thickness of pea gravel or other suitable aggregate. Indoor runs must
be constructed as provided in Subdivision (c)(1) above.
   (d)   Kennels shall not be constructed closer than 100 feet from any
structure on adjacent property used for human habitation nor closer than 40
feet to any dwelling on the premises, except that of the owner/operator’s home.
   (e)   Provisions shall be made in boarding and breeding kennels for the
separation of kennel-owned dogs from those owned by other persons.
   (f)   Kennel operators shall take such measures as may be necessary to
mitigate the occurrence of excessive barking or any noise that constitutes a
public nuisance.
(Ord. 1093, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 1455, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3399,
passed - -1990)
§ 32.0305   Required Vaccinations.
   (a)   All dogs four months of age or older shall be currently vaccinated
against rabies with a rabies vaccine approved by the California State
Department of Health Services. Said rabies vaccination shall be performed only
by a veterinarian who is duly licensed to practice in the State of California.
   (b)   In addition to such rabies vaccinations as may be required by this
Chapter, operators of boarding kennels and boarding and breeding kennels shall
require proof that every dog kept, boarded or maintained at their facility
shall be vaccinated against the following infectious and communicable diseases:
canine distemper, Bordetella bronchiseptica infection, canine adenovirus
infection, canine corona virus infection, canine parainfluenza virus infection,
canine parvovirus infection, and Leptospira canicola and icterohemorrhagie.
(Ord. 1093, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 1455, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3399,
passed - -1999)
§ 32.0306   Kennel Operations.
   (a)   Boarding kennels and boarding and breeding kennels shall maintain
records of all animals being boarded which shall be available to the Health
Officer or his or her deputy as necessary. With respect to each boarded animal,
such records shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following
information:
      (1)   A physical description of the animal;
      (2)   Documentary proof of current vaccinations as required under §
32.0305 of this Chapter;
      (3)   Name and address of the animal’s owner;
      (4)   Date and time of the animal’s arrival at the kennel with the name
and address of the person leaving the animal, if other than the animal’s owner;
and
      (5)   Date and time of the animal’s departure from the kennel, and the
name and address of the person picking up the animal, if other than the
animal’s owner.
   (b)   Dogs owned by kennel operators which are allowed outside the confines
of the kennel shall be vaccinated as required under §
32.0305 of this Chapter, individually licensed, and shall have current license
tag attached to the collar.
   (c)   All kennels, runs, buildings and other equipment and facilities used
for the care of dogs shall be cleaned daily and shall be disinfected as
necessary to prevent the spread of disease. Boarding kennels and boarding and
breeding kennels shall disinfect all facilities used in the care of the dogs
between each separate usage.
   (d)   All droppings shall be removed from the kennel daily. Soiled papers
and bedding material shall be removed from the kennel as frequently as
necessary to maintain the kennel in a clean, sanitary manner. All such waste
material shall be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the Health Officer.
   (e)   Provisions shall be made for convenient access to clean food and
water. Food and water containers shall be kept clean and sanitary. Animal feed
shall be properly stored and protected from contamination and vermin
infestation.
   (f)   The operator of every dog kennel shall be responsible to take
appropriate preventive measures to preclude outbreaks of infectious and
contagious diseases, and external parasites.
   (g)   It shall be a violation of this Chapter to sell, give away, release,
or otherwise dispose of an animal except for euthanasia, which has or is
suspected of having or has been exposed to any contagious or infectious disease
transmissible to other animals or to man, including but not limited to those
diseases specified in §
32.0305 of this Chapter and such other diseases as the Public Health Officer
may from time to time designate. All such disease shall be reported to the
County Health Officer or Public Health Veterinarian.
   (h)   Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of dead animals
which shall be satisfactory to the Health Officer.
   (i)   All dogs upon reaching the age of four months shall be vaccinated
against rabies as provided herein, and when sold, the purchaser shall be
provided with a copy of the “Certificate of Vaccination” issued by the
veterinarian and shall be advised to secure a dog license tag within 30 days
from the date of purchase.
   (j)   The requirements of this Section shall also apply to humane societies
and pet shops.
(Ord. 1093, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 3399, passed - -1999)
§ 32.0307   Penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of Chapters
1,
2 or
3 of this Division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by
imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than 100 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 1093, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 3399, passed - -1999)
CHAPTER 4: HOGS—GARBAGE-FEEDING HOG RANCHES
Section
   
32.0401   Maintenance.
   
32.0402   Feeding Floors.
   
32.0403   Storage Bins.
   
32.0404   Garbage in Pens.
   
32.0405   Water Troughs.
   
32.0406   Hog Wallows.
   
32.0407   Floors.
   
32.0408   Dead Animals and Animal Refuse.
   
32.0409   Violations.
§ 32.0401   Maintenance.
   All places where garbage is fed to hogs shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition and in accordance with the provisions hereof.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
§ 32.0402   Feeding Floors.
   All garbage fed to hogs shall be upon feeding floors, which feeding floors
must be of concrete and so constructed as to permit controlled drainage; such
drainage must be to the outside of the pens and not accessible to hogs and must
be disposed of in a manner not to create a nuisance. The surface of all feeding
floors must be maintained smooth enough to permit efficient cleaning. All
feeding floors must have all refuse, garbage, and manure removed therefrom at
least once daily, after which they must be flushed with water and drained;
except, that feeding floors in open lots where brood sows or young shoats only
are kept, will be considered as cleaned when they are entirely dry after
sweeping.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
§ 32.0403   Storage Bins.
   No vat, bin, or other receptacle for the storage of garbage shall be
maintained unless the entire receptacle is above the level of the ground and
watertight and so equipped that the same may be washed, scrubbed and drained
and all such receptacles must have all garbage removed and be thoroughly washed
and cleaned at least once each day when in use.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
§ 32.0404   Garbage in Pens.
   No garbage shall be left in any hog pen or in the vicinity of any hog pen
longer than from the day it is received or fed until the next day. No refuse
garbage shall be left in any such pen longer than from the day it is received
until the next day.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
§ 32.0405   Water Troughs.
   All water troughs for the watering of hogs must be constructed in such
manner and so covered as to permit hogs to drink, but to prevent as far as
possible, the entry of other than their heads into the water trough. All water
troughs must be kept clean and provided with clean water. All water troughs
must be connected with efficient drainage and must not be permitted to
overflow, except such water troughs as may be located in open lots, where brood
sows or young shoats only are maintained. The surface for a radius of at least
six feet from all such water troughs must be of concrete or other mireproof
material.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
§ 32.0406   Hog Wallows.
   No hog wallows or mire will be permitted in any hog pen or lot, except
drain-equipped concrete walls, upon which must be maintained a floating surface
of at least one-half inch heavy oil or water in which must be contained a
proper percentage of approved disinfectant. All such concrete wallows must have
their contents removed and be cleaned frequently enough to maintain clean
material in them. Hogs may have access to running streams of water, provided no
wallows are maintained adjacent to such streams; and further provided, that
such access to streams by hogs will not create a menace to public health.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
§ 32.0407   Floors.
   Floors of all houses where hogs may enter, must be of concrete or watertight
boarding and must be maintained in a clean condition. The use of clean bedding
upon such floors will be permitted.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
§ 32.0408   Dead Animals and Animal Refuse.
   Dead animals or animal refuse, other than garbage as hereinbefore defined,
shall not be fed to hogs unless first sterilized by heat.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
§ 32.0409   Violations.
   A violation of any of the terms or provisions of this Chapter shall be a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$100.00 or by imprisonment of not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958)
CHAPTER 5: LIVESTOCK
Section
   
32.0501   Definitions.
   
32.0502   Duties of Public Health Veterinarian.
   
32.0503   Quarantine.
   
32.0504   Cattle Disease.
   
32.0505   Public Health Veterinarian Advisory Duties.
   
32.0506   Permits for Removal of Livestock.
   
32.0507   Importation of Livestock and Tuberculosis Control.
   
32.0508   Duty to Report Information.
   
32.0509   Maintenance of Places Where Livestock are Kept or Meat Products are
Prepared.
   
32.0510   Miscellaneous Regulations.
   
32.0511   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
§ 32.0501   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCREDITED VETERINARIAN. One who shall have passed an examination conducted
by the Director of Animal Industry of the State Department of Agriculture of
California and the United States Agricultural Research Service, and whose name
is upon the list of veterinarians approved by the United States Department of
Agricultural Research Service.
   IMMEDIATE SLAUGHTER. Applies to livestock shipped to the plant or premises
of a firm regularly engaged in the slaughter of animals under approved
inspection.
   INFECTIOUS DISEASE. Includes any infectious, contagious, or communicable
diseases considered by the Public Health Veterinarian to be dangerous to the
welfare of the County of San Bernardino and to the health of the livestock
therein, sufficient to warrant putting into effect the provisions of this
Chapter and his or her rules and regulations.
   LIVESTOCK. Any horses, mules, asses, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, poultry,
rabbits, dogs, or any animal or animals ordinarily considered as wild animals
which are kept in captivity or under control or ownership of any person for any
purpose.
   MODIFIED ACCREDITED AREA. An area declared by the Chief of the United States
Agricultural Research Service when the percentage of tuberculosis cattle
therein is reduced to meet the requirements of MODIFIED ACCREDITED AREAS as
adopted by the United States Agricultural Research Service.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, company, association, or corporation, their agents
or employees.
   PUBLIC HEALTH VETERINARIAN. Any veterinarian of the County so designated in
the County Health Department, and shall include and mean the same officer
formerly designated as County livestock inspector, and shall be deemed a
continuation of the same office, and shall include all powers, duties, and
prerequisites of the former office, except as in this Chapter otherwise set
forth.
   STOCKYARDS. Applies to any stockyard, corral, or premises wherein public
trading in livestock is carried on, or where yarding, feeding and watering
facilities are provided, and where Federal, State or County inspection is
maintained for the inspection of livestock for infectious diseases.
   TUBERCULIN TEST. Any test approved by the Agricultural Research Service,
United States Department of Agriculture, for the detection of tuberculosis in
animals.
(Ord. 970, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 32.0502   Duties of Public Health Veterinarian.
   It shall be the duty of the Public Health Veterinarian, acting in
cooperation with the State Veterinarian, to enforce all laws of the State of
California and all lawful ordinances and regulations passed, enacted,
promulgated, or approved by the Board of Supervisors of the County of San
Bernardino, pertaining to the health and sanitary environment of the livestock
of the County.
   The County Public Health Veterinarian is empowered to establish, maintain,
and enforce such quarantine, sanitary, and immunizing measures and promulgate
such rules and regulations as he or she may deem necessary and which shall be
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 32.0503   Quarantine.
   The Public Health Veterinarian shall regulate the movement and
transportation of livestock from stockyards, corrals, feed yards, and other
places; examine and test, or supervise examination and testing of animals and
premises for the presence of infections or communicable diseases; provide for
the sanitation of plants and premises upon which livestock are kept, sold, or
confined; and enforce such ordinances and regulations as may be adopted to
promote and protect livestock and people from diseases and conditions adversely
affecting their health. He or she shall investigate cases and outbreak of
infections and communicable diseases, the presence of which may constitute a
menace to the health of livestock and the human population of the County.
   (a)   Livestock with Infectious Disease Outside this County. When the Public
Health Veterinarian shall have determined that an infectious disease exists
among livestock in any other county or area of the State of California and the
importation of livestock from such county or area might spread such disease
among the livestock within the County of San Bernardino, the Public Health
Veterinarian shall notify the Board of Supervisors thereof, designating and
describing the county or area wherein such disease has been found and shall,
with their approval, establish quarantine restrictions against such county or
area as the circumstances shall warrant. The Public Health Veterinarian may
refuse to permit shipments of livestock originating in such areas to enter the
County of San Bernardino unless accompanied by a certificate signed by a State
or Federal veterinarian which shall satisfactorily prove that there is no
possibility that the livestock for which such certificate is issued are
infected with or exposed to all infection from such disease.
   (b)   Investigation of Diseased Livestock Within this County. Upon
information received by the Public Health Veterinarian of any infectious
disease affecting livestock within the County of San Bernardino, he or she
shall proceed to thoroughly investigate the same. The Public Health
Veterinarian is hereby empowered to enter any premises where livestock is kept,
or on which he or she has reason to believe that livestock is kept, in order to
carry into effect the provisions of this Chapter, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to interfere with the official action of the Public Health
Veterinarian. The Public Health Veterinarian may quarantine, for a reasonable
period of observation and until such tests as may be required to ascertain the
presence or absence of any infectious disease are completed, any animals which
are suspected of being infected with or exposed to an infectious disease. Upon
discovery of any infectious disease affecting livestock in the County of San
Bernardino, the Public Health Veterinarian shall have the power and it shall be
his or her duty to establish such quarantine, sanitation, testing, immunizing
and police regulations as may be necessary to control or eradicate such
diseases and prevent the spread thereof to other livestock. The Public Health
Veterinarian may quarantine any livestock which may have been located upon the
land or premises where such diseased livestock has been kept, and thereafter it
shall be unlawful for any person to break such quarantine or to move or allow
to be moved any such livestock from within the premises thus quarantined, or
across the quarantine line so established, without first obtaining from the
Public Health Veterinarian a permit to do so. If the Public Health Veterinarian
shall deem it proper to issue such a permit, after inspection he or she may
cause such livestock, premises, and vehicles of transportation and any infected
material, equipment or effects to be properly cleaned and disinfected.
   (c)   Damage or Removal of Quarantine Notices. It shall be unlawful for any
person during the existence of such quarantine to remove, tear, deface,
mutilate, obscure, or otherwise destroy or in any other manner whatsoever
interfere with any placard, notice, or proclamation declaring such quarantine,
placed on or about the premises on which any of said animals so quarantined are
located.
   (d)   Containment of Cattle. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit
any livestock so quarantined to have access to any irrigation ditch, stream, or
other channel in which water is running, or to allow such livestock to come in
contact with other livestock which may have access to any irrigation ditch,
stream or other channel so mentioned, or to permit the depositing in such
irrigation ditch, stream, or channel of any manure, offal, excrement or
material which might carry infection, or to allow the drainage from any
premises so quarantined to come in contact with such irrigation ditch, stream
or other channel aforementioned.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 32.0504   Cattle Disease.
   (a)   Glanders. It shall be the duty of the Public Health Veterinarian,
whenever the fact shall have been determined by him or her that any livestock
is affected with the disease known as glanders, to kill such diseased livestock
and have the premises thoroughly cleaned and disinfected, and to order the
owner of such livestock to cremate or bury such livestock. If the owner of such
livestock fails, neglects or refuses to bury or cremate same within a period of
24 hours from the issuance of such order, the Public Health Veterinarian shall
cause the same to be buried or cremated at the expense of the County, and the
expense of such burial or cremation shall be charged against such owner to be
recovered by action in the name of the County of San Bernardino.
   (b)   Foot and Mouth. When the Public Health Veterinarian shall have reason
to believe that there is a possibility that foot and mouth disease exists on
any premises in the County of San Bernardino, he or she shall have the power to
enter said premises and to place and keep thereon such animals as may be
necessary to determine the presence of foot and mouth disease in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the United States Bureau of Animal Industry,
and to keep them there under his or her supervision and control for a period
not to exceed 50 days.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 32.0505   Public Health Veterinarian Advisory Duties.
   The County Public Health Veterinarian shall also serve as:
   (a)   Advisor and consultant in the Rabies Control Program;
   (b)   Consultant to the Glen Helen Ranch manager or his or her successor,
and shall supervise the health of all animals kept by the County.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 32.0506   Permits for Removal of Livestock.
   (a)   Removal of Livestock from Slaughterhouse. It shall be unlawful for any
person to remove or to allow to be removed except for immediate slaughter, any
livestock from any stockyard owned, controlled or operated by or in connection
with or incidental to the operation of any slaughter or packing house, except
on permits issued by the Public Health Veterinarian.
   (b)   Removal of Livestock from Stockyard, Corral. It shall be unlawful for
any person to remove or to allow to be removed, any livestock from any
stockyard, corral or premise maintained for the feeding or conditioning of
livestock for any purpose other than immediate slaughter without having secured
permit from the Public Health Veterinarian.
   (c)   Inspection of Livestock; Conditions of Permit. The Public Health
Veterinarian shall issue permits for the removal of livestock from stockyards,
upon finding by inspection that such livestock is free from any infectious
disease. Findings as to the presence or absence of such infectious disease
shall be final; provided however, that such permit may be granted conditional
on such treatment, immunizing, dipping or other curative or preventative
measures as may be necessary for the public welfare.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 32.0507   Importation of Livestock and Tuberculosis Control.
   (a)   Livestock Affected with Contagious, Infectious, or Communicable
Disease. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into or receive in, or to
transport from place to place within the County of San Bernardino, except for
the purpose of immediate slaughter, any livestock affected with any contagious,
infectious or communicable disease, without a permit from the Public Health
Veterinarian, except such diseased animals as are specifically permitted to
enter the State of California and the County of San Bernardino under Federal or
California State regulations and only under the conditions and for the purpose
prescribed in the Federal and State regulations governing movement of
livestock.
   (b)   Livestock Placed in an Approved Stockyard. It shall be unlawful for
any person to bring into or receive in the County of San Bernardino, any
cattle, sheep, swine, or goats for any purpose other than immediate slaughter
without a permit from the Public Health Veterinarian; provided however, that
such cattle, sheep, swine, horses, or goats, other than cattle imported for
dairy or breeding purposes, are unloaded from a vehicle into public stockyards
where Federal, State, or County inspection is maintained for the inspection of
livestock for infectious diseases, such permit shall not be required until they
are to be removed from such stockyards. Such stockyards shall be approved by
the Public Health Veterinarian and shall be so constructed as to permit human
handling, proper control without inhumane crowding or delay, and thorough
inspection including provision for restraining individual animals. They shall
permit animals to be fed, rested, and watered with sufficient potable water.
Proper drainage, and facilities for disinfections when required by the Public
Health Veterinarian, and provisions for the removal of accumulations of manure
and the prevention of the formation of mud and wallow, shall be supplied. Such
approval may be withdrawn in the event such stockyards at any time fail to
comply with the requirements of this Section.
   (c)   Removal of Livestock to Public Stockyard. All livestock entering the
County of San Bernardino for the purpose of immediate slaughter by any method
of transportation or by driving on hoof, must be moved directly to a public
stockyard or to the premise upon which they are to be slaughtered, except that
such livestock in railroad shipments may be unloaded enroute in order to comply
with the provisions of what is known as the “28 hour law” of the United States
Department of Agriculture.
   (d)   Report of Arrival. Immediately upon the arrival of the cattle into the
County of San Bernardino, the fact of such arrival shall be reported to the
Public Health Veterinarian. The Public Health Veterinarian shall mark the
cattle for identification with tags or otherwise, and make a record showing the
date of arrival, description of the cattle, the name of the owner and of the
person in charge of the cattle, and the place in which they are to be kept. No
person shall remove or tamper with any identification mark placed on an animal
by the Public Health Veterinarian for the purpose of identification.
   (e)   Restrictions on the Movement of Imported Cattle. No person shall sell
any cattle or move cattle from place to place within a period of 120 days after
their arrival, unless such cattle have been released by the Public Health
Veterinarian.
   (f)   Tuberculin Test. No person shall inject or cause to be injected,
tuberculin into any cattle brought into the County of San Bernardino for a
period of 120 days after their arrival, except by permission of the Public
Health Veterinarian.
      (1)   Restrictions on Injection. No person shall inject or cause to be
injected, tuberculin into any cattle except when used in connection with a
tuberculin test as defined in §
32.0501 of this Chapter.
      (2)   Records. The following records of all cattle tuberculin tested in
San Bernardino County must be filed with the Public Health Veterinarian within
five days after completion of the test: Owner, address or location of herd,
number of cattle in the herd, number of cattle tested, number of cattle
reacting, such description as would identify each animal tested, identification
number of each animal tested.
      (3)   Removal of Cattle Before Completion. No person shall move from any
premise, any cattle upon which a tuberculin test has been started until the
same shall have been completed, without the permission of the veterinarian
conducting such test, nor in any way interfere with the proper conduction of
such test, after it shall have been started.
   (g)   Quarantine. Whenever the Public Health Veterinarian shall have cause
to believe that there is danger that any cattle brought into the County of San
Bernardino are afflicted with tuberculosis, he or she shall cause such cattle
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis. Such test or tests may be made at
any time within 120 days after the arrival of such cattle into the County of
San Bernardino.
   (h)   Prohibiting the Sale of Untested Cattle. It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell or offer for sale any cattle for dairy or breeding purposes in
the County of San Bernardino, unless such cattle have been examined and tested
for tuberculosis within 30 days preceding such sale, by a Federal or State
veterinarian, or the Public Health Veterinarian, or by a veterinarian duly
authorized by such officials to apply such test; provided that this Section
shall not apply to cattle which have been regularly tested by representatives
of the Federal or State Department of Agriculture under the laws, rules and
regulations applicable to dairies operating under the Federal Accredited Herd
Plan or the Agricultural Code of the State of California; and further provides
that the 30-day period may be waived by the Public Health Veterinarian.
   (i)   Expense of Test. Whenever an owner requests of the Public Health
Veterinarian that his or her cattle be tested for tuberculosis, the expense of
such test shall be borne by the owner, unless said request shall be made under
the provisions of the Agricultural Code of the State of California, and said
owner shall agree in writing to conform in all respects to said State law and
the rules and regulations of the Public Health Veterinarian applying to
tuberculin tests and disposal of reacting animals, provided that whenever five
or less cattle are sold for dairy and breeding purposes and a test for
tuberculosis is required under the provisions of this Chapter, the Public
Health Veterinarian shall, at the request of the owner thereof, conduct one
such test without charge, within a period of six months.
   (j)   Identification of Cattle Affected With Tuberculosis Slaughter
Restricted. All cattle which are shown by examination or by tuberculin test to
be afflicted with tuberculosis shall be immediately marked for identification
by branding the letter “T” on the left jaw. The letter “T” used for the
branding of reacting animals shall be three inches in height from top to bottom
and three inches wide at the top, and the branding edge shall not be less than
one-quarter of an inch in width. No animals so branded shall be slaughtered or
disposed of in any manner whatsoever, or removed from the premises where
located when branded, unless permission is first obtained from the Public
Health Veterinarian or from the Director of the State Department of
Agriculture.
   (k)   Livestock to Be Confined for Examination and Testing. The owner or
person in charge of livestock shall properly confine in stanchions or chutes
any livestock which the Public Health Veterinarian may designate for the
purpose of examination, injection, observation, administration of tuberculin,
mallein, or other specific tests or procedures. If the owner or person in
charge refuses to properly confine such livestock for examination of test
within 24 hours after he or she is requested to do so by the Public Health
Veterinarian, the Public Health Veterinarian may employ help and incur such
expense as is necessary to properly control such livestock for the purposes
mentioned. The expense so incurred shall be a lien upon said livestock and
shall be recovered by action in the name of the County of San Bernardino,
unless paid within ten days after written notice of the amount has been given
by the Public Health Veterinarian to the owner or person in possession of said
livestock.
   (l)   Disposition of Livestock in Violation of this Chapter. All livestock
brought into the County of San Bernardino in violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be subject to quarantine, examination and test at the
expense of the owner, by the Public Health Veterinarian who may dispose of such
livestock to comport with the welfare of the County of San Bernardino and the
protection of the health of the domestic livestock therein.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 32.0508   Duty to Report Information.
   It is hereby made the duty of any person suspecting or having knowledge of
the presence of any infectious diseases in livestock, to report the same to the
Public Health Veterinarian. It shall be the duty of any person owning or having
control of livestock to assist the Public Health Veterinarian to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter, to obey all orders of the Public Health
Veterinarian made for the control and eradication of infectious diseases, the
sanitation of premises, destruction of livestock, and disposal of carcasses,
manure, offal, refuse, condemned meat and meat products.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 32.0509   Maintenance of Places Where Livestock are Kept or Meat Products are
Prepared.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a rat menace where livestock
is kept. Every premise where livestock is kept, fed, stabled or otherwise cared
for, or any premise on which a hog ranch or slaughter house is maintained, or
where meat products are prepared for food, shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 32.0510   Miscellaneous Regulations.
   (a)   Duty to Report Information. Upon the discovery of any contagious or
infectious disease, it shall be the duty of the Public Health Veterinarian to
immediately notify the State Veterinarian, setting forth the place, facts and
circumstances of said cases.
   (b)   Distribution of Milk or Cream from Diseased Cattle—Prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to sell or
offer for sale, or to use or give away in the County of San Bernardino, any
milk or cream drawn from a cow known to be affected with tuberculosis, anthrax,
or any other contagious or infectious diseases.
   (c)   Sanitary Conditions for Places Housing Cattle and for Milk Processing
Equipment. All dairies or other places within the County of San Bernardino,
where cows are kept for the purpose of supplying milk or cream, or their
products to be sold, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and all
milk-handling and processing equipment used in or about said dairies or other
places where cows are kept for the purpose of supplying milk or cream or their
products, shall be thoroughly sterilized in accordance with applicable sections
of the Agricultural Code and Agriculture Administrative Code.
   (d)   Sanitary Conditions of Places Supplying Meat and Fish Products. All
slaughter houses, markets and other places within the County of San Bernardino,
from which meat, poultry, fish or game are supplied for human consumption shall
be kept in a clean and proper sanitary condition.
   (e)   Conflict of this Division with State and Federal Laws. No part or
parts of this Chapter shall be construed so as to prohibit or prevent the
transportation of cattle through this County when such cattle are confined
within railroad cars in conformity with State and Federal laws.
   (f)   Penalties. Any owner or person in charge of livestock who causes a
violation of this Chapter, or of any regulation established by the authority of
this Chapter, or any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with any
provision of this Chapter and regulations pertaining thereto, is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or
imprisonment in the County Jail of not more than six months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 32.0511   (Repealed by Ord. 3105, passed - -1986).
CHAPTER 6: CATTLE TUBERCULOSIS SUPPRESSION
Section
   
32.0601   Importation of Cattle Afflicted with Tuberculosis—Prohibition.
   
32.0602   Permit for Importation of Cattle.
   
32.0603   Thirty-day Requirement and Tuberculin Test.
   
32.0604   Tuberculin Testing of Dairy Cattle and Quarantine.
   
32.0605   Tuberculin-tested Cattle—Milk.
   
32.0606   Importation of Milk or Milk Products.
   
32.0607   Promulgation of Rules and Regulations.
§ 32.0601   Importation of Cattle Afflicted with Tuberculosis—Prohibition.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to bring into or
cause to be brought into the County of San Bernardino, any cattle afflicted
with tuberculosis, except for the purpose of immediate slaughter.
(Ord. 294, passed - -1928)
§ 32.0602   Permit for Importation of Cattle.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to bring into or
cause to be brought into the County of San Bernardino, any cattle except for
the purpose of immediate slaughter, without first obtaining a permit to do so
from the Public Health Veterinarian of said County, which permit shall
designate as near as possible the number, class, and sex of the cattle to be
brought in, the place from which they are to be brought, where they are to be
delivered to, the date of their arrival, and the method of transportation.
(Ord. 294, passed - -1928)
§ 32.0603   Thirty-day Requirement and Tuberculin Test.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to bring into or
cause to be brought into the County of San Bernardino, any cattle for dairy
purposes unless they are accompanied by a certificate signed by a Federal or
State veterinarian or a veterinarian approved by the Federal or State
Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Animal Industry, and the Public Health
Veterinarian of said County, giving an adequate description of each animal,
including ear-tag numbers and brands, showing that such cattle are free from
tuberculosis by physical examination and tuberculin test performed within 30
days of date of shipment into said County and certifying that the entire herd
from which they came showed not more than one-half of one percent reactors, the
30-day requirement for examination and tuberculin test may be waived in case of
all cattle brought into the County of San Bernardino from Federal accredited
herds or from Federal and State Control Area at the discretion of the Public
Health Veterinarian.
(Ord. 294, passed - -1928)
§ 32.0604   Tuberculin Testing of Dairy Cattle and Quarantine.
   All dairy cattle brought into the County of San Bernardino shall be tested
with tuberculin upon arrival, by the Public Health Veterinarian or by a
veterinarian approved by the Public Health Veterinarian, and if one-half of one
percent or over are found to be reactors to said tuberculin test, the herd may
be quarantined for a period of 60 days and be retested by said Public Health
Veterinarian; the said Public Health Veterinarian may quarantine any cattle
brought into the said County of San Bernardino, which he or she deems necessary
for the prevention of contagious and infectious diseases and their spread. Beef
breeding and range cattle are to be controlled by the State of California and
the United States Control Area Plan. All dealers shall be required to fill out
and file with the Public Health Veterinarian, a form approved by said
Veterinarian, showing in detail from whom livestock was bought and to whom
sold.
   (a)   Removal of Cattle Before Completion Prohibited. No cattle shall be
moved or transported during said period of quarantine and shall not be moved or
transported thereafter without first obtaining and having a certificate of
release from the Public Health Veterinarian.
(Ord. 294, passed - -1928)
§ 32.0605   Tuberculin-tested Cattle—Milk.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to produce and
offer for sale for human consumption, any milk or cream in the County of San
Bernardino unless the cattle from which said milk is produced have been
examined and tested for tuberculosis by an approved veterinarian or by a
Federal or State Veterinarian of the Department of Agriculture, in compliance
with the Pure Milk Law of the State of California.
   (a)   Annual Testing. All cattle in the County of San Bernardino that are
used to produce milk or milk products for human consumption, must be examined
and tested with tuberculin at least once annually, and if there are found any
reactors in the herd, the reactors shall be removed and the herd must be tested
semi-annually thereafter until there are no reactors found in the herd.
(Ord. 294, passed - -1928)
§ 32.0606   Importation of Milk or Milk Products.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to transport and
deliver from without the County of San Bernardino into the County of San
Bernardino for human consumption, any milk or milk products unless said milk
and milk products have been produced from cattle that are regularly tested for
tuberculosis and from which all the reactors have been removed, in compliance
with this Chapter and under the provisions of the Agricultural Code of the
State of California.
(Ord. 294, passed - -1928)
§ 32.0607   Promulgation of Rules and Regulations.
   The Public Health Veterinarian may from time to time, with the approval of
the Board of Supervisors, promulgate such rules and regulations as shall be
deemed proper to carry out the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 294, passed - -1928)
CHAPTER 7: TRANSPORTATION AND MOVEMENT OF LIVESTOCK OVER PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
LANDS
Section
   
32.0701   Regulation, Consent Required.
   
32.0702   Violation.
   
32.0703   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
   
32.0704   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
   
32.0705   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009.
§ 32.0701   Regulation, Consent Required.
   (a)   Stray Livestock. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, or
controlling the possession of cattle, sheep or any other livestock, to
willfully or negligently permit any such livestock to stray upon or remain
unaccompanied by a person in charge or control thereof upon any private or
public property located within the County of San Bernardino outside the grazing
areas described in Subdivision (c) below.
   (b)   Driven Livestock. It shall be unlawful for any person to lead, drive,
or conduct any animals over or across any private or public lands within the
County of San Bernardino without obtaining prior consent of the private owner
or public agency holding or governing such lands.
   (c)   Grazing Areas. The following portions of San Bernardino County are
declared to be devoted chiefly to grazing:
      (1)   Eastern County Allotments. Beginning at the intersection of the San
Bernardino and Inyo County line with the Nevada State Line; thence
southeasterly along said Nevada State Line to the east line of Section 30,
Township 13 North, Range 20 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence southerly
along section lines to the center line of a road bearing southwesterly from the
east line of Section 7, Township 12 North, Range 20 East, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence southwesterly along said center line to the east line of the
west half of Section 18; thence in a straight line southeasterly to the
northeast corner of Section 19; thence southerly along section lines to the
northeast corner of Section 31; thence in a straight line southwesterly to the
northeast corner of Section 13, Township 11 North, Range 19 East, San
Bernardino Meridian; thence southerly along section lines to the southeast
corner of Section 36; thence westerly along the south line of said Section 36
to the northeast corner of fractional Section 3, Township 10 North, Range 20
East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence southerly along section lines to the
north line of the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad right of way; thence
westerly along said north line to the east line of fractional Section 31,
Township 10 North, Range 20 East; thence southerly along section lines to the
north line of Interstate Route 40; thence westerly along said north line to the
range line between Ranges 19 and 20 East; thence southerly along said range
line to the southeast corner of Township 6 North, Range 19 East, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence westerly along the south line of said Township to the
northeast corner of Section 5, Township 5 North, Range 19 East, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence southerly along section lines to the Township line between
Townships 3 and 4 North; thence westerly along said Township line to the range
line between Ranges 16 and 17 East; thence north along said range line to the
south line of Township 6 North, Range 17 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence
west along said south line to the west line of said Township 6 North, Range 17
East; thence north along said west line to the south line of the north half of
Section 24, Township 6 North, Range 16 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence
west along said south line to the west line of said Section 24; thence along a
straight line northwesterly to the southeasterly line of the Atchison, Topeka,
and Santa Fe Railroad at the Danby Station; thence northeasterly along said
southeasterly line to the southeasterly line of Old National Trails Highway;
thence northeasterly along said southeasterly line of Old National Trails
Highway to the south line of Interstate Route 40; thence westerly along said
south line of Interstate 40 to the east line of the west half of Section 4,
Township 8 North, Range 17 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence in a straight
line southwesterly to the southeast corner of Section 7; thence west along
section lines to the northeast corner of Section 13, Township 8 North, Range 15
East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence south along the east line of said Section
13 to the southeast corner thereof; thence west along section lines to the
northeast corner of Section 24, Township 8 North, Range 14 East, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence south along the east line of said Section 24 to the southeast
corner thereof; thence west along the south line of said Section 24 to the
southeast corner of Section 23; thence at a 45° angle from the south line of
said Section 23 northwesterly to the north line of Interstate Route 40; thence
westerly along said north line to the east line of Section 5, Township 7 North,
Range 7 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence south along said east line to the
north line of the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad; thence westerly along
said north line to the east line of Section 9, Township 8 North, Range 5 East,
San Bernardino Meridian; thence north along said east line to the southeast
corner of Section 4; thence west along section lines to the north line of the
Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad; thence westerly along said north line
to the west line of Section 2, Township 8 North, Range 4 East, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence in a straight line northwesterly to the west quarter corner of
Section 34, Township 9 North, Range 4 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence
north along section lines to the southeast corner of Section 4; thence west
along the south line of said Section 4 to the southwest corner thereof; thence
north along section lines to the northwest corner of Section 21, Township 10
North, Range 4 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along the north line
of said Section 21 to the southwest corner of Section 15; thence north along
the west line of said Section 15 to the northwest corner thereof; thence east
along section lines to the Northeast corner of Section 14; thence south along
the east line of said Section 14 to the northwest corner of Section 24; thence
east along section lines to the southwest corner of Section 17, Township 10
North, Range 5 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence north along section lines
to the south line of Section 31, Township 11 North, Range 5 East, San
Bernardino Meridian; thence east along said south line to the southwest corner
of Section 32; thence north along section lines to the south line of the Union
Pacific Railroad; thence Easterly along said south line to the west line of
Section 18, Township 11 North, Range 6 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence
south along said west line to the southwest corner of said Section 18; thence
east along the south line of said Section 18 to the northwest corner of Section
20; thence south along the west line of said Section 20 to the south line of
the north half of the north half of said Section 20; thence east along said
south line to the center line of the Mojave River; thence Easterly along said
center line to an intersection with the south line of the Union Pacific
Railroad right of way in Section 13, Township 11 North, Range 6 East, San
Bernardino Meridian; thence Easterly along said south line to the west line of
Section 18, Township 11 North, Range 9 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence in
a straight line northeasterly to the west quarter corner of Section 28,
Township 12 North, Range 9 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence north along
section lines to the southeasterly line of Interstate Route 15; thence
northeasterly along said southeasterly line to the range line between Ranges 9
and 10 East; thence north along said range line to the south line of Township
16 North, Range 9 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along said south
line to the range line between Ranges 9 and 10 East; thence north along said
range line to the south line of Township 17 North, Range 10 East, San
Bernardino Meridian; thence west along said south line to the range line
between Range 9 and 10 East. Thence north along said range line to the
southeast corner of Section I, Township 17 North, Range 9 East, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence west along section lines to the southwest corner of Section 2;
thence north along section lines to the south line of Township 19 North, Range
9 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence west along said south line to the
southwest corner of said Township 19 North, Range 9 East; thence north along
the west line of said Township 19 North, Range 9 East, to the south line of
Township 20 North, Range 9 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence west along
said south line to the southwest corner of Section 31, said Township 20 North,
Range 9 East; thence north along the west line of said Section 31 to the south
line of Township 20 North, Range 8 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence west
along said south line to the west line of the east half of Section 34, said
Township 20 North, Range 8 East; thence north along said west line to the San
Bernardino and Inyo County line; thence east along said County line and
continuing along said County line to the point of beginning.
      (2)   Cronese Lake Allotment. Beginning at the northwest corner of
Section 20, Township 12 North, Range 3 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence
east along section lines to the southwest corner of Section 17, Township 12
North, Range 5 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence north along the west line
of said Section 17 to the northwest corner thereof; thence east along the north
line of said Section 17 to the southwest corner of Section 9; thence north
along section lines to the northwest corner of Section 4; thence east along the
north line of said Section 4 to the southwest corner of Section 34, Township 13
North, Range 5 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence north along the west line
of said Section 34 to the northwest corner thereof; thence east along the north
line of said Section 34 to the southwest corner of Section 26; thence north
along the west line of said Section 26 to the northwest corner thereof; thence
east along the north line of said Section 26 to the southwest corner of Section
24; thence north along section lines to the northwest corner of Section 13;
thence east along the north line of said Section 13 to the southwest corner of
Section 7, Township 13 North, Range 6 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence
east along the south line of Sections 7 and 8 to the Easterly line of the Los
Angeles Bureau of Power and Light power line right of way; thence northeasterly
along said east line to the east line of the west half of Section 5; thence
south along the east line of the west half of Sections 5 and 8 to the north
line of Section 17; thence east along said north line to the northeast corner
of said Section 17; thence south along the east line of said Section 17 to the
northwest corner of Section 21; thence east along the north line of said
Section 21 to the northeast corner thereof; thence south along the east line of
said Section 21 to the northwest corner of Section 27; thence east along the
north line of said Section 27 to the northeast corner thereof; thence south
along the east line of said Section 27 to the north line of the south half of
Section 26; thence east along said north line to the east line of said Section
26; thence south along section lines to the northwest corner of Section 1,
Township 12 North, Range 6 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along
section lines to the east line of the west half of Section 6, Township 12
North, Range 7 West, San Bernardino Meridian; thence south along said east line
to the north line of Section 7; thence east along said north line to the
northeast corner of said Section 7; thence south along the east line of said
Section 7 to the north line of the south half of the north half of Section 8;
thence east along said north line to the east line of the west half of said
Section 8; thence south along said east line to the north line of the south
half of said Section 8; thence east along said north line to the east line of
said Section 8; thence south along section lines to the northwest corner of
Section 21; Section 15; corner thereof; corner thereof; thence east along said
north line to the southwest corner thereof; thence north along the west line of
said Section 15 to the northwest; thence east along the north line of said
Section 15 to the northeast; thence south along the east line of said Section
15 to the Northerly line of Interstate Route 15; thence southwesterly along
said Northerly line to the center line of Alvord Mountain Road; thence
northwesterly along said center line to the center line of a dirt road which
runs northwesterly to Coyote Lake Road; thence northwesterly along the center
line of said dirt road to the west line of Section 22, Township 11 North, Range
3 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence north along section lines to the
northwest corner of Section 10; thence east along the north line of said
Section 10 to the southwest corner of Section 2; thence north along section
lines to the point of beginning.
      (3)   Rattlesnake Canyon Allotment. Beginning at the southwest corner of
Section 15, Township 2 North, Range 3 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence
north along section lines to the southeast corner of Section 4; thence west
along the south line of said Section 4 to the southwest corner thereof; thence
north along the west line of said Section 4 to the south line of Township 3
North, Range 3 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence west along said south line
to the southwest corner of said Township 3 North, Range 3 East; thence north
along the west line of said Township to the southeast corner of Section 25,
Township 3 North, Range 2 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence west along the
south line of said Section 25 to the southwest corner thereof; thence north
along the west line of said Section 25 to the southeast corner of Section 23;
thence west along section lines to the southwest corner of Section 22; thence
north along section lines to the northwest corner of Section 15; thence east
along section lines to the southwest corner of Section 12; thence north along
the west line of said Section 12 to the northwest corner thereof; thence east
along section lines to the northeast corner of Section 7, Township 3 North,
Range 3 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence south along the east line of said
Section 7 to the northwest corner of Section 17; thence east along section
lines to the northeast corner of Section 14; thence south along the east line
of said Section 14 to the northwest corner of Section 24; thence east along the
north line of said Section 24 to the range line between Ranges 3 and 4 East;
thence south along said range line to the southeast corner of Section 13,
Township 2 North, Range 3 East; thence west along section lines to the point of
beginning.
      (4)   Valley Well Allotment. Section 20, Township 8 North, Range 1 East,
San Bernardino Meridian.
      (5)   Harper Lake Allotment. Beginning at the northeast corner of Section
35, Township 12 North, Range 3 West, San Bernardino Meridian; thence south
along section lines to the south line of the north half of the south half of
Section 11, Township 11 North, Range 3 West, San Bernardino Meridian; thence
west along said south line to the east line of the west half of said Section
11; thence south along said east line to the south line of said Section 11;
thence west along section lines to the northeast corner of Section 18; thence
south along the east line of said Section 18 to the northwest corner of Section
20; thence east along the north line of said Section 20 to the east line of the
west half of the east half of said Section 20; thence south along said east
line to the north line of Section 29; thence east along said north line to the
northeast corner of said Section 29; thence south along section lines to the
south line of the north half of Section 32; thence west along said south line
to the east line of Section 31; thence south along section lines to the
northwest corner of Section 8, Township 10 North, Range 3 West, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence east along the north line of said Section 8 to the northeast
corner thereof; thence south along the east line of said Section 8 to the
southeast corner thereof; thence west along section lines to the west line of
the east half of Section 11, Township 10 North, Range 4 West, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence north along the west line of the east half of Sections 11 and
2 to the north line of said Section 2; thence east along said north line to the
southwest corner of Section 36, Township 11 North, Range 4 West, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence north along section lines to the northwest corner of Section
36, Township 12 North, Range 4 West, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along
section lines to the point of beginning.
      (6)   Whitewater Canyon Allotment. Beginning at the southwest corner of
Township I South, Range 3 East, San Bernardino Meridian, said point being in
the San Bernardino County line; thence leaving said County line north along the
west line of said Township 1 South, Range 3 east to the northwest corner
thereof; thence east along the north line of said Township to the southwest
corner of Section 31, Township 1 North, Range 3 East, San Bernardino Meridian;
thence north along the west line of said Section 31 to the northwest corner
thereof; thence east along the north line of said Section 31 to the southwest
corner of Section 29; thence north along the west line of said Section 29 to
the northwest corner thereof; thence east along the north line of said Section
29 to the northeast corner thereof; thence south along the east line of said
Section 29 to the northwest corner of Section 33; thence east along the north
line of said Section 33 to the southwest corner of Section 27; thence north
along section lines to the northwest corner of Section 22; thence east along
section lines to the range line between Ranges 3 and 4 East; thence south along
said range line to the northwest corner of Section 19, Township I North, Range
4 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along section lines to the
northeast corner of Section 21; thence south along the east line of said
Section 21 to the northwest corner of Section 27; thence east along the north
line of said Section 27 to the northeast corner thereof; thence south along the
east line of said Section 27 to the northwest corner of Section 35; thence east
along the north line of said Section 35 to the northeast corner thereof; thence
south along the east line of said Section 35 to the southeast corner thereof;
thence west along section lines to the northeast corner of Section 6, Township
1, South, Range 4 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence south along section
lines to the south line of the north half of the south half of Section 19;
thence west along the south line to the east line of the west half of the east
half of said Section 19; thence south along said east line to the south line of
said Section 19; thence west along said south line to the range line between
Ranges 3 and 4 East; thence south along said range line to the San Bernardino
County line; thence west along said County line to the point of beginning.
      (7)   Ord Mountain Allotment. Beginning at the southwest corner of
Section 18, Township 6 North, Range 1 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence
north along the San Bernardino Meridian line to the northwest corner of Section
19, Township 8 North, Range 1 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along
section lines to the northeast corner of Section 24; thence south along the
east line of said Section 24 to the northwest corner of Section 30, Township 8
North, Range 2 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along the north line
of said Section 30 to the northeast corner thereof; thence south along the east
line of said Section 30 to the northwest corner of Section 32; thence east
along the north line of said Section 32 to the southwest corner of Section 28;
thence north along the west line of said Section 28 to the northwest corner
thereof; thence east along section lines to the northeast corner of Section 26;
thence south along the east line of said Section 26 to the northwest corner of
Section 36; thence east along section lines to the northeast corner of Section
33, Township 8 North, Range 3 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence southerly
along section lines to the highest ridge line of the Rodman Mountains; thence
southeasterly direction following said ridge line of the Rodman Mountains to
the south line of Section 23, Township 7 North, Range 3 East, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence east along section lines to the southwest corner of Section
20, Township 7 North, Range 4 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence north along
section lines to the northwest corner of Section 32, Township 8 North, Range 4
East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along section lines to the range
line between Ranges 4 and 5 East; thence south along said range line to the
northwest corner of Section 18, Township 6 North, Range 5 East, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence east along section lines to the northeast corner of Section
17; thence south along the east line of said Section 17 to the southeast corner
thereof; thence west along section lines to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 1139, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 2933, passed - -1985)
§ 32.0702   Violation.
   Every person who violates either of the above provisions shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 or by imprisonment of not less than ten
days nor more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each
violation during any day shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1139, passed - -1964)
§ 32.0703   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
§ 32.0704   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
§ 32.0705   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
CHAPTER 8: REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986
CHAPTER 9: APIARIES
Section
   
32.0901   Findings.
   
32.0902   Definitions.
   
32.0903   Location and Identification of Apiaries.
   
32.0904   Water Supply.
   
32.0905   Registration.
   
32.0906   Nuisance Bees.
   
32.0907   Authority to Enter Property.
   
32.0908   Nuisance; Duty to Abate.
   
32.0909   Service of Notice of Violation and Order.
   
32.0910   Time for Abatement.
   
32.0911   Abatement by Inspector.
   
32.0912   Summary Abatement.
   
32.0913   Appeal From Public Nuisance Notice.
   
32.0914   Payment for Abatement.
   
32.0915   Enforcement.
   
32.0916   Penalty for Violations.
   
32.0917   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
§ 32.0901   Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors finds that the potential presence of “Africanized
Honey Bees” and the unregulated and improper keeping of bees and apiaries in
numerous locations throughout the unincorporated territory of the County of San
Bernardino is a public nuisance and a hazard to the safety of landowners, users
of public highways and the public generally.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0902   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter:
   ABATE. To remove, destroy, eliminate, seize, impound or mitigate.
   AFRICANIZED HONEY BEES. A population of hybrid bees resulting from a cross
between Apis mellifera and Apis mellifera scutellata.
   APIARY. Includes bees, comb, hive, appliances, or colonies, wherever they
are kept, located, or found.
   APPLIANCE. Any implement or other device which is used in handling and
manipulating bees or comb, any container of bees or comb, or any other
equipment which is used in the practice of apiculture.
   BEES. Honey-producing insects of the genus Apis. It includes all life stages
of these insects.
   COLONY. One hive and its contents, including bees, comb and appliances.
   COMMISSIONER. The San Bernardino County Agricultural Commissioner and
employees of the Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures acting pursuant
to their instructions.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Environmental Health Services
and employees of the Department of Environmental Health Services acting
pursuant to their instructions.
   HIVE. Any receptacle or container, or part of any receptacle or container,
which is made or prepared for the use of bees, or which is inhabited by bees.
   INSPECTOR. Any person who is authorized to enforce this Chapter.
   LOCATION. Any premises or parcel upon which an apiary is located.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0903   Location and Identification of Apiaries.
   (a)   Prior to locating or maintaining an apiary, written permission of the
property owner or occupant shall be obtained, if the apiary is located on a
property not owned or leased by the person responsible for the apiary.
   (b)   All apiaries owned or kept within the unincorporated area of the
County of San Bernardino shall be located at least 100 feet from all public
roads (traveled portions) and at least 200 feet from all freeways, unless there
are natural barriers to prevent bees from causing a nuisance or hazard to
persons using the road or freeway.
   (c)   All apiaries owned or kept within the unincorporated area of the
County of San Bernardino shall be located at least 500 feet from houses or
buildings, unless the owner of the apiary first obtains permission from the
occupant or person in charge of the house or building.
   (d)   All apiaries owned or kept within the unincorporated area of the
County of San Bernardino within 500 feet of school yards or places where people
congregate shall be located and maintained behind barriers (natural or
otherwise) of at least six feet in height.
   (e)   No apiary shall be maintained or allowed in the unincorporated area of
the County of San Bernardino if there are substantial numbers of bees from such
apiary which are entering land other than where such apiary is situated and are
causing a public nuisance to the extent that the health, safety or welfare of
the public is endangered or property is damaged.
   (f)   No person shall maintain an apiary on premises other than his or her
residence unless the apiary is identified by a sign that is prominently
displayed on the entrance side of the apiary or stenciled on the hive that
states in dark letters not less than one inch in height on a background of
contrasting color, the name of the owner or person responsible for the apiary,
his or her address and telephone number, or if he or she has no telephone, the
telephone number of a person who has agreed in writing to be responsible for
the bees.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0904   Water Supply.
   Prior to placing an apiary, a plentiful supply of fresh water shall be
furnished and kept available to such apiary at all times pursuant to the
following methods and conditions:
   (a)   A fresh water supply placed within 100 feet of the apiary; or
   (b)   A stream or reservoir containing available fresh water within 300 feet
of the apiary; all other sources of water available to the apiary, at locations
where people or animals are present, must be one-quarter mile away from the
stream or reservoir; and
   (c)   All sources of water serving the apiary must be on property for which
permission pursuant to §
32.0903(a) has been granted or which is owned by the person responsible for the
apiary.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1655, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 3598,
passed - -1995)
§ 32.0905   Registration.
   (a)   Every person who is the owner or is in possession of an apiary which
is located within the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino, on
the first day of January of each year, or within 30 days thereafter, shall
register the number of colonies in each apiary and the location of each apiary.
The registration is valid until January 1 of the following year.
   (b)   Every person who moves bees into the unincorporated area of the County
of San Bernardino or otherwise comes into possession of an apiary located
within the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino, after the first
day of January shall within 30 days register the apiary moved or so acquired.
   (c)   Registration of an apiary shall be filed with the San Bernardino
County Agricultural Commissioner. The Commissioner shall adopt a form of
registration to be used County-wide.
   (d)   Each beekeeper, apiary owner, apiary operator, or person in possession
of any apiary, shall pay, in addition to any other fees required by law, an
annual registration fee to cover the costs of apiary registration and late
fees, if applicable, in the amount specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1655, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 3598,
passed - -1995)
§ 32.0906   Nuisance Bees.
   Bees shall be considered a public nuisance when they interfere with the
normal use of private or public property or have been involved in a multiple
stinging incident of five or more stings to an animal or person. Bees known to
be Africanized Honey Bees are declared a public nuisance in any situation.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 2348, passed - -1979; Am. Ord. 3598,
passed - -1995)
§ 32.0907   Authority to Enter Property.
   (a)   For the purpose of enforcing or administering this Chapter, the
Commissioner, Director or any inspector acting under their direction, upon
presentation of credentials or, if necessary under the circumstances, after
obtaining a warrant pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1822.50 et seq., has
the right of entry to any property owned, used, leased, or rented by any owner
or keeper of any apiary in order to inspect such property and apiary for
compliance with this Chapter.
   (b)   No person shall interfere with the entry of an inspector in the
official course of his or her duty.
   (c)   The inspector shall report the results of the inspection to the owner
or person in charge or possession of the property, where feasible, within five
days of the inspection.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0908   Nuisance; Duty to Abate.
   Any property or apiary in violation of this Chapter is a public nuisance.
The owner or person in charge or possession of any such nuisance, upon
receiving notice of the violation, shall correct or abate the violation within
the time specified in the notice.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0909   Service of Notice of Violation and Order.
   The notice and order may be served upon the owner or the person in charge or
possession of the apiary or bees personally or by certified mail to their last
known address. If the owner or person in charge or possession is not known, the
notice shall be served by posting it in a conspicuous place on the property
where the apiary or bees are located.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0910   Time for Abatement.
   The time specified in the notice for abatement of the nuisance shall not be
more than 48 hours from the time the notice is served, except that the
inspector may extend the time limit if necessary to prevent hardship and it can
be done without danger to persons or property.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0911   Abatement by Inspector.
   If the owner or person in charge or possession cannot be located after
diligent search by the inspector, or if notice has been served pursuant to this
Chapter and the owner or person in charge or possession refuses or neglects to
abate the nuisance within the time specified in the notice, the inspector shall
abate the public nuisance within 72 hours after expiration of the time which is
specified in the notice. The cost of abatement shall be paid by the owner of
the property.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0912   Summary Abatement.
   If the inspector, in his or her judgment, believes summary abatement is
necessary, the inspector may do so, or require that abatement be performed
under his or her direct supervision. The inspector may also post an order to
abate in a conspicuous place in the apiary or on the property. No person who
has been given notice of the order to abate shall move the property or any part
of the property or any other bee equipment from the location unless authorized
by the inspector, until the order to abate is released.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0913   Appeal From Public Nuisance Notice.
   (a)   If an abatement notice has been served upon the owner or lessee of the
property, the owner or lessee, before the expiration of the time specified in
the notice, may appeal from the inspector’s determination of the public
nuisance named in the notice by sending a written appeal to the issuing
department stating the reason for the appeal. The appeal hearing shall be held
before the Commissioner or Director or their designee at the time and place set
by the Commissioner or Director.
   (b)   Pending the hearing and determination of the Commissioner or Director
regarding the public nuisance, the time which is specified in the abatement
notice shall be extended by the number of days between the forwarding of the
appeal and the receipt by the owner or lessee of the property where the apiary
or bees are located that made the written appeal of the written determination
of the Commissioner or Director.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1655, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2348,
passed - -1979; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0914   Payment for Abatement.
   (a)   Billing. When the abatement has been completed, the agency or officer
so causing the abatement shall render to the County Auditor an itemized
statement covering work necessary for such abatement. The County Auditor shall
pay the same from the funds of the agency or officer causing said work to be
done and the agency shall present to the property owner a demand for payment of
the cost of abatement by mailing notice to the owner at the address shown on
the latest tax roll. If payment is not made by or on behalf of the owner within
60 days after mailing such bill, the Commissioner or Director shall collect the
bill by any legal means and charge all costs of collection to the debtor.
   (b)   Appeals. Any appeal from these charges must be filed within 60 days
from the date of mailing of the billing. The appeal procedure shall be the same
as §
32.0913 of this Chapter, and the decision of the Commissioner or Director shall
be final.
   (c)   Cancellation of Claim. All or any portion of any such costs or penalty
heretofore entered shall, on order of the Commissioner or Director, be
cancelled if uncollected or refunded if collected, if they were entered,
charged or paid:
      (1)   More than once;
      (2)   Through clerical error;
      (3)   Through error or mistake of the Commissioner or Director or of the
officer or board designated by them to give notice or to abate the nuisance, in
respect to any material fact, including the case where the cost report rendered
and confirmed as hereinbefore provided shows the County abated the nuisance but
such is not the actual fact;
      (4)   Illegally.
   (d)   Procedure for Refund of Payment. No order for a cancellation or refund
under Subdivision (c) of this Section shall be made except on a claim:
      (1)   Verified by the person who paid the special assessment, his or her
guardian, executor or administrator;
      (2)   Filed within 60 days after the error was discovered by the property
owner or lessee and no more than three years after making the payment sought to
be refunded.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0915   Enforcement.
   The provisions of this Chapter may be enforced by the authorized
representatives of the County Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures or
the Department of Environmental Health Services.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0916   Penalty for Violations.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided, any person, firm, partnership, corporation
or other entity violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified.
   (b)   Each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a
new and separate offense.
   (c)   Any person so convicted shall be:
      (1)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $100.00 and not less than $50.00 for a first offense;
      (2)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $200.00 and not less than $100.00 for a second offense;
      (3)   Guilty of a misdemeanor for the third and any additional offenses
and punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and not less than $500.00 or six
months in jail, or both;
      (4) Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged
and prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
   (d)   Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence herein provided
shall not relieve a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity from
the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation.
   (e)   In addition to the above penalties, the court may order that the
guilty party reimburse the County for all of its costs of investigating,
analyzing and prosecuting the enforcement action against the guilty party. The
court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursement upon submission of proof
of such costs by the County.
(Ord. 1466, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 3598, passed - -1995)
§ 32.0917   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
CHAPTER 10: COMMERCIAL CALF GROWERS
Section
   
32.1001   Definitions.
   
32.1002   Application for Permit.
   
32.1003   Permit Fees.
   
32.1004   Expiration and Renewal of Permit.
   
32.1005   Late Fee Penalty.
   
32.1006   Revocation of Permit.
   
32.1007   Reinstatement of a Revoked Permit.
   
32.1008   Application Requirements.
   
32.1009   Operation Requirements.
§ 32.1001   Definitions.
   CALF. A young bovine animal under 12 months of age.
   CALF NURSERY. A calf-growing operation with calves starting at one day old
to 12 weeks or a maximum of 225 pounds.
   COMMERCIAL CALF GROWER. Any calf operation where calves are fed, housed, or
otherwise kept until sold or marketed and consisting of ten or more beef or
dairy animals.
   BEEF CALF GROWER. Any type of beef calf-growing with calves exceeding 225
pounds at market time.
(Ord. 1499, passed - -1969)
§ 32.1002   Application for Permit.
   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating as a
commercial calf grower herein defined shall first obtain all application for
permit to do so from the Health Officer of San Bernardino County and shall pay
an annual permit fee shown in §
32.1003.
(Ord. 1499, passed - -1969)
§ 32.1003   Permit Fees.
   For a commercial calf grower having the following number of calves, the fee
will be:
 
Ten—24      $50.00
25—75       $75.00
76 or greater $100.00
 
(Ord. 1499, passed - -1969)
§ 32.1004   Expiration and Renewal of Permit.
   All moneys received as permit fees under the provisions of this Chapter
shall be paid to the County Treasurer and placed in the general fund. A permit
for which application is made under the provisions of this Chapter may be
granted at any time during the year, Any permit thereunder shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which it was granted and the same must be renewed
before January 1 of the following year.
(Ord. 1499, passed - -1969)
§ 32.1005   Late Fee Penalty.
   A 25 percent penalty shall be added to the permit fee for failure to make
application for yearly renewal within 30 days from the date of expiration or
for failure to apply for a permit in the case of a new business.
(Ord. 1499, passed - -1969)
§ 32.1006   Revocation of Permit.
   If it is determined by the Health Officer following an investigation or
inspection of any commercial calf-growing operation required by the provisions
of this Chapter to have a permit that the operator, owner or manager has not
complied with the provisions of this Chapter, and all other applicable
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, particularly relating to the
Health and Sanitary Laws and Regulations, the Health Officer may revoke the
permit.
(Ord. 1499, passed - -1969)
§ 32.1007   Reinstatement of a Revoked Permit.
   Revoked permits may only be reinstated upon correction of the deficiency
which caused the revocation of the permit.
(Ord. 1499, passed - -1969)
§ 32.1008   Application Requirements.
   At the time of applying for a permit for a new operation or an existing
operation not under permit, the following is required:
   (a)   Submit two sets of plans of the proposed commercial calf operation for
review and approval by the County Public Health Department.
   (b)   Meet all density and sanitary requirements as shown in the following
table:
Density Requirements
Density Requirements
Individual Pens
On dirt            One—12 wk225 lbs 32 sq. ft.
On cement          One—12 wk225 lbs 20 sq. ft.
Wire mesh or slats One—12 wk225 lbs Ten sq. ft.
Community Pens
On dirt            Two—12 wk225 lbs 100 sq. ft.
On cement          Two—12 wk225 lbs 60 sq. ft.
Wire mesh or slats Two—12 wk225 lbs 30 sq. ft.
                   Over 225 pounds. Density shall be determined by the Public
Community Pens     Health Department according to the type of operation and
                   facilities provided.
 
(Ord. 1499, passed - -1969)
§ 32.1009   Operation Requirements.
   The following requirements shall be met by all new operations. For existing
operations all of the following requirements shall be met except those
requirements waived by the Public Health Department:
   (a)   All exterior pens shall drain properly with a one and one-half percent
finished grade.
   (b)   An area shall be provided for isolation of sick animals.
   (c)   Twenty-five percent of total area shall remain undeveloped; this area
may be used for driveways or residences.
   (d)   All animal waste shall be disposed of in an approved manner, including
dead animals.
   (e)   All manure shall be removed from the property without stockpiling. If
manure is to be retained on the premises, special approval must be first
obtained from the Health Department.
   (f)   An adequate and continuing program for control of vectors such as
flies, rodents and other pests shall be instituted and maintained.
   (g)   If at any time new pens are to be installed or calves increased above
the proposed density, the Public Health Department shall be notified and a
revised plot plan be submitted for approval.
(Ord. 1499, passed - -1969)
CHAPTER 11: REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986
CHAPTER 12: CATTERIES
Section
   
32.1201   Definitions.
   
32.1202   Requirement of a Permit.
   
32.1203   Construction, Operation and Maintenance.
   
32.1204   Catteries Operation Along With Dog Kennels.
   
32.1205   Inspection.
   
32.1206   Revocation of a Permit.
   
32.1207   Penalties.
§ 32.1201   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall be used:
   CAT. All domesticated felines belonging to the genus Felis catus.
   CATTERY. A place where five or more cats are kept. The term CATTERY shall
not apply to animal shelters operated by governmental agencies, nor shall it
apply to veterinary hospitals. Any CATTERY shall be in the proper A-I, A-2, DL,
or M-I zone. In the A-I, DL and M-I zones, a location and development
application involving a public hearing before the County Planning Commission
must first be filed and approved by said Commission. In A-2 zone, the cattery
is considered as a permitted use, not requiring the approval of a Location and
Development Application. A CATTERY is subdefined as follows:
      (1)   BREEDING CATTERY. A cattery in which more than four cats are kept
for the primary purpose of breeding.
      (2)   BOARDING CATTERY. A cattery in which cats owned by persons other
than the cattery owner/operator are being cared for.
      (3)   BOARDING AND BREEDING CATTERY. A cattery in which cats are kept for
boarding, breeding, marketing or other purposes.
      (4)   PRIVATE CATTERY. A place wherein more than four but not exceeding
five cats three months of age or older, all belonging to the same owner and
kept or maintained as pets within the premises or residence of owner for his
pleasure and enjoyment. No breeding in which the kittens are intended for sale
or other commercial purpose must be done.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The San Bernardino County Health Officer, or any other
person duly authorized to act on his or her behalf.
(Ord. 1868, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 3908, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4473,
passed - -2024)
§ 32.1202   Requirement of a Permit.
   Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the operation, control, or
management of a cattery as herein defined, shall obtain a permit to operate
from the County Health Officer, and shall pay an annual fee as follows: For a
cattery having the number of cats indicated, the fees shown in the County Fee
Schedule shall apply for the following types and sizes of catteries:
 
                   Limited to five cats only; if over five cats, the cattery is
Private Cattery    classified as a commercial cattery and the provisions of the
                   commercial cattery apply.
Commercial Cattery Five—ten cats, 11—20 cats, and 21—30 cats.
 
(Ord. 1868, passed - -1973)
§ 32.1203   Construction, Operation and Maintenance.
   (a)   All cats in a private or commercial cattery shall be confined and not
allowed to run at large.
   (b)   Adequate housing shall be provided for the protection of cats from the
elements.
   (c)   The building within which cats are to be housed shall be provided with
adequate ventilation and lighting, and shall be constructed so as to be easily
kept clean and sanitary at all times. Adequate ventilation shall be that which
minimizes drafts, avoids offensive odors, and prevents moisture condensation.
Cat odors shall not be allowed to persist inside the building.
   (d)   Adequate heating shall be provided for in the winter.
   (e)   Cat cages shall be within an enclosed building and shall be of
suitable construction, e.g. fiberglass or stainless steel or other material
that will prevent the escape of the animal through destruction of material of
which cage is made of, and at the same time permits easy cleaning. The minimum
floor space of each cage shall be three square feet for each adult cat. Each
cage shall be at least two feet in height. No more than two adult cats used for
breeding shall be placed inside each cage.
   (f)   Inside runs shall be so constructed that a minimum space of three
square feet is provided per cat, and that the maximum number of cats to be
housed in each pen shall not exceed five. Wire netting used between pens shall
be such that the cats cannot put their feet through the wire netting spaces. If
dividers are of solid construction, this shall be of uniform material and make.
Enclosures shall be constructed so as to enable the animals to remain dry and
clean.
   (g)   Each pen shall be provided with a cat scratching post.
   (h)   Cat resting or sleeping shelves shall be provided and shall be uniform
and approved construction.
   (i)   All cats shall be provided with sufficient clean litter to contain
excreta and these shall be disposed of daily in a manner approved by the Health
Officer. Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of dead animals
which shall be satisfactory to the Health Officer.
   (j)   Boarded cats shall be caged or penned individually and separated by a
floor to ceiling solid partition, unless they belong to the same owner, in
which case they may stay together provided there is adequate space.
   (k)   The operator of every cattery shall be responsible to take the
appropriate preventive measures to preclude outbreaks of infectious and
contagious diseases as well as external parasites, among the cats.
   (l)   Adequate disinfection shall be provided. Beddings shall be cleaned and
laundered at the end of each boarding period prior to use by another cat.
   (m)   Provisions shall be made for convenience access to clean food and
water. Food and water containers shall be kept clean and sanitary. Animal feed
shall be properly stored and protected from contamination and vermin
infestation.
(Ord. 1868, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 4473, passed - -2024)
§ 32.1204   Catteries Operated Along With Dog Kennels.
   Catteries in operation prior to adoption of this Chapter, whether operated
in conjunction with a dog kennel or not, shall be subject to the provisions of
these regulations immediately upon adoption or this Chapter.
(Ord. 1868, passed - -1973)
§ 32.1205   Inspection.
   The Health Officer shall have the authority to enter upon any area or
premises in which a cattery is located, for the purposes of investigating a
violation or suspected violation as well as for enforcement of the provisions
of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1868, passed - -1973)
§ 32.1206   Revocation of a Permit.
   The Health Officer shall have the power, upon giving of ten days’ notice by
United States mail to any permittee under this Chapter, to revoke any permit
granted to a cattery operator for any violation of this Chapter. The permittee
may within said ten-day period, demand a hearing for reconsideration of the
revocation. The reconsideration shall be determined by a different deputy from
the deputy who first acted upon the revocation.
(Ord. 1868, passed - -1973)
§ 32.1207   Penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not
more than 100 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 1868, passed - -1973)
CHAPTER 13: ANIMAL FOOD AND FOOD SCRAPS
Section
   
32.1301   Food Left Outside for Certain Mammalian Predators.
   
32.1302   Food Left Outside For Any Animal During Certain Hours.
   
32.1303   Garbage Containing Food Scraps.
   
32.1304   Limited Applicability.
   
32.1305   Violation and Penalty.
   
32.1306   Severability.
§ 32.1301   Food Left Outside for Certain Mammalian Predators.
   (a)   No person shall feed or in any manner provide food for one or more
nondomesticated mammalian predators. A nondomesticated mammalian predator shall
include coyotes, raccoons, foxes, opossums, bears, mountain lions, and bobcats.
   (b)   Exceptions. This Section shall not apply in any of the following
instances:
      (1)   Where the person providing the food is the owner of such non-
domesticated mammalian predator and the predator is kept under a valid
certificate or permit issued by the State of California Department of Fish and
Game; or
      (2)   Where the person provides food for a trapped, injured or unweaned,
nondomesticated mammalian predator between the time the agency in charge of
animal control is notified and the time such predator is picked up by said
agency.
(Ord. 3322, passed - -1989)
§ 32.1302   Food Left Outside for Any Animal During Certain Hours.
   No person shall leave or permit to be left out-of-doors food for any animal
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any one day and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day, unless the area where the food is left is not accessible to
nondomesticated mammalian predators.
(Ord. 3322, passed - -1989)
§ 32.1303   Garbage Containing Food Scraps.
   No person shall leave or permit to be left out-of-doors any garbage
containing food scraps without first securing said food scraps in closed
containers.
(Ord. 3322, passed - -1989)
§ 32.1304   Limited Applicability.
   Sections
32.1302 and
32.1303 shall be applicable only in the mountainous and foothill areas of the
County described as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the San
Bernardino and Los Angeles County line with the center line of State Highway
138; thence southeasterly along said center line to the north line of Section
1, Township 3 North, Range 7 West, San Bernardino Meridian, said point being
also on the northern boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest; thence
easterly along said boundary and continuing along said boundary, following all
of its various courses to the Northeast corner of Section 18, Township 3 North,
Range 5 West, San Bernardino Meridian; thence leaving said National Forest
boundary east along section lines to the northeast corner of Section 13,
Township 3 North, Range 4 West, San Bernardino Meridian; thence south along the
East line of said Section 13 to the northwest corner of Section 10, Township 3
North, Range 3 West, San Bernardino Meridian, said point being also on the
northern boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest; thence easterly along
said boundary and continuing along said boundary, following all of its various
courses to the San Bernardino and Riverside County line; thence leaving said
National Forest boundary Westerly along said County line to the southwest
corner of Section 8, Township 2 South, Range 1 West, San Bernardino Meridian;
thence north along section lines to the northwest corner of Section 32,
Township 1 South, Range 1 West, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along the
North line of said Section 32 to the southwest corner of Section 28; thence
north along the west line of Sections 28 and 21 to the Southeast corner of
Section 17; thence west along section lines to the center line of Bryant
Street; thence northwesterly along said center line to the center line of State
Highway 38; thence westerly along said center line of State Highway 38 to the
center line of Garnet Street; thence northerly along said center line of Garnet
Street to the center line of Florida Street; thence westerly along said center
line of Florida Street to the center line of Green Spot Road; thence northerly
and westerly along said center line of Green Spot Road to the eastern boundary
line of the City of Highland; thence northerly along said boundary and
continuing along said boundary, following all of its various courses to the
Northern boundary of the City of San Bernardino; thence westerly along said
northern boundary of the City of San Bernardino, following all of its various
courses to the center line of Interstate 215; thence leaving said boundary
northwesterly along said center line to the center line of Interstate 15;
thence southwesterly along said center line of Interstate 15 to the south line
of Section 13, Township 1 North, Range 6 West, San Bernardino Meridian; thence
west along section lines to the southwest corner of Section 16, Township 1
North, Range 7 West, San Bernardino Meridian, said point being on the boundary
of the City of Rancho Cucamonga; thence northerly, westerly and southerly along
said boundary to the northern boundary of the City of Upland; thence westerly
along said northern boundary of the City of Upland to the San Bernardino and
Los Angeles County line; thence northerly along said County line to the point
of beginning.
(Ord. 3322, passed - -1989)
§ 32.1305   Violation and Penalty.
   A person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction, punishable in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of this Code.
(Ord. 3322, passed - -1989)
§ 32.1306   Severability.
   If any provision or clause of this Chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held to be unconstitutional or to be otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect other sections, provisions, or clauses or applications thereof which can
be implemented without the invalid provision or clause or application, and to
this end the provisions and clauses of this Chapter are declared to be
severable.
(Ord. 3322, passed - -1989)
CHAPTER 14: POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
Section
   
32.1401   Purpose.
   
32.1402   Exceptions to Chapter.
   
32.1403   Determinations and Notice Process.
   
32.1404   Authority to Seize Animal Posing Immediate Threat to Public Safety.
   
32.1405   Disposition of Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Animals.
   
32.1406   Removal of Designation as Potentially Dangerous or Vicious.
   
32.1407   Conditions for Destroying Animal Found Vicious or Potentially
Dangerous.
   
32.1408   Conditions for Prohibiting Ownership of Vicious Animals.
   
32.1409   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
§ 32.1401   Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide regulations and procedures related
to the declaration, conditions for release and control, and the disposition and
destruction of potentially dangerous and vicious animals.
(Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.1402   Exceptions to Chapter.
   (a)   This Chapter does not apply to licensed kennels, humane society
shelters, animal control facilities or veterinary clinics.
   (b)   This Chapter shall not apply to any dog utilized by any police
department or any law enforcement officer in the performance of police or law
enforcement work.
(Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.1403   Determinations and Notice Process.
   (a)   Determination of Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Animal. If an Animal
Control Officer, after conducting an investigation, has determined that there
exists probable cause to believe that an animal is potentially dangerous or
vicious, he or she shall report the results of his or her investigation in
writing to the Chief Officer, who shall review said written report for the
purpose of determining whether or not the animal in question is potentially
dangerous or vicious.
   (b)   Complaints and Evidence. If the written report submitted by the Animal
Control Officer is based on a complaint or complaints received from a member of
the public, the Animal Control Officer shall require the complainant to put the
complaint in writing and sign it under penalty of perjury, so that it may be
offered as evidence at the Review Hearing described below. The Animal Control
Officer may also include in said report to the Chief Officer:
      (1)   If known, the animal’s previous history of biting, attacking, or
causing injury to a human being or animal;
      (2)   The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the behavior of
victims involved;
      (3)   The place where the bite, attack or injury occurred;
      (4)   The presence or absence of any provocation for the bite, attack or
injury;
      (5)   The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed;
      (6)   The extent to which the animal exhibits characteristics of
aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human
beings or domestic animals; and
      (7)   The extent to which the animal exhibits any characteristics of
being trained for fighting or attack and any evidence tending to show such
training.
   (c)   Hearing Before and Determination of Chief Officer.
      (1)   If the Chief Officer, after examining the written report of the
Animal Control Officer, determines that probable cause exists that the animal
is potentially dangerous or vicious, he or she shall mail a written notice to
the owner or keeper of the animal of a hearing to be presided over by the Chief
Officer for the purpose of determining whether or not the animal should be
declared potentially dangerous or vicious, which notice shall be mailed by
first class mail, postage prepaid, not less than 14 days before the date set
for the hearing, at which time the owner or keeper of the animal shall be given
an opportunity to present evidence as to why the animal should not be declared
potentially dangerous or vicious.
      (2)   At the hearing, the Chief Officer shall review all relevant
evidence, including the written report of the Animal Control Officer and any
evidence submitted by the owner or keeper. Following the hearing, the Chief
Officer shall prepare a written notice of determination as to whether or not
the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, and make whatever other orders
are authorized by this Chapter, and shall mail said notice of determination to
the owner or keeper by first class mail, postage prepaid. The Chief Officer
shall decide all issues for or against the owner or keeper of the animal if the
owner or keeper fails to appear at a scheduled determination hearing, and such
determination shall be final and conclusive and not subject to further review.
   (d)   Notice of Determination and Review Hearing.
      (1)   If a determination is made by the Chief Officer that the animal is
potentially dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with §
32.1405 in accordance with a time schedule established by the Chief Officer,
but in no case more than 30 days after the date of mailing of the notice of
determination.
      (2)   If the owner or keeper of the animal appeared at the hearing and
contests the determination, he or she may request a review hearing of the
decision of the Chief Officer. A written request for review must be actually
received in the Office of the Chief Officer within ten days of the mailing of
the notice of determination, or the right to review shall be deemed waived and
the notice of determination of the Chief Officer shall be final for all
purposes.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a request for review, the Chief Officer shall
convene an Administrative Review Panel to review the case. The Chief Officer
shall mail a written notice to the owner or keeper of the animal of a hearing
before and Administrative Review Panel for the purpose of reviewing the Chief
Officer’s notice of determination that the animal should be declared
potentially dangerous or vicious, which notice shall be mailed by first class
mail, postage prepaid, not less than 14 days before the date set for the
hearing, at which time the owner or keeper of the animal shall be given an
opportunity to present evidence as to why the Chief Officer’s notice of
determination that the animal should be declared potentially dangerous or
vicious is erroneous.
      At the review hearing, the Panel shall review the Chief Officer’s notice
of determination, and, if it deems it appropriate, all relevant evidence
considered by Chief Officer at the prior hearing. The Panel shall submit a
written recommendation to the Health Officer regarding the appropriateness of
the notice of determination of the Chief Officer and/or disposition of the
subject animal, and shall mail a copy of said written recommendation to the
owner or keeper by first class mail, postage prepaid. The Administrative Review
Panel may issue recommendations for or against the owner or keeper of the
animal if the owner or keeper fails to appear at a scheduled review hearing,
and such recommendations shall be final and conclusive and not subject to
further review.
      (4)   The Administrative Review Panel shall consist of three members
which shall be appointed by the Chief Officer: a representative of the Animal
Care and Control Program, but not the investigating officer or an officer with
knowledge of the case; a representative of a private veterinary or animal care
provider; and a representative of another public animal control agency.
      (5)   If the owner or keeper of the animal appeared at all hearings, the
Health Officer shall review the Chief Officer’s notice of determination and the
Administrative Review Panel’s recommendations thereon and make a finding as to
whether or not the animal is potentially dangerous or vicious, and make such
other orders authorized by this Chapter, and shall mail a copy of said findings
and orders to the owner or keeper by first class mail, postage prepaid.
      The findings and orders of the Health Officer shall be final and
conclusive upon all parties. If the Health Officer determines that an animal is
potentially dangerous or vicious, the Health Officer may establish a time
schedule to ensure compliance with this Chapter, but in no case more than 30
days subsequent to the date of the mailing of the Health Officer’s findings and
orders.
   (e)   Exceptions.
      (1)   An animal may be found not potentially dangerous or vicious if the
Chief Officer, Administrative Review Panel or Health Officer reasonably
determines any of the following:
         (A)   Any injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time
the injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass upon the
premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime upon the premises;
         (B)   The person who sustained the injury or damage was teasing,
tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal at the time;
         (C)   The animal was protecting or defending a person within the
immediate vicinity of the animal from an attack, assault, battery, crime or
attempt to commit an attack, assault, battery or crime by the person who
sustained the injury; or
         (D)   Any injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal, which,
at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting,
abusing or assaulting the animal.
      (2)   No dog may be declared potentially dangerous or vicious if the
injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the dog was working
as a hunting, herding, or a predator control dog and it was on the property of,
or under the control of, its owner or keeper and the damage or injury was to a
species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog.
(Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.1404   Authority to Seize Animal Posing Immediate Threat to Public Safety.
   If an Animal Control Officer has investigated and determined there exists
probable cause to believe an animal poses an immediate and serious threat to
the safety of the public, then the Animal Control Officer may seize and impound
the animal pending the hearing to be held pursuant to §
32.1403(c). If confinement is not contrary to public safety, the Chief Officer
may require the animal to be confined at the owner’s or keeper’s expense in a
kennel or veterinary facility approved by the Animal Care and Control Program.
(Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.1405   Disposition of Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Animals.
   (a)   Animal to Be Kept under Control at All Times.
      (1)   Control While on Owner’s or Keeper’s Premises. A potentially
dangerous or vicious animal, while on the owner’s or keeper’s property, shall
at all times be kept indoors or in an enclosure which shall secure the yard so
that the animal cannot escape and children cannot trespass. The enclosure shall
be approved by the Animal Care and Control Program and meet the following
criteria:
         (A)   The enclosure shall be constructed to prevent the going in of
the public or other animals and the entrance to the enclosure shall be locked
at all times while the animal is contained within the enclosure;
         (B)   The enclosure shall be six-sided, consisting of four walls, a
cover or roof and a permanent floor to prevent the animal from escaping by
either climbing or digging under the wall. If the bottom is not secured to the
sides, the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet;
         (C)   The animal shall be housed pursuant to the provisions of Penal
Code § 597t (adequate enclosed area). The minimum dimensions of the enclosure
shall measure five feet by ten feet and be of a height which does not restrict
the animal’s natural movements and which allows the owner or keeper into the
enclosure to maintain the animal.
         (D)   The enclosure shall be surrounded by a perimeter fence which
prevents the entry of the public onto the property of the owner or keeper but
which shall not serve in any part as a primary enclosure for the animal.
      (2)   Compliance Inspections. As a condition of maintaining a potentially
dangerous or vicious animal, its owner or keeper shall allow access to the
Animal Care and Control Program to inspect the premises to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m. daily. Prior notification of the inspection to the owner or keeper of the
potentially dangerous or vicious animal shall not be required.
      (3)   Control When Off Owner’s or Keeper’s Premises. At all times, when a
potentially dangerous or vicious animal is not on the premises of the owner or
keeper, the animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained by a leash. The
animal shall also be under the control of a person 18 years of age or older,
who is physically capable of restraining the animal.
   (b)   Warning Notice. The owner or keeper of the animal shall display, in a
prominent place upon the premises where the animal is kept or maintained, a
sign easily readable by the public using the words “DANGEROUS ANIMAL,” or
“VICIOUS ANIMAL,” as ordered by the Chief Officer or Health Officer after a
hearing or hearings pursuant to §
32.1403, in letters at least two inches in height.
   (c)   Permanent Identification of Animal. The owner or keeper of the animal
shall provide a permanent identification by means of either a registered tattoo
or implanted microchip that shall be registered with the Animal Care and
Control Program. A photograph of the animal shall be kept on record for
identification, in addition to registration as a dangerous animal or vicious
animal.
   (d)   Notice of Change of Location or Death of Animal.
      (1)   If an animal determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious
dies, is sold, transferred or permanently removed from the County, the owner or
keeper shall notify the Chief Officer of the changed condition(s) and new
location of the animal in writing within two working days of the changed
status.
      (2)   Animals determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious may be
relocated to other premises within the County only upon written notification to
the Animal Care and Control Program a minimum of five working days in advance
of the animal being physically transferred to new premises. Such physical
transfer requires the inspection and approval by an Animal Control Officer of
the new premises’ enclosure and perimeter fencing for compliance with §
32.1405.
   (e)   Licensing and Vaccination. All potentially dangerous and vicious dogs
shall be licensed and vaccinated in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 3 of the
County Code. The potentially dangerous or vicious dog designation shall be
included in the license records of the dog. A potentially dangerous or vicious
dog fee shall be charged in addition to the regular licensing fee to provide
for the increased costs of maintaining the records of the dog pursuant to San
Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
   (f)   Designated Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Animal Listing. All
animals designated potentially dangerous or vicious shall be recorded on a
listing maintained by the Animal Care and Control Program. Animals designated
potentially dangerous or vicious shall remain on the listing until the animal
dies, is permanently removed from the County, or is removed from designation
pursuant to §
32.1406.
(Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.1406   Removal of Designation as Potentially Dangerous or Vicious.
   If the owner or keeper demonstrates changes that mitigate the risk to public
safety to the satisfaction of the Chief Officer, the designation of potentially
dangerous or vicious shall be removed.
(Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.1407   Conditions for Destroying Animal Found Vicious or Potentially
Dangerous.
   (a)   An animal determined to be a vicious or potentially dangerous animal
may be destroyed by the Animal Care and Control Program when it is found, after
proceedings conducted under §
32.1403, that the release of the animal would create a significant threat to
the public health, safety and welfare. If it is determined that a vicious or
potentially dangerous animal may be released, the Chief Officer shall impose
conditions upon the ownership of the animal, including, but not limited to, the
conditions set forth in §
32.1405 in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (b)   An animal previously determined to be a vicious or potentially
dangerous animal may be destroyed by the Animal Care and Control Program when
it is found, after proceedings conducted under §
32.1403, that the owner or keeper of the animal has failed to comply with the
provisions of §
32.1405(a).
(Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.1408   Conditions for Prohibiting Ownership of Vicious Animals.
   The owner of an animal determined to be vicious or potentially dangerous may
be prohibited by the Health Officer from owning, possessing, controlling or
having custody of any other animals of dangerous propensities for a period of
up to three years, when it is found, after proceedings conducted under §
32.1403, that ownership or possession of such an animal by that person would
create a significant threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, as
determined by the Chief Officer.
(Ord. 3804, passed - -2000)
§ 32.1409   (Repealed by Ord. 4092, passed - -2009).
CHAPTER 15: CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH DOGS MUST BE SPAYED OR NEUTERED
Section
   
32.1501   Spaying and Neutering of Pit Bulls.
   
32.1502   Spaying or Neutering of Unaltered Dogs Other Than Pit Bulls.
   
32.1503   Captured, Received, Taken Up, or Impounded Unaltered Dogs Other Than
Pit Bulls.
   
32.1504   Appeal.
§ 32.1501 Spaying and Neutering of Pit Bulls.
   (a)   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 122331, no person shall own or
keep a Pit Bull over the age of four months which has not been spayed or
neutered, except as provided in Subdivision (b) below. For purposes of this
Section, “Pit Bull” is defined as any Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit
Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dog, or any mixed breed
of dog which contains, as an element of its breeding, any of these breeds so as
to be identifiable as partially of the breed of Staffordshire Bull Terrier or
American Pit Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier.
   (b)   The following Pit Bulls are exempt from Subdivision (a) above: a
purebred Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier or American
Staffordshire Terrier, recognized by and registered with the American Kennel
Club (AKC), United Kennel Club (UKC), or other national registry; a dog used by
a law enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes; a qualified service or
assistance dog as defined in Food and Agriculture Code § 30850; a dog which is
unable to be spayed or neutered without a high likelihood of suffering serious
bodily harm or death due to age or infirmity and the owner or keeper of such
dog provides to the Health Officer written confirmation of the condition from a
licensed veterinarian; a dog used for breeding at a licensed breeding kennel as
defined in §
32.0301.
(Ord. 4114, passed - -2010)
§ 32.1502 Spaying or Neutering of Unaltered Dogs Other Than Pit Bulls.
   (a)   No person may own or have custody of an unaltered dog over the age of
four months if such owner or custodian has been found to have violated any
State law or the County Code pertaining to the owner’s or custodian’s
obligations regarding such dog. The owner or custodian in such circumstance
must have the dog spayed or neutered or provide a certificate of sterility to
the Health Officer or his or her designee (hereinafter referred to as the
“Health Officer”).
   (b)   The owner or custodian of an unaltered dog is exempt from the
requirements of §
32.1502(a) if:
      (1)   The dog is unable to be spayed or neutered without a high
likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death due to age or infirmity.
Written confirmation of that fact from a licensed veterinarian must be
submitted by the owner or custodian to the Health Officer in order for this
exemption to apply. The writing must also state the date by which the dog may
be safely spayed or neutered.
      (2)   The dog is one of the following: a competition dog that has
competed in at least one dog show or sporting competition sanctioned by a
national registry within the last 365 calendar days or has earned a
conformation, obedience, agility, carting, herding, protection, rally,
sporting, working or other title from a purebred dog registry; a purebred dog,
recognized by and registered with the American Kennel Club (AKC), United Kennel
Club (UKC), or other national registry; a dog used by a law enforcement agency
for law enforcement purposes; a qualified service or assistance dog as defined
in Food and Agriculture § 30850; a dog used for breeding at a licensed breeding
kennel as defined in §
32.0301; or a dog possessed by an owner or custodian who possesses a valid
license pursuant to §
32.0111 or §
32.0112. The owner or custodian must provide sufficient written proof of such
status of the dog in order for this exemption to apply.
(Ord. 4150, passed - -2011)
§ 32.1503 Captured, Received, Taken Up, or Impounded Unaltered Dogs Other Than
Pit Bulls.
   (a)   When an unaltered dog is captured, received, taken up, or impounded
pursuant to §
32.0102(a), the dog shall be spayed or neutered as set forth below.
      (1)   The dog may be released to the owner or custodian with written
notice provided to the owner or custodian that the owner or custodian must
within ten calendar days of such release have the dog spayed or neutered and
submit a statement signed by a licensed veterinarian confirming such spaying or
neutering. Failure to comply with such noticed requirements is a violation of
this Code.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Subdivision (a)(1), the Health Officer, solely at
his or her own discretion, may have the dog spayed or neutered by a
veterinarian designated by the Health Officer, prior to releasing the dog to
the owner or custodian. The owner or custodian shall be liable for all costs
associated with such spaying or neutering, including the time expended by the
Health Officer, based on the hourly rate set forth in §
16.0213A(b)(1). The owner or custodian must pay such costs prior to the release
of the dog to the owner or custodian.
   (b)   The owner or custodian of an unaltered dog is exempt from the
requirements of §
32.1503(a) if the owner or custodian complies with §
32.1502(b).
   (c)   If such dog is impounded, the costs of impoundment shall be a lien on
the dog, and the dog shall not be returned to its owner or custodian until the
costs are paid. If the owner or custodian of an impounded unaltered dog does
not pay the lien against the dog in full within ten calendar days of notice of
impoundment, the dog shall be deemed abandoned to the Health Officer in
accordance with §
32.0102(a)(1)(E).
(Ord. 4150, passed - -2011)
§ 32.1504 Appeal.
   (a)   If an owner or custodian claims that his or her dog is exempt from the
spaying or neutering requirements pursuant to §
32.1501 or §
32.1502, but the Health Officer has determined that the dog does not qualify
for such exemption, the owner or custodian may file with the Health Officer a
written appeal contesting the determination. Any such appeal must be filed
within five calendar days of notice of the determination otherwise the right to
appeal is deemed waived.
   (b)   At a noticed appeal hearing before the Chief Officer or designee
(hereinafter “Chief Officer”), relevant evidence may be submitted by the
parties. Following the hearing, the Chief Officer shall prepare a written
notice of findings and determination as to whether an exemption to the spaying
or neutering requirements exists under §
32.1501 or §
32.1502 and shall transmit said notice of findings and determination to the
owner or custodian by first class mail, postage prepaid, or by other reasonable
means of service. The owner's or custodian’s failure to appear at the hearing
shall constitute a waiver of appeal. The findings and orders of the Chief
Officer shall be final and conclusive upon all parties.
(Ord. 4150, passed - -2011)
DIVISION 3: ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
CHAPTER 1: AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
33.0101   Intent and Enforcement Authority.
   
33.0102   Scope of Authority.
   
33.0103   Validity and Severability; Existing Law Continued.
   
33.0104   Continuing Violations.
   
33.0105   No Liability/No Warranty.
   
33.0106   Authority to Investigate, Detain and/or Issue Citation.
   
33.0107   Interference Unlawful/Criminal Penalties For.
   
33.0108   Freedom of Information.
   
33.0109   Administrative Process for Permitted Facilities.
   
33.0110   Enforcement Remedies and Penaltiesare Cumulative and Discretionary;
Not Exclusive; Declaration of Public Nuisance.
   
33.0111   Civil Actions.
   
33.0112   Criminal Actions.
   
33.0113   Administrative Citation Actions.
   
33.0114   Notice of Action.
   
33.0115   Definitions Generally.
§ 33.0101   Intent and Enforcement Authority.
   Pursuant to the Health and Safety Code §§ 120125 et seq., §§ 101025 et seq.,
§§ 101375 et seq., §§ 101450 et seq., §§ 101275 et seq., Public Resources Code
§§ 21050 et seq. (Environmental Quality Act of 1970), and other relevant State
authority, this jurisdiction has found that the public’s interest will be best
served by all Environmental Health Services and related Consumer Protection
Programs within the borders of San Bernardino County being enforced and
administered through the Department of Environmental Health Services (“DEHS”)
of the County of San Bernardino. The Director and Enforcement Officers of DEHS
are hereby authorized to enforce and administer all State law pertaining to
environmental health and all provisions of this Environmental Health Code (E.H.
Code) within this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1942; Am. Ord. 810, passed - -1956; Am. Ord. 850, passed -
-1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0102   Scope of Authority.
   This authority is granted to the Director and Enforcement Officers of DEHS.
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 101310, during declared states of
emergency, the County Health Officer shall have supervision and control over
all DEHS programs and personnel. DEHS shall enforce all California Health and
Safety Code provisions pertaining to Environmental Health, other relevant State
law, and the provisions of this E.H. Code, within available resources. DEHS may
charge reasonable fees for their services, including fees as are prescribed by
the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1942; Am. Ord. 810, passed - -1956; Am. Ord. 850, passed -
-1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0103   Validity and Severability; Existing Law Continued.
   (a)   Validity and Severability.  This E.H. Code shall not be in conflict
with State or Federal law. If any provision of this E.H. Code or the
application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this E.H. Code are
severable.
   (b)   Existing Law Continued. The provisions of this E.H. Code, insofar as
they are substantially the same as provisions of existing laws and ordinances
relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements,
continuations, and amendments thereof, and not as new enactments.
(Ord. 527, passed --1942; Am. Ord. 810, passed --1956; Am. Ord. 850, passed --
1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed --1986; Am. Ord. 4093, passed - -2009)
§ 33.0104   Continuing Violations.
   Each and every day, and any portion of which, any violation of this E.H.
Code is committed, continued, or permitted shall be deemed a new and separate
offense and shall be punishable or actionable as set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 527, passed --1942; Am. Ord. 810, passed --1956; Am. Ord. 850, passed --
1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed --1986; Am. Ord. 4093, passed - -2009)
§ 33.0105   No Liability/No Warranty.
   DEHS and its employees or agents shall not be held liable for any act or
omission to act when in “good faith” reliance upon State law, or the ordinances
and codes of this jurisdiction, of this E.H. Code, and upon current DEHS
policies and procedures. DEHS and its employees or agents shall not be held
liable for the negligence of, nor as the guarantor of proper performance, by
any person or entity holding any license, permit, certificate, registration,
privilege, or other entitlement from DEHS.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1942; Am. Ord. 810, passed - -1956; Am. Ord. 850, passed -
-1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0106   Authority to Investigate, Detain and/or Issue Citation.
   (a)    All persons authorized to enforce the provisions of this E.H. Code
are authorized to enter upon any property or premises within the unincorporated
areas of the County of San Bernardino to investigate violations of this E.H.
Code, and to make any inspection as may be necessary in the performance of
their enforcement duties, subject to constitutional constraints and laws
respecting the rights of privacy. These investigations and inspections may
include the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence, and the
making of video and/or audio recordings. All such entries and inspections shall
be done in a reasonable manner. If an owner, lawful occupant, or the respective
agent, employee, or representative thereof, will not consent to the entry and/
or inspection, the County may seek an administrative inspection warrant
pursuant to the procedures provided by Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1822.50
through 1822.59, as may be amended from time to time, or the successor
provisions thereto and related case law.
   (b)   DEHS Enforcement Officers are authorized to issue citations (criminal
and administrative) for violations of this E.H. Code in the same manner and
under the same authority as provided at §§
11.0206 and
11.0208 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 527, passed --1942; Am. Ord. 810, passed --1956; Am. Ord. 850, passed --
1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed --1986; Am. Ord. 4093, passed - -2009)
§ 33.0107   Interference Unlawful/Criminal Penalties For.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to deny access, interfere
with, prevent, restrict, obstruct, or hinder DEHS employees or agents acting
within the scope of their duty or agency. Offering physical resistance or
bodily attack upon authorized representatives of DEHS acting within the scope
of their duty or agency is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the
County jail for not less than ten days, without the alternative of a fine.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1942; Am. Ord. 810, passed - -1956; Am. Ord. 850, passed -
-1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0108   Freedom of Information.
   In accordance with Government Code §§ 6250 et seq., generally, all DEHS
routine inspection activities and files shall be readily accessible to public
inspection. DEHS may charge reasonable fees to cover the administrative costs
of making such information available. In the absence of a specific court order,
DEHS shall not disclose to the public any information concerning complainants,
epidemiological studies, medical records, criminal investigations, private
matters, trade secrets, or any information which would reveal the identity of
any person who gave information to DEHS in confidence, or otherwise violate any
person’s right to privacy. Administrative procedures for information requests
shall include in person identification of the requestor from suitable photo
identification and completion of a request form, showing what information was
requested and the requestor’s name and address, a copy of which DEHS shall make
available to the permit holder or other affected parties.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1942; Am. Ord. 810, passed - -1956; Am. Ord. 850, passed -
-1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0109   Administrative Process for Permitted Facilities.
   Every DEHS Administrative Hearing and related activity for permitted
facilities shall properly consider all constitutional due process principles
and generally proceed as provided in
Chapter 2 and
Chapter 3 of this E.H. Code.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1942; Am. Ord. 810, passed - -1956; Am. Ord. 850, passed -
-1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4093, passed - -2009)
§ 33.0110   Enforcement Remedies and Penalties are Cumulative and
Discretionary; Not Exclusive; Declaration of Public Nuisance.
   All remedies and penalties provided for in this Chapter shall be cumulative
and discretionary and not exclusive of other applicable provisions of this E.
H. Code or other applicable State or Federal law. Each and every violation of
this E. H. Code is hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance. The
conviction and punishment (whether by fine, imprisonment, or both) of any
person hereunder pursuant to a criminal action, or the imposition of a monetary
administrative penalty pursuant to an administrative citation (as defined in §
33.0113), shall not relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting,
removing, or abating the violation; nor prevent the enforced correction,
removal, or abatement thereof by the County, its employees, agents, or
representatives. The correction, removal, or abatement of a violation begun
after the issuance of a criminal citation or the filing of a criminal complaint
shall not be a defense to the infraction or misdemeanor so charged and,
following a conviction or plea of nolo contendere shall not be grounds for
dismissal of the action or for the waiver, stay, or reduction, of any fine
established in this Chapter. Further, the procedures established in this
Chapter for the use of administrative citations, and the procedures established
in other titles and chapters of this E. H. Code for administrative abatement
and summary abatement as a means for addressing violations of this E. H. Code,
shall be in addition to criminal and civil or other legal or equitable remedies
established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this E. H.
Code. The use of this Chapter shall be at the sole discretion of this County.
In the exercise of such discretion in selecting an appropriate code enforcement
remedy, the County shall not be required to institute available code
enforcement remedies in any particular order, or to prefer the application of
one remedy to another.
(Am. Ord. 3105, passed --1986; Am. Ord. 4093, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4102,
passed - -2010)
§ 33.0111   Civil Actions.
   (a)   Injunctive Relief and Abatement. At the request of any person
authorized to enforce this E.H. Code, the County Counsel or District Attorney
may commence proceedings for the abatement, removal, correction and enjoinment
of any act or omission that constitutes or will constitute a violation of this
E.H. Code, or any permit issued pursuant to this E.H. Code, or any condition(s)
of approval for such permit granted pursuant thereto, and an order requiring
the violator(s) to pay civil penalties and/or abatement costs. Where multiple
violators are involved, they shall be jointly and severally liable for the
civil penalties and/or abatement costs.
   (b)   Civil Remedies and Penalties. Any person, whether acting as principal,
agent, employee, owner, lessor, lessee, landlord, tenant, occupant, operator,
contractor, or otherwise, who violates any provision of this E.H. Code, or any
permit issued pursuant to this E.H. Code, or any condition(s) of approval for
such permit granted pursuant thereto, shall be liable for a civil penalty not
to exceed $1,000.00 per violation for each day or any portion thereof, that the
violation continues to exist. In determining the amount of civil penalty to be
imposed, both as to the daily rate and the subsequent total amount for any
given violation, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances,
including, but not limited to: the extent of the harm caused by the conduct
constituting the violation; the nature and persistence of such conduct; the
length of time over which the conduct occurred or was repeated; the assets,
liabilities, and net worth of the violator; whether the violator is a corporate
entity or an individual; and, any corrective action taken by the violator.
   (c)   Attorney’s Fees and Costs of Enforcement. In any civil action brought
by the County, including but not limited to a proceeding to abate a public
nuisance, whether by seeking injunctive relief and/or an abatement order, or
other order, attorney’s fees and costs of enforcement may be recovered by the
prevailing party. Such recovered attorney’s fees shall not exceed the amount of
reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the County in that action or proceeding
(Government Code § 25845). Costs of enforcement shall include, but not be
limited to, administrative costs and any and all costs incurred in the physical
abatement of any nuisance and any and all costs incurred by the County in the
correction or remedying of a violation of the E.H. Code. Notwithstanding the
above language, no attorney’s fees shall be recovered in any administrative
proceeding held pursuant to §
33.0113 or any related appeal to the Superior Court or the Courts of Appeal.
(Am. Ord. 3105, passed --1986; Am. Ord. 4093, passed - -2009)
§ 33.0112   Criminal Actions.
   (a)   Criminal Penalties for Violations. It is unlawful for any person to
violate any provision of this E.H. Code, or to violate any provision of any
permit issued pursuant to this E.H. Code or the conditions of approval for such
permit granted pursuant to this E.H. Code. Unless otherwise specified in
another part of this E.H. Code, any person committing such violation shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor as hereinafter specified.
      (1)    Misdemeanor Violations. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, or upon
a plea of nolo contendere (commonly called “no contest”), the penalty shall be
a base fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or by
imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six months, or by
both such base fine and imprisonment. Any court costs that the court may
otherwise be required to impose pursuant to applicable State law or local
ordinance shall be imposed in addition to the base fine.
      (2)   Infraction Violations. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a misdemeanor
violation may be cited, charged, and prosecuted as an infraction. Where so
prosecuted, or where specified in a section or chapter of this E.H Code that
the violation of a certain section or sections shall be an infraction, then
that shall be the type of offense and each such violation shall be punishable,
except as otherwise provided herein, upon conviction or upon a plea of nolo
contendere by a base fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; a base
fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same E.H. Code section
within one year; and a base fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional
violation of the same E.H. Code section within one year of the first violation.
The maximum fines imposed in this section are based upon the provisions of
Government Code § 25132 and will be increased automatically and without
amendment to this section upon any amendment to Government Code § 25132
increasing the amount of fines permitted. Any court costs that the court may
otherwise be required to impose pursuant to applicable state law or local
ordinance shall be imposed in addition to the base fine.
   (b)   Criminal Citations.
      (1)   If any person is arrested by a peace officer, fire marshal, fire
prevention officer, code enforcement officer, animal control officer, public
health officer, or any other officer authorized to enforce this E.H. Code for a
violation of any provision of this E.H. Code (hereinafter “arresting officer”),
whether punishable as a misdemeanor or as an infraction, the arresting officer
shall issue a notice to appear (the citation) to such person, pursuant to Penal
Code §§ 853.5 and 853.6, and request that the person sign the notice to appear,
which shall constitute the person’s written promise to appear in court. After
obtaining the written promise to appear, the arresting officer must immediately
release the person.
      (2)   If the person cited refuses to sign the notice to appear, the
arresting officer, unless the arresting officer is a sworn peace officer, must
immediately release the person and refer the matter to the Office of County
Counsel or other appropriate agency for appropriate action.
(Am. Ord. 3105, passed --1986; Am. Ord. 3585, passed --1994; Am. Ord. 4093,
passed - -2009)
§ 33.0113   Administrative Citation Actions.
   (a)   Application. With the exception of licensing related violations
pertaining to permitted facilities subject to enforcement under §
33.0109 of this E.H. Code, all violations of any provision of this E.H. Code,
are subject to enforcement through the use of administrative citations in
accordance with Government Code § 53069.4. Administrative citations may be
issued for any violation of this E.H. Code including but not limited to those
violations not occurring in the presence of the Enforcement Officer (as defined
below) issuing the citation where the issuing officer determines through
investigation that the responsible party (as defined below) committed, caused,
allowed, or is otherwise responsible for the violation. The following
procedures shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection, administrative
review, and judicial review of administrative citations and penalties.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, certain words are
defined as follows:
      ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION. A citation issued pursuant to this Chapter,
stating that one or more violations of this E.H. Code has occurred and stating
the amount of the administrative penalty to be paid by the responsible party.
      ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS. All costs incurred by or on behalf of the County
from the first discovery of the violation of this E.H. Code through the appeal
process and until compliance is achieved, including but not limited to, staff
time in investigating the violation, inspecting the property where the
violation occurred, preparing investigation reports, sending notices, preparing
for and attending any appeal hearing, telephone contacts, and correspondence.
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS shall not include attorney’s fees.
      CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY OF SAN BERNARDINO, and SAN BERNARDINO
COUNTY CODE and SBCC. The Codified Ordinances of San Bernardino County,
including all pertinent provisions of State codes as from time to time adopted
and incorporated therein, enacted by the Board of Supervisors of the County of
San Bernardino, acting pursuant to authority granted under the County Charter,
Government Code §§ 25126, 25127, and 25128; or other applicable law.
      COUNTY. San Bernardino County and, as it is also known, the County of San
Bernardino, a political subdivision of the State of California, as enacted by
the State Legislature by the Statutes of California passed at the Fourth
Session of the Legislature, Chapter LXXVIII, April 26, 1853.
      E.H. CODE. The Codified Ordinances of San Bernardino County located at
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any County employee, Special District employee, or
agent of the County with the authority to enforce any provision of this Code,
specifically:
         (A)   The Deputy Director, each Code Enforcement Supervisor, and each
Code Enforcement Officer or other designated employee of the Code Enforcement
Division of the Land Use Services Department;
         (B)   The Building Official, each Regional Building and Safety
Supervisor, each Building Inspector, and other designated employees of the
Building and Safety Division of the Land Use Services Department;
         (C)   The Fire Chief/Fire Warden, Fire Marshal, and other designated
employees of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District;
         (D)   The Director, each Inspector, and other designated employees of
the Environmental Health Services Division of the Department of Public Health;
         (E)   The Division Chief, each Animal Control Supervisor/Officer, and
other designated employees of the Animal Care and Control Program of the
Department of Public Health;
         (F)   The Sheriff-Coroner, each Deputy Sheriff (all ranks), and other
designated employees of the Department of the Sheriff-Coroner;
         (G)   The Director and other designated employees of the Public Works
Department; and
         (H)   Any other Director and other designated employees of a County
Department or Special District as designated by the County Administrative
Officer or the Board of Supervisors.
      ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CODE and E.H. CODE. 
Division 3: Environmental Health of Title 3: Health and Sanitation and Animal
Regulations of the San Bernardino County Code.
      PERSON. Without limitation, any natural person, firm, association, club,
organization, corporation, partnership, business, business trust, company or
other entity, which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties.
      RESPONSIBLE PARTY. For the purpose of this Chapter shall mean:
         (A)   Each person, other than a minor, who commits or causes a
violation of any provision of this E.H. Code to occur, exist, or continue;
         (B)   Each person who is the parent or legal guardian of the minor
person who commits or causes a violation of any provision of this E.H. Code to
occur, exist, or continue;
         (C)   Each person who has a legal or equitable ownership interest in
any parcel of real property located within the unincorporated area of the
County of San Bernardino and who commits, causes, or otherwise allows the
violation of any provision of this E.H. Code to occur, exist, or continue on
such parcel; and
         (D)   Each person who, although not an owner, nevertheless has a legal
right or legal obligation to exercise possession and control over any parcel of
real property located within the unincorporated area of the County of San
Bernardino and who commits, causes, or otherwise allows the violation of any
provision of this E.H. Code to occur, exist, or continue on such parcel; and
         (E)   In addition to the business entity itself, each person who is an
owner of that business entity in those cases in which the commission,
occurrence, existence, or continuation of the violation of any provision of
this E.H. Code is most reasonably attributable to that business entity and not
to an employee of that business entity.
   (c)   Content of Citation. The administrative citation shall be issued on a
form approved by the County Administrative Officer in consultation with County
Counsel. The administrative citation form may be tailored to the specific needs
of the issuing department as approved by the County Administrative Officer;
however, all administrative citations regardless of the issuing County
Department shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and mailing address of the responsible party.
      (2)   The administrative citation shall refer to the date(s) and location
of the violation and the approximate time(s), if applicable, that the violation
was observed.
      (3)   The administrative citation shall identify each violation by the
applicable Section number of this E.H. Code and by either the Section’s title
or a brief descriptive caption; or by reference to the applicable permit
describing the condition violated.
      (4)   The administrative citation shall describe the action(s) required
to correct the violations.
      (5)   The administrative citation shall require the responsible party to
immediately correct the violation where appropriate or otherwise indicate a
reasonable compliance deadline date and shall explain the consequences of
failure to correct the violation.
      (6)   The administrative citation shall state the amount of the penalty,
if any, imposed for the violation. Multiple violations may be listed on the
same citation form. In the event of multiple violations, the administrative
citation shall list the penalty amount for each violation and the total amount
of all of the penalties. For continuing violations pertaining to building,
plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues, and where
such continuing violations do not create an immediate danger to health or
safety, the administrative citation shall provide for a reasonable period of
time to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the imposition of
the penalty. Otherwise, the penalty may be imposed immediately.
      (7)   The administrative citation shall contain a notation box for the
Enforcement Officer to indicate whether or not the citation is issued as a
“warning only” and without penalty. The administrative citation shall also
include a notation box that may be used by the Enforcement Officer to indicate
that the penalty will be waived if the violation is corrected by the compliance
deadline date indicated on the citation form.
      (8)   The administrative citation shall explain how the penalty shall be
paid and the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of
failure to pay the penalty within this time period.
      (9)   The administrative citation shall identify all appeal rights and
include instructions on how to appeal the citation, including instructions
regarding the advance deposit hardship waiver.
      (10)   The administrative citation shall contain the printed name and the
signature of the Enforcement Officer issuing the citation and, where reasonably
possible to obtain it, the signature of the responsible party (or managing
employee if the responsible party is a business entity), if he or she can be
located, as set forth in Subdivision (d) below.
   (d)   Service of Citation.
      (1)   If the responsible party is present at the scene of the violation,
the Enforcement Officer shall attempt to obtain their signature on the
administrative citation and shall deliver a copy of the administrative citation
to them.
      (2)   If the responsible party is a business, and the business owner is
on the premises, the Enforcement Officer shall attempt to deliver the
administrative citation to the business owner. If the Enforcement Officer is
unable to serve the business owner on the premises and the Enforcement Officer
can only locate the manager or on-site supervisor, the administrative citation
may be issued in the name of the business and a copy given to the manager or
on-site supervisor. A copy of the administrative citation shall also be mailed
to the business owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by first
class mail. If a copy of the administrative citation that is sent by certified
mail is returned by the United States Postal Service unsigned or marked
“unclaimed” and/or “refused”, then service by first class mail shall be deemed
effective provided it is also not returned by the United States Postal Service.
      (3)   If a responsible party cannot be located at the property, then a
copy of the administrative citation shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
or near that property, if practicable, and a copy mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and by first class mail, to each responsible party at
their last known addresses as they appear on the last County equalized
assessment role, or any other available public records related to title or
ownership of the property that is the subject of the administrative citation.
If the copy of the administrative citation sent by certified mail to a
responsible party is returned by the United States Postal Service with the mail
receipt unsigned, or marked “unclaimed” and/or “refused”, then service by first
class mail shall be deemed effective provided it is also not returned by the
United States Postal Service.
      (4)   The failure of any responsible party to receive a copy of the
administrative citation shall not affect the validity of the proceedings.
   (e)   Administrative Penalties and Costs.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided in this E.H. Code, the amount of penalty
to be imposed for a violation of this E.H. Code and assessed by means of an
administrative citation shall be $100.00 for the first occurrence of a
violation; $200.00 for the second occurrence of the same violation within one
year; and $500.00 for the third and each subsequent occurrence of the same
violation within one year. The maximum fines imposed in this section are based
upon the provisions of Government Code § 25132 and will be increased
automatically and without amendment to this Section upon any amendment to
Government Code § 25132 increasing the amount of fines permitted.
      (2)   If the violation is not corrected within the time limits
established in this E.H. Code, then additional administrative citations may be
issued for the same violation. The amount of the penalty shall increase at the
rate specified above.
         (A)   Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct
the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the County.
         (B)   The penalties assessed shall be due to the County (or to the
County’s designated collection/processing agent for the issuing County
Department) within 30 calendar days from the date the administrative citation
is issued.
         (C)   Except as provided below, any person who fails to pay to the
County (or the County’s designated collection/processing agent for the issuing
County Department) any penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter shall be liable for payment of the applicable late payment charges as
follows:
            (I)   For payments received within 30 days after the due date, a
late fee in the amount of 50 percent of the administrative fine is due.
            (II)   For payments received more than 30 days after the due date,
a late fee in the amount of 50 percent of the original administrative fine is
due, plus an additional 50 percent of the original administrative fine is due.
         (D)   The County may collect any past due administrative citation
penalty or late payment charge by use of any available means, including without
limitation, the recording of a notice of lien, describing the real property
affected and the amount of the costs and administrative citation penalties
claimed by the County with the Office of the County Recorder. The County may
transmit notice of the award of administrative costs and administrative
citation penalties, or notice of the judgment thereon arising from a collection
or other legal action, to the Treasurer/Tax Collector who shall place the
amount thereof on the assessment role as a special assessment to be paid with
County taxes, unless sooner paid. The County may also recover its collection
costs. A judgment or award of such costs, penalties or damages may be enforced
as set forth above and may also be enforced in any other manner and under the
same authority as provided by law.
         (E)   In any appeal hearing, the issuing County Department may also
recover its administrative costs incurred in investigating, inspecting, and
abating or remedying the violation of the E.H. Code, in attempting to collect
any and all penalties and late fees, and in defending the citation at the
appeal hearing.
         (F)   All administrative citation penalties collected pursuant to
these provisions shall be deposited into specific funds maintained by or on
behalf of the respective issuing County Departments for the purpose of funding
their enforcement of this E.H. Code.
   (f)   Appeal of Administrative Citation.
      (1)   Notice of Appeal. Any responsible party in whose name an
administrative citation has been issued may appeal the administrative citation
by filing a written notice of appeal with the County Department that issued the
administrative citation. If the issuing County Department has designated a
processing agent, then the responsible party shall file their written notice of
appeal with the issuing County Department’s designated processing agent. The
written notice of appeal must be filed within 20 calendar days of the date the
administrative citation was served in a manner set forth in Division (d) of
this Section. The written notice of appeal shall be filed together with an
advance deposit, consisting of a cashier's check, for the full amount of the
penalty stated on the administrative citation. Failure to file a written notice
of appeal and the full amount of the advance deposit within this time period
shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the administrative citation.
      (2)   Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver. Any person intending to appeal an
administrative citation and who is financially unable to make the advance
deposit as required by this Section may file a written request for an advance
deposit hardship waiver. The written request must be filed prior to filing the
notice of appeal. The written request shall be filed with the issuing County
Department. A County-approved form shall be made for this purpose. The person
requesting the advance deposit hardship waiver shall indicate on the
corresponding notice of appeal that an advance deposit hardship waiver request
has been submitted.
      (3)   Advance Deposit Hardship Waiver Evaluation Procedures. Pending a
decision by the County Department’s Director, or the Director’s designee to
grant or deny the request, the advance deposit requirement shall be stayed and
no administrative hearing shall be scheduled. The Director, or the Director’s
designee, may waive the advance deposit requirement and issue a waiver only if
the person requesting the waiver submits to the Director’s attention a sworn
affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, reasonably
demonstrating to the Director the person’s actual financial inability to submit
the advance deposit in advance of the appeal hearing. Within ten days of
receipt of the advance deposit hardship waiver request, the Director or the
Director’s designee shall issue a written decision to grant or deny the
request. If the request is denied the written decision shall explain the reason
(s) for the denial of the waiver and shall state the due date for payment of
the advance deposit. The written decision of the Director, or the Director’s
designee, shall be sent by first class mail to the requesting party and shall
be final. An administrative hearing shall not be scheduled until the advance
deposit is received. If the request is denied and the advance deposit is not
remitted within the time frame indicated in the written decision, the right to
an appeal shall be deemed waived and payment of the administrative penalty
shall become due immediately. The amount due shall be subject to all applicable
late fees, which shall accrue from the original due date as indicated on the
administrative citation.
      (4)   Contents of Notice of Appeal. The notice of appeal shall be
submitted on County-approved forms and shall contain the following information:
         (A)   A brief statement setting forth the appealing person’s
(hereinafter “appellant”) interest in the proceedings;
         (B)   A brief statement of the material facts which the appellant
claims supports their contention that they did not commit, cause, or otherwise
allow a violation of one or more provisions of this E.H. Code to occur, exist,
or continue as alleged in the administrative citation at issue; or that they
are not a responsible party as defined at §
33.0113(b)(9) of this Chapter.
         (C)   A mailing address at which the appellant agrees that notice of
any additional proceeding, or an order relating to the imposition of an
administrative citation penalty, shall be received and accepted by the
appellant by first class mail.
         (D)   The notice of appeal must be signed and dated by the appellant.
      (5)   Administrative Hearing. The resolution of an appeal of an
administrative citation issued under the authority of this Section shall be by
an administrative hearing conducted according to the procedures set forth in
this Section. The provisions of SBCC at Title 1: Government and Administration,
Division 2: Departments, Offices, Commissions,
Chapter 27: Administrative Hearings; County Hearing Officer, shall not apply.
Upon the issuing County Department’s designated processing agent’s receipt of a
timely, written notice of appeal from the appellant, an administrative hearing
shall be held as follows:
         (A)   Hearing Date Set. The date of the hearing shall be set for a
date that is no later than 60 days from the date the notice of appeal is
received by the issuing County Department’s processing agent, unless otherwise
stayed by the timely submission of an advance deposit hardship waiver, as
indicated above.
         (B)   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the administrative hearing shall be
given to the appellant at least ten calendar days before the hearing. The
notice may be delivered to the appellant or mailed by first class mail to the
address listed in the notice of appeal. Neither personal service nor service by
certified mail shall be required.
         (C)   Hearing Officer. The administrative hearing shall be held before
the Director of the issuing County Department or his or her designee. The
hearing officer shall not be the Enforcement Officer who issued the
administrative citation or their immediate supervisor. The Director of the
issuing County Department, through the County’s contracting process, may
contract with a qualified provider for administrative processing and collection
services to provide hearing officers to conduct administrative hearings and
process administrative citations, including the collection of payment of
administrative citation penalties, administrative costs, and late charges.
            The Board of Supervisors finds that contracting with a qualified
provider for administrative hearing officers as set forth in this section is
equivalent to the establishment of an office of County hearing officer as
provided for and for the purpose intended by Government Code § 25845(i). The
Board of Supervisors further finds that the decision of the hearing officer so
appointed shall be deemed a recommendation adopted by the Board of Supervisors
without further notice, and shall be deemed equivalent to and for the purpose
intended by Government Code § 25845(h).
         (D)   Conduct of the Hearing.
            (I)   The Enforcement Officer who issued the administrative
citation shall not be required to participate in the administrative hearing.
The contents of the Enforcement Officer’s case file shall be admitted as prima
facie evidence of the facts stated therein. The hearing officer shall not be
limited by the technical or formal rules of evidence. The issuing County
Department shall bear the burden of proof at the administrative hearing to
establish the existence of a violation of this E.H. Code by a preponderance of
the evidence. The hearing officer shall have the discretion to exclude evidence
if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the probability that its
admission will cause an undue consumption of time. The Enforcement Officer
establishing or confirming the occurrence or existence of a violation of this
E.H. Code shall be deemed the complaining or reporting party. Personal or other
identifying information regarding any other reporting party shall be deemed
both irrelevant and subject to the federal and state constitutional rights of
privacy; and, therefore, shall not be subject to review or disclosure.
            (II)   Provided that proper notice of the administrative hearing
has been served as required by this or other applicable chapters of this E.H.
Code, an appellant who fails to appear at the administrative hearing shall be
deemed to have waived each of the following: the right to such hearing, the
adjudication of issues presented at the hearing, and any and all rights
afforded to the appellant under this E.H. Code. The appellant shall also be
deemed to have failed to exhaust their administrative remedies.
            (III)   Notwithstanding subsection (II) above, if the appellant
fails to appear at the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall make
their determination based on the information contained in the Enforcement
Officer’s case file and the appellant’s notice of appeal.
            (IV)   The only evidence that shall be permitted at the
administrative hearing and considered by the administrative hearing officer in
reaching a decision, is that evidence which is relevant to the proof or
disproof of:
                  (i)   Ownership of the subject property, when applicable;
                  (ii)   Whether a person noticed by the issuing County
Department as a responsible party is, in fact, a responsible party;
                  (iii)   Whether a violation of this E.H. Code occurred and/or
continues to occur on the date or dates specified in the administrative
citation;
                  (iv)   Whether the responsible party has committed, caused,
maintained, or permitted a violation of this E.H. Code on the date or dates
specified on the administrative citation;
                  (v)   The County’s administrative costs.
   (g)   Hearing Officer’s Ruling.
      (1)   After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the hearing officer shall take the matter under submission. The
hearing officer shall within a reasonable time issue a written ruling
(“Administrative Citation Appeal Ruling” or “Ruling”) to uphold or cancel the
administrative citation, as to each violation, and shall list in the ruling the
reasons for that decision.
      (2)   If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation
should be upheld, then the amount of the penalties set forth in the citation
shall not be reduced or waived for any reason. As to an administrative citation
listing multiple violations, the amount of penalties for the violations so
upheld shall not be reduced or waived for any reason. This Division (g) shall
not apply to “warning only” administrative citations or to any administrative
citation that indicates on its face that the penalty will be waived if the
violation is corrected by the deadline compliance date and the violation is so
corrected.
      (3)   If the hearing officer cancels the administrative citation, then no
penalty shall be assessed and any penalty otherwise deposited with the issuing
County Department, or its designated processing/collection agent, shall be
promptly refunded to the appellant. As to an administrative citation listing
multiple violations, then no penalties shall be assessed for the specific
violations so cancelled and the amounts of such penalties otherwise deposited
with the issuing County Department, or its designated processing/collection
agent, shall be promptly refunded to the appellant.
      (4)   The appellant shall be served with a copy of the ruling by first
class mail within a reasonable time. The ruling shall become final on the date
of mailing.
      (5)   The ruling shall contain instructions for obtaining judicial review
of the decision pursuant to California Government Code § 53069.4, as that
section may be from time to time amended, or the successor provision thereto.
      (6)   If the administrative citation is upheld, the Hearing Officer shall
also award the County its administrative costs. An itemized summary of these
costs shall be presented at the hearing.
   (h)   Judicial Review of Administrative Hearing Officer’s Ruling.
      (1)   Notice of Appeal. Within 20 calendar days of the date of the
delivery or mailing of the ruling to the appellant, the appellant (hereinafter
“contestant”) may contest that decision by filing an appeal to be heard by the
Superior Court, and paying to the court clerk the filing fee set forth at
Government Code § 53069.4, or the successor provision thereto. The failure to
file the written appeal and to pay the filing fee within this period shall
constitute a waiver of the right to an appeal and the ruling shall be deemed
confirmed. The contestant shall serve a copy of the notice of appeal in person
or by first class mail upon the County Department that had issued the original
administrative citation.
      (2)   Conduct of the Superior Court Appeal Hearing. The conduct of the
appeal before the superior court is a subordinate judicial duty and may be
performed by traffic trial commissioners and other subordinate judicial
officers at the direction of the presiding judge at the Superior Court. The
appeal shall be heard de novo, except that the contents of the issuing County
Department’s file in the case shall be received in evidence. A copy of the
document or instrument of the issuing County Department providing notice of the
violation and imposition of the administrative penalty (i.e., the
administrative citation) shall be admitted into evidence as prima facie
evidence of the facts stated therein. The court shall request that the issuing
department’s file in the case be forwarded to the court, to be received within
15 calendar days of the request.
      (3)   Judgment. The court shall retain the filing fee regardless of the
outcome of the appeal. If the court finds in favor of the contestant, the
amount of the fee shall be reimbursed to the contestant by the issuing County
Department. Any deposit of the administrative penalty shall be refunded by the
issuing County Department in accordance with the judgment of the court. If the
administrative penalty has not been deposited and the decision of the court is
against the contestant and in favor of the issuing County Department, the
issuing County Department may proceed to collect the penalty and administrative
costs pursuant to the procedures set forth in this E.H. Code, or in any other
manner provided by law.
   (i)   Administrative Hearings for Permitted Facilities. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, permitted facilities shall have administrative hearings conducted as
set forth in §
33.0109 of this E.H. Code.
(Am. Ord. 3105, passed --1986; Am. Ord. 3585, passed --1994; Am. Ord. 4093,
passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4102, passed - -2010)
§ 33.0114   Notice of Action.
   A notice of action affecting the title to a possession of real property may
be filed in the County Recorder’s office at the time of commencement of legal
action or any time thereafter pursuant to Government Code §§ 27280 et seq., or
other applicable statutes. The County Recorder shall record and index the
notice in the name of each person and property specified in the action or
proceeding. After all violations have been corrected, the County shall record
in the Office of the County Recorder a document terminating the notice.
(Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3585, passed - -1994)
§ 33.0115   Definitions Generally.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions throughout the
California Health and Safety Code and elsewhere in State laws and regulations
pertaining to environmental health and
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino Code.
   COUNTY FIRE DEPARTMENT. The San Bernardino County Consolidated Fire
District.
   DEHS. The Division of Environmental Health Services of the Public Health
Department of the County of San Bernardino.
   DIRECTOR. The Chief of the Division of Environmental Health Services of the
Public Health Department of the County of San Bernardino.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any employee or agent so designated by the Chief of the
Division of Environmental Health Services.
   LAWS. All statutes, regulations, rules, resolutions, ordinances, orders,
judicial appellate opinions, and every other legal authority pertaining to the
Environmental Health and Consumer Protection Programs of DEHS.
   OPERATOR. Any person or entity engaged in any pursuit pertaining to
activities or facilities subject to DEHS jurisdiction.
   OWNER. Any person or entity having a financial interest in any activity or
facility subject to DEHS jurisdiction.
   PERSON. Include individuals, general partnerships, joint ventures,
corporations, state and local governmental entities, the U.S. Government and
its agencies to the degree authorized by Federal law, every other legal entity
or any association having legal obligations subject to the provisions of
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. As defined in
Chapter 3 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENT. As defined at San Bernardino County Code § 41.1510
(f).
(Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3611, passed - -1995)
CHAPTER 2: PERMITS AND HEARING PROCEDURES
Section
   
33.0200   Authority.
   
33.0201   DEHS Plan Review and Construction Permits Required.
   
33.0202   Current Operational Permits Required.
   
33.0203   Administration of Permits. Special Processing Fees and Penalties.
   
33.0204   Operating With an Expired Permit Unlawful.
   
33.0205   Grounds for Revocation of Permits and Penalties for Continued
Operation.
   
33.0206   Administrative Procedures Where Permits Revoked.
   
33.0207   Grounds for Summary Suspension of Permits and Penalties for Continued
Operation.
   
33.0208   Administrative Procedures Where Suspended Permits.
   
33.0209   Administrative Hearing Procedures.
   
33.0210   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
§ 33.0200   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 (Authority and Administration) of this Environmental Health Code
(E.H. Code), the Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the
County of San Bernardino shall enforce the following permit and hearing
procedures.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3611,
passed - -1995)
§ 33.0201   DEHS Plan Review and Construction Permits Required.
   No person or entity shall commence any construction activity, remodel,
alteration, substantial addition or change in equipment and/or scope of
operation for any activity or facility subject to DEHS jurisdiction whether
permanent or for temporary special events, without first obtaining written
approval of three sets, or more as required herein, of detailed plans submitted
to DEHS accompanied with plan check fees in those amounts specified in the San
Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees. Scaled plans shall be in a
conventional format that allows rapid review by DEHS. Where complex, unique, or
peculiar public health and safety risks may be created by the proposed activity
or facility, DEHS may require special engineering studies sufficient to
demonstrate that every reasonable elimination or reduction of such risks has or
will be taken. No deviation from approved or corrected plans shall occur
without written approval of DEHS. No construction or related activity shall
occur at the job site without DEHS approved or corrected plans being presented.
DEHS inspection and approval shall be obtained at the completion or each
construction phase. Operational permits shall be obtained from DEHS before the
activity or facility is operated or opened to the public.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0202   Current Operational Permits Required.
   No person or entity shall own, operate, or allow the operation of any
activity or facility subject to DEHS jurisdiction, whether permanent or for
temporary special events, without first applying for, receiving, and retaining
an unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked DEHS operational permit for each activity
or facility, and paying fees to DEHS in those amounts specified in the San
Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
   Each applicant shall furnish accurate names, addresses, and other relevant
information reasonably required by DEHS for administration of this E.H. Code.
By the signature of the applicant’s representative on the application, each
applicant consents to periodic unannounced inspection(s) at all reasonable
business hours by DEHS Enforcement Officers, and to the collection of evidence,
samples, photographs, examination of invoices, and all other reasonable
inspection procedures to determine compliance with all applicable laws enforced
by DEHS.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0203   Administration of Permits. Special Processing Fees and Penalties.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, DEHS permits shall not be transferable
from one person or entity to another or from one location to another. Each such
permit shall be placed in a conspicuous place in or on the permitted activity
or facility in the manner prescribed by DEHS. Applicants shall renew permits
prior to their expiration. DEHS may assess reasonable special processing fees
against any activity or facility operating without a permit; with an expired,
suspended, or revoked permit; and when checks are returned without payment; as
set forth in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0204   Operating With an Expired Permit Unlawful.
   Any person or entity operating or allowing the operation of any activity or
facility subject to DEHS jurisdiction with a permit expired for more than 30
days without having made application for renewal with DEHS, shall be guilty of
an infraction offense for each day or portion thereof such violation exists.
The penalty upon conviction thereof shall be a fine of at least $25.00 but
shall not exceed $100.00 for the first violation, a fine not exceeding $200.00
for the second conviction within one year, and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for
the third conviction within one year. The fourth and additional convictions
within one year shall result in revocation of the permit to operate as set
forth in §
33.0205 herein.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0205   Grounds for Revocation of Permits and Penalties for Continued
Operation.
   DEHS may revoke operational permits for repeated noncompliance with relevant
law, or otherwise for just cause where the health or safety of the public may
be endangered. Prior to such revocation, DEHS shall, by an Administrative Order
to Show Cause (OSC), notify the permit holder to show cause why such permit
should not be revoked by DEHS. The OSC shall state the allegations and evidence
leading to its issuance and notify the permit holder of the right to a hearing
on the OSC if requested within 15 calendar days after receipt of the OSC or
else such right to a hearing shall be deemed waived. Unless the DEHS
operational permit is also suspended, any activity or facility may continue to
operate pending action on the OSC. Continued operation of any activity or
facility after revocation of relevant DEHS operational permits is a misdemeanor
and any person or entity so convicted shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $250.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0206   Administrative Procedures Where Permits Revoked.
   All conditions upon which DEHS based a revocation shall be corrected in an
approved manner prior to an activity or facility being granted a new permit to
operate. Where revocation of a DEHS permit has occurred, the applicant shall
apply in the manner provided for new applicants, shall pay all appropriate
fees, and shall include a signed statement by the applicant that all conditions
complained of by DEHS have been completely corrected.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0207   Grounds for Summary Suspension of Permits and Penalties for
Continued Operation.
   DEHS may summarily suspend any DEHS permit when DEHS finds or reasonably
suspects continued operation of the facility or activity may constitute an
immediate public health hazard. Additionally, whenever DEHS authorized
representatives are denied access or entry to any part of the activity or
facility under DEHS jurisdiction or permit, interfered with, prevented,
restricted, obstructed, or otherwise unreasonably hindered in the performance
of their duties, DEHS may summarily suspend the applicable DEHS permits to
operate. Any person continuing to operate any activity or facility after
suspension of any DEHS permit to operate, shall be guilty of an infraction
offense for each day or portion thereof such violation exists. The penalty upon
conviction thereof shall be a fine of at least $25.00, but not exceeding
$100.00 for a first violation, a fine not exceeding $200.00 for the second
conviction within one year, and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for the third
conviction within one year. The fourth and additional conviction(s) within one
year shall result in DEHS permit revocation procedures as provided in §
33.0205 herein.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0208   Administrative Procedures Where Suspended Permits.
   At the time of suspension, DEHS shall issue a written notice to the permit
holder stating the grounds for the suspension and notifying the permit holder
of the right to a hearing on the suspension, if requested within 15 calendar
days after the receipt of the notice or else such right to a hearing shall be
deemed waived. DEHS shall guarantee a hearing within five days of its receipt
of a written request for a hearing on the suspension. Any suspension shall
remain in effect until such time as DEHS determines the grounds for suspension
as provided in §
33.0207 herein, no longer exist. DEHS shall reinstate such suspended permit
within a reasonable period unless it was also revoked.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0209   Administrative Hearing Procedures.
   Notwithstanding any other administrative procedure of this jurisdiction, and
unless otherwise specified by State law or within this E.H. Code, the following
administrative procedure shall be applied for all DEHS hearings pertaining to
the denial, suspension, revocation, or denial of reissuance of any license,
permit, certificate, registration, privilege, or other entitlement through
DEHS. The following procedure shall not be applicable to hearings before the
San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors.
   (a)   An appeal made under this Section shall be made in writing, addressed
to the Director of DEHS, within 15 calendar days of receipt of the
Administrative OSC or notice of the denial, suspension, revocation, denial of
reissuance, or denial of any claimed entitlement. The appeal shall contain the
address to which the notice of hearing shall be sent in order for the appeal to
be valid.
   (b)   The hearing officer shall be the Director of DEHS or the Director’s
appointee for such purpose. Any such appointee shall be a person who has no
knowledge of the facts of the particular case at the outset of the hearing, and
a person not immediately involved with enforcement activities pertaining to the
particular activity or facility concerned.
   (c)   For revocation proceedings, the hearing shall be held within 15
calendar days after receipt of a request for a hearing; for post-suspension
proceedings the hearing shall be held within five calendar days after receipt
of a request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permit holder, the
hearing officer may postpone the hearing date or it may be postponed or
continued by stipulation of the parties. If the party notified does not respond
or appear, no further hearing procedure shall be required.
   (d)   Witnesses shall swear or affirm to tell the truth. The oath or
affirmation shall be taken by the hearing officer. The enforcing officer shall
present his or her case first, with oral testimony, documentary, or other
evidence. The responding party shall have the right to be represented by
counsel, and shall have the right of cross-examination. The responding party
may present a response after the enforcing officer has presented his or her
case. The enforcing officer shall have the right of cross-examination. After
both sides have completed presenting evidence, the enforcing officer may
comment on the evidence and argue. Thereafter, the responding party may do the
same.
   The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to
evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the
sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or
statutory rule which might make improper the admission of the evidence over
objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of
supplementing or explaining other evidence, but shall not be sufficient in
itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in
civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that
they are otherwise required by statute to be recognized at the hearing and
irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0210   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Chapter. In addition to those listed herein or elsewhere provided by law,
all enforcement procedures, remedies, and penalties of
Chapter 1 (Authority and Administration) shall apply to this Chapter.
(Adopted/amended by Ord. 850, passed - -1958; Ord. 1335, passed - -1967; Ord.
1527, passed - -1969; Ord. 1633, passed - -1971; Ord. 1790, passed - -1973;
Ord. 1832, passed - -1973; Ord. 1924, passed - -1974; Ord. 2246, passed - -
1978; Ord. 2663, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
CHAPTER 3: PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Section
   
33.0301   Authority.
   
33.0302   Definitions.
   
33.0303   Resolution.
   
33.0304   Duty to Abate.
   
33.0305   Criminal and Civil Penalties Applicable.
   
33.0306   (Reserved).
   
33.0307   Emergency Abatement.
   
33.0308   Notice to Abate.
   
33.0309   Appeal Procedure.
   
33.0310   Abatement.
   
33.0311   Payment for Abatement.
§ 33.0301   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino Code and other
relevant State law, the San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors authorizes
the Chief of the County Fire Department (CFD) or the Chief of the Division of
Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the Public Health Department and the
Enforcement Officers of the CFD or the DEHS of the County of San Bernardino to
enforce the provisions of this Public Nuisance Abatement Chapter within this
jurisdiction. Such authority includes the right to enter land for
investigation, posting or serving notice, or to cause abatement as herein
provided. For purposes of this Chapter, all references to DEHS shall also
include the CFD, all references to the Director of DEHS shall mean the Chief of
the DEHS and shall also include the County Fire Chief, and all references to
employees of DEHS shall also include employees of CFD.
   Commercial poultry ranches and other activities subject to specific vector
control provisions elsewhere in Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino
County Code, shall be exempt from conflicting provisions in this Chapter.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3611, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0302   Definitions.
   Definitions stated in other chapters of this E.H. Code shall supplement the
following:
   PUBLIC NUISANCES. Shall include:
      (1)   Breeding and harborage places for invertebrate and vertebrate
vectors under conditions of known public health significance including those
for mosquitoes, flies, and rodents, as more specifically set forth at
Chapter 8 (Waste Management) and
Chapter 9 (Insect, Rodent and Other Vector Control) herein.
      (2)   Accumulations of junk, trash, waste, debris, garbage, rubbish and
related materials as set forth more specifically at
Chapter 8 (Waste Management) herein and including: scrap metals, scrap lumber,
scrap plastic or polymer materials, scrap building materials, scrap pipe or
plumbing fixtures, junked appliances or furniture, dismantled, junked, or
wrecked motor vehicles, machinery, or equipment or parts thereof, rags,
bedding, tree and landscape trimmings, rope, waste oil, batteries, paper,
rubber, and similar accumulations under conditions incompatible with their
originally intended use or location as set forth more specifically in the
planning and zoning laws of this jurisdiction, or otherwise in any manner
detrimental to the public health.
      (3)   Hazardous materials which are corrosive, toxic, ignitable,
irritants, infectious, strong sensitizers, generate pressure by decomposition
or other means or otherwise are present under circumstances that could endanger
the public health and safety, as set forth more specifically herein at
Chapter 7 (Hazardous Materials and Toxics Control).
      (4)   Incompatible materials unsuitable for commingling where
circumstances suggest a likelihood of explosion, spontaneous combustion,
chemical reaction, fire, extreme heat, toxic substance formulation or other
dangerous reaction so as to endanger the public health and safety, as set forth
more specifically herein at
Chapter 7 (Hazardous Materials and Toxics Control) and by the fire codes of
this jurisdiction.
      (5)   Infectious and related wastes and odors therefrom including from:
hospitals and medical facilities, sewers, cesspools, septic tanks, leach lines
and fields (whether of individual or multiple ownership), toilets, holding
tanks, seepage pits, butcher offal, pet droppings, excrement, urine, laundry
water, manure accumulations, dead animals, putrid matter, and similar materials
under circumstances endangering the public health and safety, as set forth more
specifically herein at
Chapter 7 (Hazardous Materials and Toxics Control) and
Chapter 8 (Waste Management).
      (6)   Open, unused, or abandoned: buildings, structures, foundations,
basements, excavations, swimming pools, wells, ponds, pits, shafts, and similar
unfenced, unsealed, or unsecured situations of immediate danger to the public
health and safety.
      (7)   Any device, sign, decoration, design, or fence, which is outside of
a four-walled and roofed structure and determined to be unlawful by reason of
its condition or inappropriate use or location as defined in Title 8
(Development Code) of the San Bernardino County Code or by the development code
of this jurisdiction.
      (8)   Any animal, fowl, or bird, wild or domestic, other than cats, dogs,
canaries or birds of the psitacinae family, within 70 feet of any school,
church, hospital, public place or business, or any residence or dwelling house
or other building used for human habitation, other than the personal dwelling
of the person owning or controlling such animal, fowl, or bird. The Subdivision
shall not apply to accredited laboratories regulated by the State Department of
Health Services.
      (9)   Any privy or outhouse: on premises where domestic water under
pressure is available; without suitable shelter to afford privacy and
protection from the elements; without an automatically self-closing door
adequate to exclude flies from the pit; in disrepair; with vaults filled with
excreta not regularly and thoroughly disinfected; within 40 feet of any
dwelling, residence, school, church, hospital or public place of business,
except with the permission of the occupants or operators of such dwelling,
residence, school, church, hospital, or public place of business.
      (10)   Any toilet, washroom. or bath or shower room for the use of
employees, patrons, or the public where: the floors, walls, ceilings,
lavatories, urinals, toilet bowl, bath or showers have accumulations of dirt,
filth or corrosion; lavatories are not supplied with soap, individual towels
and a receptacle for their disposal; toilet rooms are not provided with toilet
paper.
      (11)   Castor bean (Ricinus communis) plants located in unsecured
situations. that pose an immediate danger to the public and safety.
      (12)   Any situation or activity which exists, is conducted, maintained,
or permitted, known at common-law, in equity jurisprudence, specified at Civil
Code §§ 3479 et seq., Penal Code § 370, or elsewhere defined in State law or by
the laws of this jurisdiction as a public nuisance and within the authority of
DEHS to abate.
      (13)   Graffiti on any residence, rental housing, multi-residential,
commercial or industrial building, structure, sidewalk or driveway.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3611, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0303   Resolution.
   (a)   Whenever a public nuisance as defined herein exists anywhere within
this jurisdiction, the Board or Council governing this jurisdiction may, by
resolution, declare such to be a public nuisance.
   (b)   Such resolution may refer to the public nuisance location by the name
under which it is commonly known, by street number and name, in reference to
adjacent or nearby roads, streets, or highways, by the County Assessor’s parcel
number(s) (APN), or by an abbreviated legal description.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0304   Duty to Abate.
   No person or entity shall cause, permit, maintain, conduct, or otherwise
allow a public nuisance as defined herein to exist within this jurisdiction. It
shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, and person in control of any land
or interest therein located within this jurisdiction to remove, abate, and
prevent the recurrence of a public nuisance upon such land or interest therein.
Any recurrence of a condition may be deemed to be a continuation of the
original condition.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0305   Criminal and Civil Penalties Applicable.
   Violations of this Chapter are also subject to all enforcement, criminal,
and civil penalty provisions of
Chapter 1 (Authority and Administration) and
Chapter 2 (Permits and Hearing Procedures) of this E.H. Code which are
incorporated herein by reference and all other remedies and penalties provided
by law, and are not limited or superseded by this Chapter.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0306   (Reserved).
§ 33.0307   Emergency Abatement.
   When a public nuisance constitutes an immediate hazard or threat of harm and
the situation calls for abatement sooner than the abatement procedures herein
otherwise allow, the director and enforcement officers of DEHS may take or
cause emergency abatement of such nuisance with such notice to parties
concerned, or without notice, as the particular circumstances reasonably allow.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0308   Notice to Abate.
   After the governing Board or Council of this jurisdiction by resolution
determines the existence of a public nuisance, the Director of DEHS or
designated agent shall issue a “notice to abate” by either of the following
methods:
   (a)   Mailing a copy by first class or certified mail addressed to the
owner, person, or entity with a mailing address as shown on available tax or
assessment rolls of the County of San Bernardino; and by posting a copy at the
concerned property.
   (b)   Personal service upon the owner or occupant of the concerned property.
The form “notice to abate” shall be substantially in the form following. In the
absence of exigent circumstances, the notice may not require abatement in less
than ten days.
NOTICE TO ABATE
Issued this:___________________________________________________________________________________
      Month      Day      Year
By virtue of proceedings under authority of San Bernardino County Code Section
33.0301 et seq.,
YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED TO ABATE from your property described as _______________________________
   Assessor’s Parcel Number/A PN
____________________________________________________________________________________________
   Number and Street               Post Office
from the County of San Bernardino Assessor’s/Tax Records which list the owner as:
__________________________________________________________________________________________of
Name
____________________________________________________________________________________________
Address         Post Office               State      Zip
the following public nuisances:                                                                                                                   
If said nuisances are not abated within ______ days of the above date, the Director of Environmental Health Services or his duly designated officer may order said conditions abated by public employees, private contractor, or
other person, and the cost of said abatement and all directly related investigative and administrative costs shall be billed directly to the property owner or levied and assessed against the property as a special assessment
lien.
Any appeal from this order must be in writing and brought within ten (10) days to the Director, who will set the same for hearing before a Board of Appeals and notify you of the date of such hearing.
Failure to abate or to appeal within the times allotted may also make you subject to criminal and civil remedies. Your cooperation is appreciated.
                        ___________________________________
                           Name and Title of Issuing Officer
Department of Environmental Health Services
County of San Bernardino
385 North Arrowhead Avenue
San Bernardino, CA 92415
 
§ 33.0309   Appeal Procedure.
   Any person or entity served, constructively or personally, with the notice
set forth in §
33.0308 may appeal in writing to the Director of DEHS within ten days of said
service. The Director shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before a
Board of Appeals and notify the appellant of the date set for such hearing at
least 15 days prior to such date or, if the appellant resides outside the
County, at least 25 days prior to such date. The Board of Appeals shall act on
the appeal and its determination shall be conclusive. The Board of Appeals
shall be appointed by the Director and consist of three persons as follows: A
DEHS officer but not the notice issuing officer nor anyone having knowledge of
the particular case, a public member, a deputy of the County Counsel of San
Bernardino County or legal representative of the governing Board/Council of
this jurisdiction. Except as provided herein, the provisions of §
33.0209 (Administrative Hearing Procedures) of
Chapter 2 of this E.H. Code are incorporated here by reference.
§ 33.0310   Abatement.
   If, at the end of the time allowed for compliance in the original notice or
as extended in cases of appeal, compliance has not been accomplished, DEHS may
cause the abatement by public employees, or by private contractor selected and
approved by the governing Board or Council of this jurisdiction in the manner
under the terms provided by this Chapter, and if such abatement is so carried
out, such property shall be subject to a special assessment lien for the costs
of the abatement.
§ 33.0311   Payment for Abatement.
   (a)   Procedure for Payment. When said abatement has been completed, the
Director of DEHS shall render to the San Bernardino County Auditor-Controller
an itemized statement covering work necessary for the abatement. The Auditor-
Controller shall pay the same from the funds of the agency or department
causing said work to be done, and the Director shall present to the owner a
demand for payment by mail. If payment is not made on behalf of the owner
within 60 days after mailing such bill, the Director shall certify to the
Auditor-Controller the remaining unpaid cost, together with the information
required by law in such cases. The Auditor-Controller shall cause the amount of
the same to be entered upon the property from which abatement was accomplished,
and the said special assessment and tax shall be included upon the next
succeeding tax statement. Thereafter, the amounts of the assessment shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as County taxes are
collected, and are subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and
sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary County taxes, except that
if any real property to which such lien would attach has been transferred or
conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide
encumbancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date
on which the first installment of such taxes would become delinquent, then the
lien which would otherwise be imposed by this Section shall not attach to such
real property and the costs of abatement, as confirmed, relating to such
property shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
   (b)   Appeals. Any appeal from these charges must be filed within 60 days
from the date of billing or receipt of a tax bill which shows abatement
charges. The appeal procedure shall be essentially the same as §
33.0309 of this Chapter, and the Appeal Board’s decision shall be conclusive.
   (c)   Cancellation of Claim. All or any portion of any such special
assessment, penalty, or costs heretofore entered, shall on order of the Board
of Appeals be cancelled by the Auditor-Controller if uncollected, or, except in
the case provided for in Subdivision (5) hereof, refunded by the County
Treasurer if collected, if it or they were entered, charged, or paid;
      (1)   More than once;
      (2)   Through clerical error;
      (3)   Through the error or mistake of the Board of Appeals, the Director,
or the person designated by them to give notice to abate regarding any material
fact relevant to the determination of a claim;
      (4)   Illegally;
      (5)   On property acquired after the lien date by the State or by any
county, city, school district, or other political subdivision and because of
this public ownership, not subject to sale for delinquent taxes.
   (d)   Procedure for Refund of Payment. No order for a refund under the
foregoing Section shall be made except on a claim:
      (1)   Verified by the person who paid the special assessment, their
guardian, executor, or administrator;
      (2)   Filed within three years after making the payment sought to be
refunded.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
CHAPTER 4: FOOD PROTECTION
Section
   
33.0401   Authority.
   
33.0402   Definitions.
   
33.0403   Plan Review and Construction Permits Required.
   
33.0404   Current Operational Permit Required.
   
33.0405   Enforcement Activities.
   
33.0406   General Health, Safety, and Sanitation Requirements.
   
33.0407   Specific Requirements.
   
33.0408   Nonpermanent Food Facilities.
   
33.0409   Food Handler Training.
   
33.0410   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
§ 33.0401   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 (Authority and Administration) of this Environmental Health Code
(E.H. Code), Health and Safety Code §§ 118375 et seq. (Common Drinking Cups),
§§ 118425 et seq. (Common Towels), §§ 110970 et seq. (Ice), §§ 111070 et seq.
(Bottled Water), §§ 113310 et seq. (Food Crop Growing), §§ 108850 et seq.
(Glazed Ceramic Tableware), §§ 109875 et seq. (Sherman Food, Drug and
Cosmetic), §§ 113700 et seq. (California Retail Food Code), §§ 112355 et seq.
(Cold Storage), §§ 111955 et seq. (Wholesale Food Processors), §§ 112650 et
seq. (Canneries), §§ 112500 et seq. (Frozen Foods), Title 17 of the
Administrative Code, Penal Code § 383 (Sale of Adulterated Products), and other
applicable State law, this County authorizes, that all food protection laws of
the State and of this E.H. Code be enforced within this County by the Director
and enforcement officers of the Division of Environmental Health Services
(DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino. All provisions of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Chapter except as provided herein.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4158, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4196,
passed - -2013)
§ 33.0402   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions in the Health and Safety
Code §§ 113728 et seq., pertaining to food protection, and of Chapters
1 and
3 of this E.H. Code. Any definitions not expressly stated herein shall be as
defined in the Health and Safety Code §§ 113728 et seq., or as those sections
may be amended hereafter.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. Any retail food facility or portion thereof where
activities primarily relate to self-service of prepackaged foods and limited
food preparation by employees, such as popcorn, beverages, ice products,
condiments and hot dog warming.
   FOOD DISTRIBUTOR. Any wholesale place, building, structure, room or portion
thereof, vehicle or other means of conveyance, where food or beverages are
commercially distributed, stored, or held for transfer. It shall include:
mobile food facilities commissaries, mobile support unit commissaries, vending
commissaries, central storage or distribution facilities for school or retail
facilities, or distribution facilities for beer, wine, or alcoholic beverages.
   FOOD FACILITY. Includes retail and wholesale food operations.
   FOOD HANDLING PLACE. Any retail or wholesale facility or portion thereof
where activities primarily relate to food being held for or made available to
the public in a packaged form or state requiring further processing off the
facility’s premises. It shall include: grocery stores; vegetable markets;
produce stands; seasonal produce stands; certified farmers’ markets;
supermarkets; meat markets; seafood markets; health food stores; beer, wine, or
alcoholic beverage stores; and similar operations at a fixed location.
   FOOD PROCESSOR. Any wholesale place, building, structure, room, or portion
thereof, maintained, used or operated for the purpose of commercially packing,
making, manufacturing, cooking, baking, mixing, processing, bottling, canning,
packing, portioning, assembling, salvaging, re-conditioning or otherwise
preparing or processing food, or beer, wine, or alcoholic beverages, including
ice for human consumption. It shall include food processing commissaries and
central kitchens for schools and central kitchens for retail facilities.
   ICE/SLUSH PRODUCTS MACHINE. Any machine manufacturing a nondairy ice/slush
product using the principle of scraper blades sweeping a freezing surface or
block of ice.
   NONPOTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS. All foods not defined as “potentially
hazardous foods” in Health and Safety Code § 113871.
   PUBLIC EATING PLACE. Any retail food facility or portion thereof where
activities primarily relate to the preparation of food for consumption on the
facility's premises or for carryout per customer order. It shall include:
restaurants, cafeterias, cafes, bakeries, taverns, bars, lounges, ice cream
parlors, soda fountains, walk-in and drive-in movie theater snack bars, public
or private school cafeterias, delicatessens, sandwich shops, snack bars,
nonexempt food service operations, and similar food service operations at a
fixed location.
   SEASONAL. A food facility in operation not more than a total of six months
per any calendar year.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4158, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4172,
passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4196, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4283, passed - -2015)
§ 33.0403   Plan Review and Construction Permits Required.
   No construction activity shall occur for any facility or activity subject to
DEHS jurisdiction without plan review and construction permits first being
submitted to and approved by DEHS as provided in
Chapter 2 of this E.H. Code.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4158, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4196,
passed - -2013)
§ 33.0404   Current Operational Permit Required.
   (a)   Generally. Except as exempted herein, no person or entity shall own,
operate or permit any retail or wholesale activity pertaining to the handling
or holding of food, without first applying for, receiving and retaining an
unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked permit from DEHS for each food facility or
activity, and paying fees to DEHS in those amounts specified in the San
Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees, in accordance with
Chapter 2 of this E.H. Code.
   (b)   Food Facilities Generally Exempt from Permits. Permitting requirements
do not apply to those activities that are expressly exempted by the Health and
Safety Code definition of a “food facility.”
   (c)   Limited Commercial Exemption. This Chapter shall not apply where only
nonpotentially hazardous food, properly packaged or protected, properly
labeled, and with no evidence of adulteration or exposure to adulteration, is
vended to the public in machines or from permanent food facilities, with a food
display area of 25 square feet or less.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4158, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4196,
passed - -2013)
§ 33.0405   Enforcement Activities.
   Enforcement activities shall generally proceed as set forth in Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code, and relevant State law pertaining to public food
protection.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4196, passed - -2013)
§ 33.0406   General Health, Safety, and Sanitation Requirements.
   Every activity or facility subject to DEHS jurisdiction shall be so
designed, constructed, repaired, replaced, conducted, operated, controlled,
inspected, supervised, tested, and otherwise properly managed so that every
reasonable step is taken to eliminate, reduce, or minimize the likelihood of
injury, disease, or other harm where food activities relate to the public.
Those requirements, specifications, and/or standards provided by State law for
public food protection are hereby made applicable to every facility or activity
subject to DEHS jurisdiction.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4196, passed - -2013)
§ 33.0407   Specific Requirements.
   (a)   Current Standards Apply. Every food facility or activity subject to
DEHS jurisdiction herein established, or upon change in scope of operation,
construction, reconstruction, conversion, remodeling, additions or replacement
of equipment or fixtures or other substantial change, shall comply with all
current approved standards.
   (b)   Protection of Food from Adulteration or Contamination. Every food
facility or activity subject to DEHS jurisdiction shall be so conducted that
every reasonable step is taken to protect food from every circumstance whereby
it may become adulterated, contaminated, or exposed to adulteration or
contamination.
   (c)   Other Specific Requirements. Where a State standard is not prescribed
for any facility or activity subject to DEHS jurisdiction, the standards of
this Chapter shall be complied with.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4196, passed - -2013)
§ 33.0408   Nonpermanent Food Facilities.
   (a)   Permits Required. Except as exempted herein, it shall be unlawful for
any person to proclaim, hawk, peddle, cater, prepare, or serve food to the
public from any nonpermanent food facility, as defined in the Health and Safety
Code, without first applying for, receiving and retaining an unexpired,
unsuspended and unrevoked permit from DEHS for each, and paying fees to DEHS in
those amounts specified in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
   (b)   Posting of Permits. Every permit sticker or document issued pursuant
to Subdivision (a) shall be immediately affixed on the nonpermanent food
facility in the manner specified by DEHS.
   (c)   Community Event Requirements. No permit shall be issued by DEHS unless
previously or concurrently every requirement of the San Bernardino County Code
for community events in unincorporated areas, or the requirements of the local
jurisdiction for community events in incorporated areas, have been complied
with.
   (d)   Mobile Food Facility Requirements. Mobile food facilities must comply
with the following:
      (1)   Meet all applicable plan check, equipment and other requirements as
governed by Health and Safety Code §§ 114294 et seq.;
      (2)   Report to an approved commissary on a daily basis for cleaning,
servicing and storage, or where allowable pursuant to Health and Safety Code §
114295, operate in conjunction with an approved mobile support unit; and,
      (3)   Provide to DEHS on a monthly basis, a schedule indicating the
operating locations for the mobile food facility for the upcoming month. If
changes occur to the schedule, the mobile food facility shall notify DEHS of
the change within three business days.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3848, passed - -2002; Am. Ord. 4158,
passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4172, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4196, passed - -2013;
Am. Ord. 4283, passed - -2015)
§ 33.0409   Food Handler Training.
   (a)   Intent. This Section is intended to set forth a uniform minimum
standard of training and certification for all food handlers within this
jurisdiction regarding the food protection laws of the State and this E.H.
Code.
   (b)   Applicability. Except as provided herein, no person shall work or
allow the employment of any person as a food handler within this jurisdiction
except when such food handler possesses an unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked
food handler card or a certificate after passing an approved and accredited
food safety certification exam as described in § 113947.1 of the Health and
Safety Code (“food safety certificate”). Food handlers are exempt from this
requirement for 14 calendar days following the date of employment if working
under the supervision of a person holding an unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked
food safety certificate.
   (c)   Food Handler Card Eligibility. A person shall be eligible for a food
handler card after paying a fee to DEHS in that amount specified in the San
Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees and successfully passing a DEHS-
approved training course and proficiency examination. Every training course
shall include at least two instructional hours in: microorganisms, sources of
food borne disease, means whereby food is contaminated by microorganisms or
toxic substances, methods of protecting food to prevent food borne illnesses,
time and temperature criteria preventing food borne illnesses, food worker
personal hygiene, disease transmission by utensils or equipment, and multi-use
utensil washing and sanitizing procedures.
   (d)   Expiration of Card. Every food handler card shall expire three years
from the date of issuance.
   (e)   Card Requirements After Issuance. Food handler cards are
nontransferable. Every food handler on duty in any activity or facility subject
to DEHS jurisdiction shall possess and present the required card upon request
to DEHS enforcement officers. Every owner or operator of every facility
engaging food handler(s) shall maintain upon the premises of such food facility
the original unexpired food handler card or food safety certificate for all
currently employed food handler(s), and present such copies upon request to
DEHS enforcement officers.
   (f)   Card Suspension and Due Process Generally. After consulting the Health
Officer, DEHS enforcement officers may summarily suspend any food handler card
upon reasonable cause to suspect that the card holder may pose an immediate
risk of infectious disease transmission to the public or coworkers.
Additionally, DEHS may summarily suspend a food handler card upon reasonable
cause to suspect that the card holder’s action may pose a significant risk of
disease transmission to the public or coworkers. Whenever a card is summarily
suspended, the enforcement officer shall issue to the holder thereof a written
notice setting forth the grounds of such suspension and informing the holder of
his/her right to a hearing thereon within 15 calendar days or else such right
shall be deemed waived. Generally, the administrative procedures set forth in §
33.0209 of this E.H. Code shall apply except as follows:
      (1)   Any person whose card has been summarily suspended shall
immediately surrender their card to a DEHS enforcement officer upon demand and
immediately cease food handler activities.
      (2)   Such suspension and cessation shall continue until the Health
Officer or DEHS determines that the risk of infectious disease transmission
from such food handler has ceased. At such time, DEHS shall return the
suspended card to the holder within a reasonable period.
   (g)   Appeal Procedures. Upon suspension of his or her card, any food
handler may appeal such suspension to the Director of DEHS by requesting a
hearing. Such request for hearing must be in writing and filed with the
Director within 15 calendar days of such suspension. Such request for hearing
shall be accompanied with documentation approved by the Health Officer, showing
no disease transmission risk exists. Failure to request a hearing within this
time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and the decision
of the Director of DEHS shall be deemed final. Thereafter, at reasonable
periodic intervals, any food handler whose card suspension has been sustained
on appeal or who fails to request a hearing may petition for a review of their
current health status and for the end to such card suspension. Such petition
shall be accompanied with documentation, the type of which is approved by the
Health Officer, to support the petition. Upon a proper showing, DEHS shall act
upon the petition in the manner set forth for administrative hearings in
Chapter 2 (Permits and Hearing Procedures) of this E.H. Code.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3608, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 4158,
passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4196, passed - -2013)
§ 33.0410   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Chapter. Except as provided herein, all remedies/penalties of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Chapter, and are in addition to all
others provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4196, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 5: DAIRY PRODUCTS
Section
   
33.0501   Authority.
   
33.0502   Standards and Requirements for Milk, Cream, and Milk Products.
   
33.0503   Application for Permits.
   
33.0504   Permit Fees.
   
33.0505   Expiration and Renewal of Permits.
   
33.0506   Revocation of Permit and Appeal Procedures.
   
33.0507   Reinstatement of Revoked Permit.
   
33.0508   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
§ 33.0501   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code), Health and Safety Code
§§ 13700 et seq., Food and Agricultural Code §§ 32501 et seq., §§ 33141 et
seq., §§ 33171 et seq., Title 3 of the California Code of Regulations, and
other applicable state law, the Department of Food and Agriculture of the State
of California has designated, and this County hereby authorizes, that the
Division of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the Department of Public
Health of the County of San Bernardino is the State Approved Milk Inspection
Services (AMIS) to enforce all applicable State laws and provisions of this
E.H. Code pertaining to the sale of semifrozen (soft serve) products and plant
(soft serve machine) sanitation at permitted food facilities within this
jurisdiction. Enforcement officers shall be designated as set forth at Food and
Agricultural Code §§ 33111 et seq.  Except as provided herein, the provisions
of
Chapters 1,
2 and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Chapter.
   Unless otherwise indicated, all terms contained herein shall be as defined
in
Chapters 1 and
3 of this E.H. Code, and as defined in Division 15 of the Food and Agriculture
Code.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4200, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4362,
passed - -2019)
§ 33.0502   Standards and Requirements for Milk, Cream, and Milk Products.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to sell, offer for sale,
distribute, or possess for sale or distribution, any milk, cream, or milk
product for human consumption unless it conforms to the standards and
requirements provided by Division 15 of the Food and Agriculture Code and Title
3 of the California Code of Regulations.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4200, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4362,
passed - -2019)
§ 33.0503   Application for Permits.
   (a)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in
the business of producing, processing, or selling any milk product subject to
AMIS jurisdiction within this jurisdiction without first applying for,
receiving and retaining an unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked permit to do so,
issued by the AMIS of San Bernardino County as provided for in Division 15 of
the Food and Agriculture Code.
   (b)   Procedure. Applicants for a permit or a renewal of a permit under this
chapter shall file with the AMIS an application in writing on the form
furnished by AMIS. Such facts or information as may be required by AMIS shall
be provided.
   (c)   Nontransferable. Permits are nontransferable, including as to
ownership or location.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4200, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4362,
passed - -2019)
§ 33.0504   Permit Fees.
   Every person or entity engaged in the business of producing, processing, or
selling any milk product subject to AMIS jurisdiction, shall pay the DEHS/AMIS
annual permit fees as specified in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of
Fees.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4200, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4362,
passed - -2019)
§ 33.0505   Expiration and Renewal of Permits.
   Permits shall be renewed annually provided that the permit holder has,
during the period of the expiring permit, operated in conformity with this
Chapter and other applicable rules and regulations of the AMIS.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4200, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4362,
passed - -2019)
§ 33.0506   Revocation of Permit and Appeal Procedures.
   The Director of DEHS, or authorized deputy, upon notice and hearing, and
upon the finding(s) that State law or a requirement of this Chapter has been
violated, may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter. If it is
determined by the Director or authorized deputy following an inspection or
investigation that a violation of this Chapter exists, a written notice to
correct such violation or violations within a specified time limit shall be
issued to the owner or operator of the milk products plant. If upon re-
inspection after the time specified, the violation still exists, a second
written notice shall be issued to the owner or operator.
   If a subsequent investigation again reveals the lack of compliance, the
owner or operator shall be given a written notice to appear before a hearing
officer of this jurisdiction to show cause why the DEHS permit to operate
should not be revoked. After the AMIS representatives and the owner or operator
have presented evidence of compliance, or noncompliance, the hearing officer
after considering all facts, may, for sufficient cause, order the permit
revoked.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4200, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4362,
passed - -2019)
§ 33.0507   Reinstatement of Revoked Permit.
   Revoked permits may be reinstated only upon the order of the Director of
DEHS or authorized deputy.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4200, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4362,
passed - -2019)
§ 33.0508   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Chapter. Except as provided herein, all enforcement procedures, remedies,
or penalties provided in
Chapters 1,
2 and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Chapter, and are in addition to all
others provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4200, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4362,
passed - -2019)
CHAPTER 6: DOMESTIC WATER SOURCES AND SYSTEMS
Section
Article 1: General Provisions
   
33.0601   Authority.
   
33.0602   Definitions.
   
33.0603   Permits, Licensing, Registration, Privileges, and Entitlements.
   
33.0604   Enforcement Activities.
   
33.0605   Reports.
   
33.0606   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   
33.0607   Administrative Variance.
   
33.0608   Hearing Procedures.
   
33.0609   (Reserved).
Article 2: Public Water Supply Systems
   
33.0610   Statement of Purpose.
   
33.0611   Authority.
   
33.0612   Standards.
   
33.0613   Permits.
   
33.0614   Modifications.
   
33.0615   Monitoring.
   
33.0616   Water Quality.
   
33.0617   Water Quantity, Source, and Storage Requirements.
   
33.0618   Required Separation Between Water Mains and Sanitary Sewers.
   
33.0619   Backflow and Cross-Connection Control.
   
33.0620   Treatment.
   
33.0621   Correction of Sanitary Defects and Health Hazards.
   
33.0622   Surface Water Sources.
   
33.0623   Hauled Water.
   
33.0624   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   33.0625-0629   (Reserved).
Article 3: Water Wells
   
33.0630   Statement of Purpose and Authority.
   
33.0631   Permits.
   
33.0632   Licensing and Registration of Water Well Drillers and Contractors.
   
33.0633   Standards.
   
33.0634   Lateral (Horizontal) Well Standards.
   
33.0635   Approval of Sites.
   
33.0636   General Location of Water Wells.
   
33.0637   Well Logs.
   
33.0638   Well Surface and Subsurface Construction Features.
   
33.0639   Disinfection of Water Wells.
   
33.0640   Water Quality Standards.
   
33.0641   Required Inspections of Wells.
   
33.0642   Approval by DEHS.
   
33.0643   Well Abandonment.
   
33.0644   Declaration of Proposed Reuse.
   
33.0645   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   33.0646-0649   (Reserved).
Article 4: Certification of Backflow Prevention Device Testers
   
33.0650   Statement of Purpose.
   
33.0655   Authority.
   
33.06510   Certification Required.
   
33.06515   Term of Certification.
   
33.06520   Required Fees.
   
33.06525   Denial, Revocation and Suspension of Certification.
   
33.06530   Non-Transferability of Certifications.
   
33.06535   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies and Penalties.
   33.06540-06550   (Reserved).
Article 5: Desert Groundwater Management
   
33.06551   Purpose.
   
33.06552   Scope and Exclusions.
   
33.06553   Definitions.
   
33.06554   Permits.
   
33.06555   Notice of Pending Decision
   
33.06556   Appeals.
   
33.06557   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
Article 6: Limit to Groundwater Wells within the County Institutional Control
Boundary Area
   
33.06558   Purpose.
   
33.06559   Definitions.
   
33.06560   Prohibition.
   
33.06561   Exceptions.
   
33.06562   Penalties.
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.0601   Authority.
   Within this jurisdiction, the San Bernardino County Department of
Environmental Health Services (DEHS) shall enforce the provisions of this
Chapter pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code) and elsewhere as
provided by State law. Except as provided herein, all provisions of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Chapter.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0602   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions in State law pertaining
to domestic water sources and systems, and in Chapters
1 and
3 of this E.H. Code.
   ABANDONED WELL and ABANDONMENT. A well which has not been declared for reuse
by the legal owner with DEHS. Test holes and exploratory holes shall be
considered abandoned 24 hours after construction and testing work have been
completed. A well whose original or functional purpose and use has been
discontinued for a period of one year or which is in such a state of disrepair
that it cannot be made functional for its original purpose or any other
function regulated by this Chapter, shall be considered an abandoned well.
   AGRICULTURAL WELL. Any water well used to supply water for irrigation or
other agricultural purposes, including so-called STOCK WELLS.
   ANNULAR SEAL or SANITARY SEAL. The material placed in the space between the
well casing and the wall of the drilled hole (the annular space).
   CATHODIC PROTECTION WELL. Any artificial excavation in excess of 50 feet
constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities
for the protection electrically of metallic equipment in contact with the
ground, commonly referred to as cathodic protection.
   COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY WELL. Any well which provides water for public water
supply systems.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of water quality by wastes or other degrading
elements to a degree that an actual or potential public health hazard may
exist.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any unprotected connection between any part of a water
system used or intended to supply water for domestic purposes and any source or
system containing water or other substance that is not or cannot be approved as
safe, pure, wholesome, and potable for human consumption.
   CUSTOMER SYSTEM. Those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the
distribution system.
   DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. The facilities, conduits or any other means used for
the delivery of water from the source facilities to the customer’s system.
   DOMESTIC WATER HAULER. A person who transports water for domestic use in a
common bulk container (tank) from source facilities to the customer’s system,
but shall not include those transporting “bottled water” from a State-licensed
“water bottling plant.”
   FURNISH or SUPPLY. Furnishing or supplying water to a public water supply
system.
   INDIVIDUAL DOMESTIC WELL. Any well used to supply water for domestic needs
of an individual residence.
   INDUSTRIAL WELL. Any well used primarily to supply water for industrial
processes and may supply water intentionally or incidentally for domestic
purposes.
   LATERAL (HORIZONTAL) WELL. A well drilled or constructed horizontally or at
an angle with the horizon as contrasted with the common vertical well and does
not include horizontal drains or so-called “wells” constructed to remove
subsurface water from hillsides, cuts, or fills.
   OBSERVATION WELL. A well used for monitoring or supplying the conditions of
a water-bearing aquifer, such as water pressure, depth, movement or quality.
   POLLUTION. An alteration of water quality by waste to a degree which
affects: (1) such waters for beneficial uses, or (2) facilities which serve
such beneficial uses. POLLUTION may include CONTAMINATION.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. The source facilities and distribution system
used to provide water to the public for human consumption and which has two or
more service connections or regularly serves an average of at least 25
individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year. It shall include:
      (1)   COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A public water system which serves at least
15 service connections used by year-long residents or regularly serves at least
25 year-long residents. Community water systems shall include those serving
residential communities.
      (2)   NONCOMMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A public water system which meets one
of the following criteria:
         (A)   Serves at least 25 nonresident individuals daily at least 60
days of the year, but not more than 24 year-long residents.
         (B)   Serves 15 or more service connections and any number of
nonresident individuals at least 60 days per year.
         (C)   Serves five to 14 service connections and 25 or more individuals
less than 60 days per year.
      State small water systems shall include, but are not limited to, mountain
area tracts without year-long residents.
   SOURCE FACILITIES. Wells, stream diversion works, infiltration galleries,
springs, reservoirs, tanks and all other facilities used in the production,
treatment, disinfection, storage or delivery of water to the distribution
system.
   TEST OR EXPLORATORY HOLE. An excavation used for determining the nature of
underground geological or hydrological conditions, whether by seismic
investigation, direct observation, or any other means.
   USER. Any person or entity using water for domestic purposes, but shall not
include furnishing or supplying water to the public.
   WELL or WATER WELL. Any artificial excavation constructed by any method for
the purpose of extracting water from or injecting water into the ground, but
shall not include:
      (1)   Oil and gas wells, or geothermal wells constructed under
jurisdiction of the California State Department of Conservation, except those
wells converted to use as water wells; or
      (2)   Wells used for the purpose of:
         (A)   Dewatering excavation during construction; or
         (B)   Stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0603   Permits, Licensing, Registration, Privileges, and Entitlements.
   No person or entity shall engage in any activity subject to the jurisdiction
of this Chapter without first having an unrevoked, unsuspended, unexpired
permit, license, registration, privilege, and entitlement for each such
activity and without first paying all applicable fees to DEHS for each activity
in the amounts set forth in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0604   Enforcement Activities.
   Except as provided herein, enforcement activities shall generally proceed as
set forth in Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code, and relevant State law pertaining to domestic water
sources and systems.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0605   Reports.
   DEHS may require any public water supply system permit holder or applicant
to file a comprehensive report on the condition and operation of the source
facilities and distribution system. The report shall be in such form and detail
as DEHS prescribes. It shall be prepared by a registered engineer, or other
qualified professional registered with DEHS, and be made at the sole expense of
the permit holder or applicant.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0606   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision
of this Chapter or to furnish or supply to a user, water used or intended to be
used for human consumption or for domestic purposes which is impure,
unwholesome, unpotable, polluted, or dangerous to health.
   (b)   Except as provided herein, all enforcement procedures, remedies, and
penalties of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Chapter, in addition to all others
provided by law.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0607   Administrative Variance.
   Subject to approval by the State Department of Health Services, Sanitary
Engineering Branch, the Director of DEHS may grant an administrative variance
to the provisions of this Chapter where evidence submitted documents that a
modification of the standards, as provided herein, will not endanger the
general public health and safety and strict compliance would be unreasonable in
view of all the circumstances.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0608   Hearing Procedures.
   Any person or entity whose permit application is rejected, or permit has
been suspended, denied or revoked may request a hearing. Upon a proper showing
DEHS shall act upon the request in the manner set forth for administrative
hearings in
Chapter 2 (Permits and Hearing Procedures) of this E.H. Code.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0609   (Reserved).
ARTICLE 2: PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS
§ 33.0610   Statement of Purpose.
   The purpose of this Article is to assure that water furnished or supplied by
public water supply systems within this jurisdiction shall at all times be
pure, wholesome, potable, healthful and in adequate supply.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0611   Authority.
   The San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS)
shall monitor and enforce all applicable laws and orders for public water
supply systems with less than 200 service connections within this jurisdiction
pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of this E.H. Code, and elsewhere as provided by law.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0612   Standards.
   Minimum standards for the design, construction, operation, maintenance,
repair and monitoring for public water systems requiring a permit by this
Article shall also include those standards listed in Health and Safety Code
Division 5, Part 1, Chapter 7, “Water and Water Systems” and in Administrative
Code Title 22:
   (a)   “Domestic Water Quality and Monitoring,” Division 4, Chapter 15, §§
64401—64475.
   (b)   “California Waterworks Standards,” Division 4, Chapter 16, §§
64551—64644 and Administrative Code, Title 17, Division 1, Chapter 5,
Subchapter 1:
      (1)   “Cross-Connection Control,” §§ 7583—7622.
      (2)   “Operator Certification,” §§ 7100—7134 as the same may be amended
by the State from time to time and incorporated herein by reference, and every
other relevant standard pursuant to State law.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0613   Permits.
   No person or entity shall furnish or supply water to a user for domestic
purposes from any source of water supply without first applying for, receiving,
and retaining, an unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked permit to do so from DEHS
in accordance with
Chapter 2 (Permits and Hearing Procedures) of this E.H. Code except as provided
herein.
   (a)   Conditions of Approval. Permits shall be issued subject to compliance
with the standards provided in this Article and plans shall be submitted to
DEHS demonstrating such compliance. All owners or operators of any public water
supply system subject to the provisions of this Article shall organize into a
single legal entity responsible for such public water supply system. Permits
may include any condition or requirement found by DEHS to be necessary to
accomplish the purposes of this Article.
   (b)   Temporary Permit. DEHS may grant a temporary permit to any person or
entity who has applied for a permit upon such terms as DEHS shall determine are
in the public interest pending the completion of DEHS’s investigation and
application processing.
   (c)   Denial. If, upon the completion of the investigation and processing,
DEHS determines that the water furnished, supplied, or proposed to be supplied
is such that under any circumstances and conditions it is likely to be impure,
unwholesome, unpotable or may constitute a menace or danger to public health,
or if the existing or proposed source facility or distribution system is
unhealthful, unsanitary, or not suited to the production and delivery of pure,
wholesome, potable, and healthful water at all times, DEHS shall deny the
application and order the applicant to make such changes as DEHS deems
necessary to secure a continuous supply of pure, wholesome, potable, and
healthful water.
   (d)   Revocation. Any permit issued may be revoked or suspended by DEHS at
any time if it determines that the water being supplied or furnished by the
permittee is or may become impure, unwholesome, unpotable, or endanger the
lives or health of human beings. When a permit has been revoked or suspended by
DEHS, the public water supply system shall not be exempt from service
obligations and responsibilities unless so directed by DEHS.
   (e)   Exception. This Article shall not apply to a public water supply
system with two to four service connections except in those specific areas in
which DEHS has found its application to be necessary for the protection of
public health and has given written notice thereof to those so regulated.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0614   Modifications.
   (a)   General Requirements. No person or entity shall modify, add to or
change source facilities or distribution systems without written prior approval
of DEHS.
   (b)   Conditions for Adding Service Connections. New service connections may
he added to a public water supply system if the water system is, and will
continue to be, in compliance with the provisions of this Article. When a water
system is not in compliance with the provisions of this Article or of the
requirements/conditions of the DEHS permit, a public nuisance shall be deemed
to exist restricting the addition of service connections or water users until
such compliance is obtained.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0615   Monitoring.
   Any person or entity who furnishes or supplies water to a user for domestic
purposes shall pay for and provide approved analyses of such water to DEHS per
Administrative Code Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 15, “Domestic Water Quality
and Monitoring.”
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0616   Water Quality.
   All water sources used for domestic water supply shall meet minimum
standards of Administrative Code Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 15, “Domestic
Water Quality and Monitoring.”
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0617   Water Quantity, Source and Storage Requirements.
   The quantity of water available from all water sources and distribution
storage reservoirs shall at least equal those amounts shown in Tables I and II
of the Article.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
TABLE I
GRAVITY STORAGE SYSTEM
SOURCE AND STORAGE CAPACITY
 Minimum Use Median Use High Use
TABLE I
GRAVITY STORAGE SYSTEM
SOURCE AND STORAGE CAPACITY
            Minimum Use           Median Use              High Use
            Recreational Dwelling Typical or Average      Residence With
            with No Irrigation    Residence and Lot       Large Lot
No. of      Source    Storage     Source    Storage       Source    Storage
Service     Capacity  Capacity    Capacity  Capacity      Capacity  Capacity
Connections (gpm)     (gals)      (gpm)     (gals)        (gpm)     (gals)
10          11        3,500       17        4,000         28        4,900
20          19        6,900       32        7,800         53        9,600
30          26        10,100      45        11,400        75        14,130
40          33        13,100      57        14,800        95        18,400
50          40        15,900      69        18,000        115       22,500
60          46        18,500      80        21,000        134       26,400
70          52        20,900      90        23,800        151       30,200
80          58        23,100      100       25,400        167       33,900
90          64        25,100      109       27,800        181       37,500
100         69        27,000      117       30,100        195       41,000
120         74        30,500      133       34,500        220       47,700
140         79        33,600      149       38,900        245       54,000
160         84        36,400      165       43,300        270       59,900
180         89        39,200      181       47,700        295       65,400
200         94        42,000      197       52,200        320       70,500
Source and Storage Design Guide for Small Water Systems, State of California,
State Department of Health, Water Sanitation Section, 1967.
 
TABLE II
PRESSURE TANK SYSTEM
SOURCE CAPACITY
 Minimum Use Median Use High Use
TABLE II
PRESSURE TANK SYSTEM
SOURCE CAPACITY
               Minimum Use           Median Use           High Use
               Recreational Dwelling Typical or Average   Residence with Large
               with No Irrigation    Residence and Lot    Lot
No. of Service Source Capacity (gal  Source Capacity (gal Source Capacity (gal
Connections    per minute)           per minute)          per minute)
10             40                    50                   69
20             77                    97                   133
30             110                   140                  193
40             142                   180                  248
50             174                   219                  302
60             200                   255                  354
70             226                   288                  403
80             251                   312                  449
90             273                   341                  494
100            294                   367                  537
120            328                   420                  618
140            363                   473                  695
160            387                   526                  770
180            416                   579                  840
200            444                   630                  908
Source and Storage Design Guide for Small Water Systems, State of California,
State Department of Health, Water Sanitation Section, 1967.
 
§ 33.0618   Required Separation Between Water Mains and Sanitary Sewers.
   Underground street utility locations for water and sewer mains shall conform
to the standards contained in the most recent edition of the State Road
Department publication entitled Standard Specifications, Drawings 310 and 311,
and the State Department of Health Services bulletin entitled “Required
Separation Between Water Mains and Sanitary Sewers.”
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0619   Backflow and Cross-Connection Control.
   Every person or entity furnishing or supplying water to users shall, by
approved methods, prevent water from unapproved sources or any other substance
from entering the domestic water system, and shall conform to the standards of
Administrative Code Title 17, Division 1, Chapter 5, Subchapter 1, Group 4,
Articles 1 through 4, “Cross-connection Control.”
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0620   Treatment.
   Treatment facilities and operation shall be provided as determined by DEHS
on a case-by-case basis. All surface waters shall be properly treated,
including reliable disinfection.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0621   Correction of Sanitary Defects and Health Hazards.
   DEHS may order such repairs, alterations or additions to the proposed or
existing source facilities and distribution system as will ensure that the
water furnished or supplied shall at all times be in continuous supply, pure,
wholesome, potable, and without danger to the public health and safety,
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0622   Surface Water Sources.
   Surface water sources (stream diversion works, impoundments, infiltration
galleries, springs, etc.) shall not be utilized as sources of water supply for
public water systems unless the permittee has demonstrated to DEHS that there
are no reasonable means of obtaining an acceptable quality and quantity of
groundwater, that required surface water rights documentation has been
completed, that such surface sources and water treatment methods thereof have
been approved for use by DEHS.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0623   Hauled Water.
   Water furnished by a domestic water hauler shall not be used as a source of
water by any public water supply system unless it has been demonstrated to DEHS
that there are no reasonable means of obtaining an acceptable quality and
quantity of groundwater, and that water treatment methods have been approved by
DEHS. Exception: During an officially declared State or local emergency, a
public water supply system may utilize hauled water as a temporary source of
supply.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§ 33.0624   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Those enforcement procedures, remedies, and penalties of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Article and be in addition to all
others provided by law.
(Ord. 2518, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2537, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 2670,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2701, passed - -1982; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am.
Ord. 3512, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3516, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3659, passed
- -1996)
§§ 33.625—629   (Reserved).
ARTICLE 3: WATER WELLS
§ 33.0630   Statement of Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this Article is to provide minimum standards for
construction, reconstruction, abandonment and destruction of all wells relating
to groundwater protection in order to: (a) protect underground water resources,
and (b) provide safe water to persons within San Bernardino County. Pursuant to
the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code), the Department of
Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino shall
enforce the provisions of this Article within this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0631   Permits.
   (a)   No person or entity, as principal agent or employee, shall dig, drill,
bore, drive, reconstruct or destroy: (1) a well that is or has been used to
produce or inject water; (2) a cathodic protection well; (3) an observation
well; or (4) an exploration well; without first filing a written application to
do so with DEHS, receiving, and retaining a valid permit as provided herein.
   (b)   Application for Permit. Applications for permits shall be submitted to
DEHS and shall include the following:
      (1)   A plot plan showing the location for the well with respect to the
following items within a radius of 500 feet from the well:
         (A)   Property lines, location and ownership of all parcels and
easements;
         (B)   Sewage or waste disposal systems or works for carrying or
containing sewage or waste;
         (C)   All intermittent or perennial, natural or artificial bodies of
water or watercourses;
         (D)   The approximate drainage pattern of the property;
         (E)   Other wells, including abandoned wells;
         (F)   Access road(s) to well site.
      (2)   Location of the subject property — legal description, assessor’s
parcel number and street address;
      (3)   The contractor’s name and State license classification/number
constructing the well;
      (4)   The proposed or probable depth of the well;
      (5)   The proposed minimum depths and types of casing and probable
minimum depth of perforations to be used if such data can be reasonably
projected;
      (6)   The proposed use of the well;
      (7)   Where the proposed work is a reconstruction or destruction of a
well, the following, if available: Total depth, depth and type of casing used,
depth of perforations, well log, and any other pertinent information available;
      (8)   Description of proposed method of reconstruction or destruction of
well;
      (9)   Location and classification of any past or present solid, liquid,
or hazardous waste disposal sites within two miles of the proposed well;
      (10)   Other information as may be reasonably necessary for DEHS to
determine if the underground waters will be adequately protected.
   (c)   Conditions of Approval. Permits shall be issued after compliance with
the standards provided in this Article. Plans shall be submitted to DEHS
demonstrating compliance with such standards. Permits may include conditions
and requirements found by DEHS to be reasonably necessary to accomplish the
purposes of this Article. Completion bonds, contractor’s bonds, cash deposits,
or other adequate security may be required to ensure all projects are performed
completely and properly to protect the public’s health and safety and the
integrity of underground water resources.
   (d)   Denial. Where DEHS determines that the standards of this Article have
not been met, it shall deny the application.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0632   Licensing and Registration of Water Well Drillers and Contractors.
   No person or entity shall engage in any activity listed in §
33.0631 of this Article except as provided herein, and where required by State
law with a valid license in accordance with the California State Contractor’s
License Law (Business and Professions Code Chapter 9, Division 3), as
appropriate to the activity to be engaged in. Such person or entity shall
register with DEHS prior to commencing any activity regulated by this Article.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0633   Standards.
   Standards for the construction, reconstruction, destruction or abandonment
of wells shall be the standards recommended in the California Department of
Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-81, Chapter II, as may be amended by the State
from time to time and is hereby incorporated herein by reference. For cathodic
protection wells, the standard shall be those recommended in Chapter 11 of the
California Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1, as amended from
time to time and is hereby incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0634   Lateral (Horizontal) Well Standards.
   The location, design, and monitoring of lateral wells shall be in accordance
with the standards recommended in the State of California, State Department of
Health, Water Sanitation Section publication Requirements For Use of Lateral
Wells in Domestic Water Systems, as may be amended and is hereby incorporated
herein by reference.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0635   Approval of Sites.
   Domestic water well sites shall be inspected and approved by DEHS before any
construction activities thereat. Wells serving systems under the direct
jurisdiction of the State Department of Health Services may receive site
approval from that agency.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0636   General Location of Water Wells.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to drill, dig, excavate, or
bore any water well at any location where sources of pollution or contamination
are known to exist, existed, or otherwise substantial risk exists that water
from that location may become contaminated or polluted even though the well may
be properly constructed and maintained. Every well shall be located an adequate
distance from all potential sources of contamination and pollution as follows:
 
Sewers                                                          50 ft. minimum
Septic tank, sewage holding tank, subsurface sewage leach lines 100 ft. minimum
or leach fields
Cesspool or seepage pit                                         150 ft. minimum
Animal or fowl confined                                         100 ft. minimum
Any subsurface sewage disposal system discharging 5,000 gal./   200 ft. minimum
day or more
 
   Minimum distances from other sources of pollution or contamination shall be
determined by DEHS upon investigation and analyses of the probable risks
involved.
   Where particularly adverse or special hazards are involved, the foregoing
distances shall be increased or special approved means of protection,
particularly in the construction of the well, shall be provided as determined
by DEHS.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0637   Well Logs.
   Any person or entity who has drilled, dug, excavated or bored a well subject
to this Article shall furnish DEHS a complete log of such well within 30 days
after completion of the drilling, digging, excavation or boring of such well,
or prior to final inspection of the completed well, whichever occurs first.
This log shall include depths of formation, character, size distribution, color
for all lithological units penetrated, as well as the type of casing, the depth
of the well, the number and location of the perforations in the casing and any
other data required by DEHS. Where insufficient subsurface information is
available from other reliable sources as to certain formations, DEHS may
require inspection of the well log during any phase of the well’s construction
and may require modifications of the remaining planned work to achieve the
purposes of this Article.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0638   Well Surface and Subsurface Construction Features.
   (a)   Water-Well Surface and Annular Sealing. All water wells hereafter
drilled, dug, excavated or bored shall be provided with: a watertight
reinforced concrete slab at least six inches thick and with the top being a
minimum of four inches above the higher of the ground level or floor level at
the well site. The slab shall extend horizontally at least three feet from the
center of the well casing in all directions and be adequately sloped to drain
surface water away from the well casing. Annular seals for agricultural and
individual domestic wells shall extend at least 20 feet below the ground
surface. For community water supply wells, annular seals shall extend at least
50 feet below the ground surface.
   (b)   Sample Spigot. A sample spigot shall be provided on the pump discharge
line of any water well used as a public water supply adjacent to the pump and
on the distribution side of the check valve.
   (c)   Check Valve. A check valve shall be provided on the pump discharge
line adjacent to the pump for all water wells.
   (d)   Water Well Disinfection Pipe. All community water supply wells and
individual domestic wells shall be provided with a pipe or other effective
means through which chlorine or other approved disinfecting agents may be
introduced directly into the well. The pipe shall be extended at least four
inches above the finished grade and shall contain a threaded or equivalently
secured cap upon it.
   (e)   Water Well Master Meter. A master meter or other suitable measuring
device shall be located at each source facility and shall accurately register
the quantity of water delivered to the distribution system from all community
water supply wells serving a public water supply system.
   (f)   Air-Relief Vent. An air-relief vent, if used, shall terminate
downward, be screened, and otherwise be protected from contaminating material
entering.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0639   Disinfection of Water Wells.
   Every new, repaired or reconstructed community water-supply well or
individual domestic well, after completion of construction, repair or
reconstruction, and before being placed in service, shall be thoroughly cleaned
of all foreign substances. The well gravel used in gravel-packed wells, pipes,
pump, pump column, and all well water contact equipment surfaces shall be
disinfected by a DEHS-approved method. Such solution shall remain in the well
and upon all relevant surfaces for at least 24 hours. Disinfection procedures
shall be repeated until microbiologically safe water is produced, as set forth
by Administrative Code Title 22, “Domestic Water Quality and Monitoring.”
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0640   Water Quality Standards.
   Water from all new, repaired, and reconstructed community water supply wells
shall be tested for, and meet standards for, microbiological, chemical,
physical, and radiological quality in accordance with Administrative Code Title
22, Division 4, Chapter 15, “Domestic Water Quality and Monitoring.”
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0641   Required Inspections of Wells.
   An inspection shall be requested of DEHS at least 24 hours in advance of:
   (a)   The filling of the annular space or conductor casing; (Upon failure to
notify DEHS, approved geophysical tests including Sonic Log and Gamma Ray Log
tests shall be conducted at the owner’s expense to substantiate that an annular
seal has been properly installed.)
   (b)   After installation of the surface protective slab, pumping, and other
required equipment;
   (c)   Immediately before and during the destruction of a well; immediately
after the well destruction;
   (d)   Any other operation or condition stipulated on the DEHS permit.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0642   Approval by DEHS.
   No water from a new, repaired, or reconstructed well shall be used until the
well is given a final approval by DEHS.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0643   Well Abandonment.
   If after 30 days of abandonment, the owner of an abandoned well has not
declared to DEHS the well for proposed reuse per §
33.0644, then the well shall be destroyed per §
33.0631 of this Article. If any well is found by DEHS to be a hazard, whereby
its continued existence is likely to cause damage to groundwater, or to the
public health and safety, DEHS shall direct the owner to destroy the well
within a stated period. At the time of removal of a pump, the casing shall be
provided with an adequate cap at the surface and shall be maintained so that it
will not be a hazard to health or safety until such time that the abandoned
well is properly sealed from the bottom to the top.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0644   Declaration of Proposed Reuse.
   Where a well is unused or its disuse is anticipated, the owner may apply to
DEHS in writing stating an intention to use the well again for its original or
other approved purpose. DEHS shall review such a declaration and may grant an
exemption from certain of the provisions of §
33.0643 of this Article provided no undue hazard to public health or safety is
created by the continued existence of the well. Thereafter, an amended
declaration shall be filed annually with DEHS. The original or subsequent
exemption may be terminated for cause by DEHS at any time.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0645   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. All enforcement procedures, remedies, and penalties of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Article, and are in addition to all
others provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§§ 33.646—649   (Reserved).
ARTICLE 4: CERTIFICATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TESTERS
§ 33.0650   Statement of Purpose.
   The purpose of this Article is to assure that domestic water systems within
this jurisdiction are protected against contamination or pollution as a result
of inadequate protection due to the lack of or malfunctioning of backflow
prevention assemblies.
(Ord. 3512, passed - -1992)
§ 33.0655   Authority.
   This Article is adopted pursuant to the authority in Health and Safety Code
§ 116810.
(Ord. 3512, passed - -1992)
§ 33.06510   Certification Required.
   No person shall inspect, maintain, or test water back flow prevention
assemblies without a current, valid Certificate of Competence issued in
accordance with requirements established by the San Bernardino County
Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS).
(Ord. 3512, passed - -1992)
§ 33.06515   Term of Certification.
   The certification required by §
33.06510 of this Article shall be valid for a period of three years From the
date of qualification unless it has been revoked for cause in accordance with
procedures established within this Article.
(Ord. 3512, passed - -1992)
§ 33.06520   Required Fees.
   Each person applying to qualify for certification or for renewal of his or
her certification shall first pay all applicable fees to the San Bernardino
County Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) for each activity in
the amounts set forth in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code Schedule
of Fees.
(Ord. 3512, passed - -1992)
§ 33.06525   Denial, Revocation and Suspension of Certification.
   (a)   The San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services
(DEHS) may deny, revoke, or suspend a certification for any one or more of the
following causes pertaining to conduct of the applicant or certification
holder:
      (1)   Where falsified information is submitted to DEHS in an application
for certification, testing report(s), or correspondence; or
      (2)   Where Federal, State, or local laws or regulations pertaining to
the testing and/or certification of a backflow prevention assembly or
assemblies have been violated.
      (3)   Where required fees have not been paid.
   (b)   Upon determining probable cause for the denial, revocation, or
suspension of a certification, DEHS shall give written notice to the applicant
or certificate holder at the address given on the application or certificate to
show cause why the certification should not be denied, revoked, or suspended,
and conduct a hearing if requested in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (c)   A person whose certification has been denied or revoked pursuant to
this Section shall not be considered by DEHS for a certification until at least
after one year from the date of such denial or revocation. After three such
denials or revocations, or combinations thereof, no new certification shall be
granted to such applicant.
(Ord. 3512, passed - -1992)
§ 33.06530   Non-Transferability of Certifications.
   Certifications issued pursuant to this Article are non-transferable as to
any person or entity.
(Ord. 3512, passed - -1992)
§ 33.06535   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all administration, enforcement,
remedies, and penalties as to this Article shall be as set forth in Chapters
1 and
2 of
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 3512, passed - -1992)
§§ 33.06540 — 33.06550    (Reserved).
ARTICLE 5: DESERT GROUNDWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 33.06551   Purpose.
   (a)   The protection of groundwater resources within San Bernardino County
is of utmost importance. The public health, safety and general welfare of the
people of the State of California and of the County depend upon the continued
availability of groundwater through ensuring that extraction of groundwater
does not exceed the safe yield of affected groundwater aquifers, considering
both the short and long-term impacts of groundwater extraction, including the
recovery of groundwater aquifers through natural as well as artificial
recharge. The protection of the groundwater resource within San Bernardino
County also includes the consideration of the health of individual aquifers and
the continued ability of those aquifers to store and maintain water.
   (b)   The protection of groundwater resources within the unincorporated and
unadjudicated desert region of San Bernardino County is of particular
importance due to:
      (1)   The existence of vast aquifers that underlie those areas which have
not been overdrafted;
      (2)   The relative lack of significant natural recharge in those areas
when compared to the mountain areas and other less arid areas of the County;
and
      (3)    The lack of regulatory or judicial oversight of the groundwater
aquifers within the unadjudicated desert region, which oversight would serve to
ensure the groundwater safe yield and health of the aquifers.
   (c)   This Article protects the groundwater resources of San Bernardino
County in order to ensure the health of that resource. This Article is intended
to be consistent with the California Constitution, Article 10, Section 2 (water
rights), and Article 11, Section 7 (police powers).
   (d)   This Article augments and supplements the Groundwater Management
authority the County may otherwise have pursuant to the Groundwater Management
Act, Water Code §§ 10750 et seq.
§ 33.06552   Scope and Exclusions.
   (a)   This Article shall only apply to those groundwater aquifers that have
not been adjudicated by judicial decree, which are located outside of the
jurisdictional boundaries of the Mojave Water Agency and Public Water Districts
within the Morongo Basin and which are situated in the unincorporated desert
region of the County, generally described as that area of the County lying west
of the Colorado River and the California-Nevada State line, north of the San
Bernardino-Riverside County line, south of the San Bernardino-Inyo County line
and east of Fort Irwin Military Reservation, the Mojave Water Agency, the
Marine Air Ground Task Force Command Center, Twentynine Palms Water District
and the City of Twentynine Palms. The area subject to this Article is more
specifically identified on the attached Desert Groundwater Ordinance Map.
   (b)   This Article shall not apply to any well operated by any district or
person where the district or person has performed both of the following:
      (1)   Adopted a groundwater management plan pursuant to Water Code §§
10750 et seq. (“AB 3030 Plan”) which adheres to “groundwater safe yield” and
“aquifer health” limitations, as those terms are defined in §
33.06553 of this Code or has otherwise developed and instituted a County-
approved groundwater management, monitoring and mitigation plan associated with
its extraction of water that is consistent with guidelines developed by the
County; and
      (2)   Executed a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) or other binding
agreement with the County which:
         (A)   requires the parties to share groundwater monitoring information
and data and to coordinate their efforts to monitor groundwater resources in
the County; and
          (B)   ensures that the measures identified in the AB 3030 Plan or
County-approved groundwater management, monitoring and mitigation plan are
fully implemented and enforced. Such MOU or agreement must remain enforceable
in order to provide for an exclusion from this Article.
   (c)   This Article shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Groundwater wells subject to the Lower Colorado Water Supply
Project;
      (2)   Groundwater wells within the jurisdictional boundary of the Mojave
Water Agency, including public water agencies within the Morongo Basin;
      (3)   Groundwater well operations approved before the effective date of
this Article as part of a currently valid and complied with Conditional Use
Permit or well construction permit. Owner must provide evidence or
certification the well was drilled prior to permit requirements or was
permitted prior to the effective date of this ordinance;
      (4)   Groundwater wells used in conjunction with mining operations for
which a currently valid and complied with mining reclamation plan has been
established;
      (5)   Groundwater wells associated with an agricultural operation, where
the cumulative extraction from all of the agricultural wells from such an
operation is less than 1,100 acre-feet per year and where the water is used on
site and allowed to percolate into the ground, resulting in some return flow to
the underlying aquifer.
      (6)   Groundwater wells which replace abandoned wells if (i) proof of
abandonment for the existing well is shown, (ii) the replacement well casing is
not larger in diameter than the abandoned well, and/or (iii) the pumping
capacity of the replacement well is no more than the pumping capacity of the
abandoned well.
      (7)   Non-agricultural wells with casings smaller than ten inches in
diameter or those to be pumped for less than 30 acre feet per year.
Notwithstanding the foregoing exemption, this Article shall apply to a non-
agricultural well that is proposed on a parcel on which other wells are located
and where the total production of all wells on-site is greater than 50 acre
feet per year. The term PARCEL shall include all parcels within any one
groundwater aquifer in which the same person or persons have a common ownership
interest.
      (8)   Groundwater wells located on Federal lands unless otherwise
specified by inter-agency agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing exclusion,
this Article shall apply to groundwater wells located on privately held lands,
which are within the boundaries of a National Park, Preserve or Monument or any
other Federal designation.
§ 33.06553   Definitions.
   The following terms related to groundwater management are defined as
follows:
   AB 3030 DISTRICT. A district which also has adopted a plan pursuant to the
Groundwater Management Act.
   AQUIFER. A geologic formation that stores, transmits and yields significant
quantities of water to wells and springs.
   AQUIFER HEALTH. The geologic integrity of the affected aquifer, its storage
capacity and the quality of water within the aquifer, including the quality of
water for a drinking water supply.
   CODE. The San Bernardino County Code.
   DISTRICT. Excluding a city wholly or in part located within the boundaries
of the County, any district or political subdivision whose primary function is
the irrigation, reclamation or drainage of land or is the diversion, storage,
management or distribution of water primarily for domestic, municipal,
agricultural, industrial, recreation, fish and wildlife enhancement, flood
control or power production purposes.
   ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The Enforcement Agency for San Bernardino County may be
the Board of Supervisors or the Director of the Department of Public Health,
Environmental Health Services Division.
   GROUNDWATER. All water beneath the surface of the earth within the zone
below the water table in which the soil is completely saturated with water, but
does not include water which flows in known and definite channels.
   GROUNDWATER MANAGEMENT ACT. Water Code §§ 10750 et seq.
   GROUNDWATER SAFE YIELD. The maximum quantity of water that can be annually
withdrawn from a groundwater aquifer (i) without resulting in overdraft (ii)
without adversely affecting aquifer health and (iii) without adversely
affecting the health of associated lakes, streams, springs and seeps or their
biological resources. The safe yield of an aquifer can be increased by
management actions such as artificial recharge, including infiltration and
other similar actions.
   OVERDRAFT. The condition of a groundwater supply in which the average annual
amount of water withdrawn by pumping exceeds the average annual amount of water
replenishing the aquifer in any ten year period, considering all sources of
recharge and withdrawal.
   PERSON. Any state or local government agency, private corporation, firm,
partnership, individual, group of individuals or, to the extent authorized by
law, any Federal agency.
   RECHARGE. Flow to groundwater storage from precipitation, irrigation,
infiltration from streams, spreading basins and other sources of water.
§ 33.06554   Permits.
   (a)   Requirement for Permit. Except as otherwise excluded from the
application of this Article and in addition to any applicable permitting
requirements for well construction, reconstruction, abandonment and destruction
pursuant to the provisions of the San Bernardino County Code, no person,
district or other entity acting as principal, agent or employee, shall locate,
construct, operate or maintain any new groundwater well within the desert
region of San Bernardino County, as identified in §
33.06552(a), without first filing a written application to do so with the
enforcement agency and receiving and retaining a valid permit as provided
herein. This permit is a discretionary permit under the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA, Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq.)
   (b)   Application for Permit. Applications for permits under this Article
shall be submitted to the enforcement agency in a format prescribed by the
enforcement agency, and shall be of sufficient detail to allow the
determinations set forth in Subdivisions (c) and (d) of this Section to be
made. Applications shall include the following information:
      (1)   A plot plan depicting the location of the proposed well(s) on a
section map depicting the location of the following items within one-half mile
of the well(s):
         (A)   Property lines, location and ownership of all parcels and
easements;
         (B)   All intermittent, perennial, natural or artificial bodies of
water or watercourses;
         (C)   Notable nearby geographic features (faults, etc.);
         (D)   All other wells; and
         (E)   Landfills, septic systems or other liquid or solid waste
facilities.
      (2)   Proposed well diameter, depth and completion interval (screen or
perforation locations) for proposed well(s);
      (3)   Well design capacities for proposed well(s);
      (4)   Anticipated groundwater safe yield of the affected groundwater
aquifer;
      (5)   Anticipated static and pumping levels;
      (6)   Anticipated water quality;
      (7)   The intended use of groundwater from the proposed well(s);
      (8)   The proposed months of operation of the proposed well(s) (year-
round, irrigation months, etc.);
      (9)   The proposed pumping cycles (one eight-hour/day cycle, two six-
hour/day cycles, etc.).
      (10)   Estimated annual pumpage from the proposed well(s) in acre-feet;
      (11)   System description (irrigation, domestic, etc.);
      (12)   Anticipated return flows (deep percolation, runoff, etc.);
      (13)   The estimated rate of natural recharge to the affected groundwater
aquifer(s) calculated in accordance with generally accepted scientific
methodologies and as deemed appropriate by the enforcement agency;
      (14)   A description of the affected groundwater aquifer(s) including
estimated storage capacity and the overall quality of water within the aquifer;
      (15)   Other information as may be reasonably necessary for the County to
determine the potential effects of the proposed well operations on the
groundwater safe yield and aquifer health of the affected aquifer;
      (16)   Supporting documentation, where available, for all of the
foregoing items.
   (c)   Permit Review.
      (1)   Procedure: administrative review or public hearing.
      (2)   Reviewing authority: The Director of the Department of Public
Health, Environmental Health Services Division, shall be the reviewing
authority for Permit applications except in the following circumstances:
         (A)   Where the Director of the Department of Public Health,
Environmental Health Services Division refers the proposal to the Board of
Supervisors for Public Hearing.
         (B)   Where the proposal is filed concurrently with an application
subject to Public Hearing review procedures.
      (3)   Where the Director of the Department of Public Health,
Environmental Health Services Division is the reviewing authority, the
procedure shall be considered to be Administrative Review and notice shall be
provided pursuant to §
33.06555 herein.
   (d)   Conditions of Approval. Plans shall be submitted to the enforcement
agency demonstrating compliance with the standards of this Article. No permit
shall be issued unless the enforcement agency determines, based upon the
available data, that the well(s) constructed and operated as proposed, would
not result in exceeding the groundwater safe yield of the relevant aquifers.
Permits may include conditions and requirements found by the enforcement agency
to be reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Article,
including, but not limited to, conditions requiring groundwater management,
mitigation and monitoring by the applicant.
   (e)   Environmental Review. Prior to taking an action to approve an
application for a permit, the enforcement agency shall make the environmental
findings required under the California Environmental Quality Act.
   (f)   Denial. The enforcement agency shall deny the application where it
determines that the standards of this Article have not been met; where the well
operations proposed in the application would result in exceeding the
groundwater safe yield of the relevant aquifers considered individually or in
conjunction with other existing wells.
   (g)   Permit Fees. The hourly rates for administering the provisions of this
Article are established under the provisions of the San Bernardino County Code
Schedule of Fees.
   (h)   Permit Suspension/Revocation or Modification. Permits may be issued
only for so long as the well operations do not exceed the groundwater safe
yield of the relevant aquifers. Permits will be suspended, revoked or modified
if the enforcement agency determines that continued operations under the permit
would result in overdraft of the relevant aquifers.
   (i)   Administrative Variances and Special Circumstances. The County may
grant an administrative variance from any provision of this Article due to
special circumstances or hardship. The County may describe alternative
requirements where submitted documents as may be reasonably required by the
County provide substantial evidence that a modification of the requirements in
this Article will not endanger the general public health and safety and strict
compliance would be unreasonable in view of all of the circumstances.
   (j)   Inspection and Monitoring. The enforcement agency may, with consent or
a warrant if required, at any and all reasonable times enter any and all
places, property, enclosures and structures for the purposes of making
examinations and investigations to determine whether any provision of this
Article is being or has been violated.
§ 33.06555   Notice of Pending Decision.
   (a)   Upon receipt of a request for a decision, the reviewing authority
shall cause notice to be given specifying the time and place at least ten
calendar days prior to the date of the scheduled decision by the following
applicable methods:
      (1)   Notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the respective community of the proposal for decisions using the
Public Hearing procedure.
      (2)   Notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has
filed a written request for a specific application.
      (3)   Notice shall be given by first class mail or delivery to all
property owners within one mile of the external boundaries of the parcel of the
proposed extraction for decisions using the public hearing or the
administrative review procedures.
      (4)   Notice may be given in such other manner as is deemed necessary or
desirable.
   (b)   Said notice shall include sufficient information to give those
receiving the notice a reasonable opportunity to evaluate the implications of
the proposal and to participate in the decision making process.
   (c)   Ownership and addresses of properties shall be determined from the
latest equalized tax assessment role or from other records of the County
Assessor or County Tax Collector, whichever contains more recent information.
   (d)   If during a public hearing, items are continued by the reviewing
authority to a specific date, the items shall not be re-noticed unless
specifically requested by the reviewing authority.
§ 33.06556   Appeals.
   (a)    Prior to its effective date, a decision made in accordance with the
provisions of this Code by a reviewing authority other than the County Board of
Supervisors may be appealed by the applicant or other affected party, as
follows:
      (1)   Applications for an appeal to the Board of Supervisors shall be
made on forms supplied by the enforcement agency. Applications for appeals
shall be accompanied by a written statement of the grounds upon which the
appeal is based. The appeal application shall identify:
         (A)   The subject permit application;
         (B)   The specific decision, condition of approval or other matter
being appealed;
         (C)   The date of such action;
         (D)   The justification for the appeal; and
         (E)   Any remedy or solution for which the appellant petitions.
      (2)   A uniform fee established by the Board of Supervisors shall be paid
to the County upon the filing of each appeal.
      (3)   A properly filed application for appeal stays proceedings in the
matter appealed until a decision is rendered on the appeal.
      (4)   An application for an appeal must be submitted to the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors within 15 days after a notice of decision is mailed by the
enforcing agency to the applicant.
      (5)   Within 30 days of the acceptance of an application for an appeal,
the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall set the matter for hearing and
shall give notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the appellant,
the applicant and to any other party who has requested in writing to be so
notified.
      (6)   Upon hearing the appeal, the Board of Supervisors shall consider
the record and such additional evidence as may be offered and may affirm,
reverse or modify in whole or in part the decision appealed. The Board of
Supervisors is subject to all of the criteria, findings and requirements
imposed by this Code upon the original decision maker.
§ 33.06557   Violations, Remedies and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. All enforcement procedures, remedies and penalties of
Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code shall apply to this Article and
are in addition to all others provided by law.
(Ord. 3872, passed - -2002)
ARTICLE 6: LIMIT TO GROUNDWATER WELLS WITHIN THE COUNTY INSTITUTIONAL CONTROL
BOUNDARY AREA
§ 33.06558 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Article is to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the residents of San Bernardino County (County) by identifying a
County Institutional Control Boundary Area (CICBA) and prohibiting the
construction and installation of new groundwater wells on land located within
the CICBA to prevent public exposure to groundwater contaminated with
tetrachloroethylene (PCE).
(Ord. 4481, passed - -2024)
§ 33.06559 Definitions.
   As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   COUNTY INSTITUTIONAL CONTROL BOUNDARY AREA (CICBA). The geographic area
depicted and defined as the Cajon Disposal Site and adjacent unincorporated
County areas north and east of the Cajon Disposal Site as further detailed on
Map A and identified as Assessor Parcel Numbers: 0262042190000; 0262042200000;
0262042180000; 0262042430000; 0262042440000; 0262042450000; 0266011130000;
0266021540000; 0266012140000; and 0266011170000.
[image]
 
   Map A
   GROUNDWATER. All water beneath the surface of the earth within the zone
below the water table in which the soil is saturated with water.
   REMEDIATION GOAL. The concentration of PCE in groundwater that will be
achieved when the remedy selected in the Record of Decision (ROD) for the
Source Operable Unit dated May 9, 2024, is complete. The remediation goal
selected in the ROD is the maximum contaminant level for PCE of 5 micrograms
per liter (µg/L) promulgated pursuant to the federal Safe Drinking Water Act.
   RECORD OF DECISION (ROD). The document that selects and describes the
cleanup action the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) will take to address
contamination in the Northwest Area of the Source Operable Unit (OU) at the
Newmark Groundwater Contamination Superfund Site (Newmark Site).
(Ord. 4481, passed - -2024)
§ 33.06560. Prohibition.
   The drilling, construction, development, and operation of any new
groundwater well in the CICBA is prohibited.
(Ord. 4481, passed - -2024)
§ 33.06561. Exceptions.
   (a)   This Article shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Groundwater wells currently installed within the CICBA as of the
date of enactment of this Article.
      (2)   Future groundwater wells to be installed within the CICBA, the
purpose of which is to collect groundwater for monitoring or testing
groundwater quality. The construction and installation of all such wells must
comply with the applicable requirements of
Article 3 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4481, passed - -2024)
§ 33.06562 Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. All enforcement procedures, remedies and penalties of
Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code shall apply to this Article and
are in addition to all others provided by law.
(Ord. 4481, passed - -2024)
CHAPTER 7: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND TOXICS CONTROL
(REPEALED BY ORD. 3846, PASSED - -2002)
CHAPTER 8: WASTE MANAGEMENT
Section
Article 1: Refuse Storage
   
33.0801   Statement of Purpose and Authority.
   
33.0802   Definitions.
   
33.0803   Storage of Refuse.
   
33.0804   Refuse Removal.
   
33.0805   Refuse Collection Frequency.
   
33.0806   Residential Refuse Containers and Collection Standards.
   
33.0807   Commercial Refuse Containers.
   
33.0808   Placement of Refuse Containers.
   
33.0809   Bulky and Prohibited Wastes.
   
33.0810   (Reserved).
   
33.0811   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   33.0812—0819   (Reserved).
Article 2: Refuse Collection
   
33.0820   (Reserved).
   
33.0821   Statement of Purpose and Authority.
   
33.0822   Definitions.
   
33.0823   Health and Safety Permits.
   
33.0824   Exceptions.
   
33.0825   Application for a Permit or Renewal of a Permit.
   
33.0826   Issuance, Suspension, and Revocation of Permits; Change of Ownership
   
33.0827   Causes and Procedures for Denial, Denial of Renewal, Revocation, and
Suspension of Permits.
   
33.0828   Renewal of Permits.
   
33.0829   Permit Fees and Charges for Service.
   
33.0830   Vehicle Specifications.
   
33.0831   Equipment Required.
   
33.0832   Records Required.
   
33.0833   Requirements of Permittee.
   
33.0834   Office for Inquiries and Complaints.
   
33.0835   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   33.0836—0839   (Reserved).
Article 2.1: Class A Permits
   
33.0840   Statement of Purpose and Authority.
   
33.0841   Definitions.
   
33.0842   Permits.
   
33.0843   Exemptions.
   
33.0844   Refuse Collection Areas.
   
33.0845   Application/Renewal of Permit.
   
33.0846   Issuance, Renewal, Suspension, Transfer and Revocation of Permits.
   
33.0847   Procedure for Denial, Denial of Renewal, Revocation and Suspension of
Permits.
   
33.0848   Specification of Permit Areas.
   
33.0849   Renewal of Permits.
   
33.0849A   New Applicants.
   
33.0849B   Permit Fees and Charge for Services.
   
33.0849C   Records Required.
   
33.0849D   Hours of Collection.
   
33.0849E   Office for Inquiries and Complaints.
   
33.0849F   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies and Penalties.
Article 3: Liquid Waste (Sanitary) Pumpers
   
33.0850   Purpose and Authority.
   
33.0851   Definitions.
   
33.0852   Permits and Hearing Procedures.
   
33.0853   Application for Permits.
   
33.0854   Issuance of Permits.
   
33.0855   Indemnification and Insurance.
   
33.0856   Renewal of Permits.
   
33.0857   Denial, Denial of Renewal, Revocation, and Suspension of Permits.
   
33.0858   Nontransferability of Permits and Change of Address.
   
33.0859   Records and Reports.
   
33.0860   Disposal of Sanitary Wastes.
   
33.0861   Required Health and Safety Equipment.
   
33.0862   Cleanliness and Markings for Vehicles.
   
33.0863   Sanitary Wastes, Hazardous and/or Toxic Wastes and Materials.
   
33.0864   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies and Penalties.
   
33.0865   Portable Toilets.
Article 4: Sewage Holding Tanks
   
33.0870   Purpose and Authority.
   
33.0871   Definitions.
   
33.0872   Use of Sewage Holding Tanks Restricted. Permits Required.
   
33.0873   Conditions for Construction and Operational Permits.
   
33.0874   Required Agreements with District or Sewering Entity.
   
33.0875   Required Agreements with Property Owners.
   
33.0876   Bonds.
   
33.0877   Standards.
   
33.0878   Contract with Septic Tank Pumper.
   
33.0879   Abandonment of Sewage Holding Tanks.
   
33.0880   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   33.0881—0889   (Reserved).
Article 5: Liquid Waste Disposal
   
33.0890   Purpose and Authority.
   
33.0891   Definitions.
   
33.0892   Approved Liquid Waste Disposal Systems.
   
33.0893   Mountain Areas.
   
33.0894   Soil Testing Requirements.
   
33.0895   Soil Testing Administration.
   
33.0896   Revocation by DEHS of Testing Privileges.
   
33.0897   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
Article 6: Designated Maintenance Areas
   
33.08100   Purpose and Authority.
   
33.08101   Definitions.
   
33.08102   Designated Maintenance Areas.
   
33.08103   Persons Authorized to Certify Compliance.
   
33.08104   Revocation of DEHS Authorization to Perform Certifications.
   
33.08105   Minimum Requirements.
   
33.08106   Permits Required.
   
33.08107   Holding Tanks.
   
33.08108   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   33.08109—08119   (Reserved).
Article 7: Operation of Multiple Ownership Septic Systems
   
33.08120   Purpose.
   
33.08121   Authority.
   
33.08122   Definitions.
   
33.08123   Ownership and Control.
   
33.08124   Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions (C.C.&R.’s).
   
33.08125   Types of Permits.
   
33.08126   Requirements for DEHS Permits.
   
33.08127   Existing DEHS Operating Permits.
   
33.08128   Public Sewering Entity.
   
33.08129   DEHS Contracted Services.
   
33.08130   Placement of Utilities.
   
33.08131   Compliance Procedures, Remedies, and Penalties.
   33.08132—08140   (Reserved).
Article 8: Storage of Manure and Commercial Fertilizer Operations (CFO)
   
33.08141   Statement of Purpose and Authority.
   
33.08142   Definitions.
   
33.08143   Prohibition of Manure Storage Upon the Premises Where Manure is
Produced.
   
33.08144   Permits Required for CFO.
   
33.08145   Enforcement Activities.
   
33.08146   Construction and Operational Requirements.
   
33.08147   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
Article 9: Out-Of-County Refuse
   
33.08150   Findings and Determinations.
   
33.08151   Discharge of Out-of-County Refuse.
   
33.08152   Posting of Restriction.
   
33.08153   Penalty.
Article 9.5
   
33.08155   Prohibition on Acceptance at or Delivery of Waste or Related
Material to an Unauthorized Facility; Definitions; Application of Prohibition.
   
33.08156   Authority.
   
33.08157   Penalty.
   
33.08158   Severability.
Article 10 (Reserved)
   
33.08160   (Repealed by Ord. 4195, passed - -2013).
   
33.08161   (Repealed by Ord. 4195, passed - -2013).
   
33.08162   (Repealed by Ord. 4195, passed - -2013).
   
33.08163   (Repealed by Ord. 4195, passed - -2013).
   
33.08164   (Repealed by Ord. 4195, passed - -2013).
   33.08165—33.08169   (Reserved).
Article 11: Landspreading of Sludge
   
33.08170   Purpose.
   
33.08171   Definitions.
   
33.08172   Approvals.
   
33.08173   Filing for Department Approval.
   
33.08174   Application Form.
   
33.08175   Standards.
   
33.08176   Substitute Standards.
   
33.08177   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   
33.08178   (Reserved).
   
33.08179   (Reserved).
Article 12: Solid Waste Facility Permits
   
33.08180   Purpose and Authority.
   
33.08181   Legal Defense Fee Responsibility.
ARTICLE 1: REFUSE STORAGE
§ 33.0801   Statement of Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this Article is to establish minimum standards for the
storage of nonhazardous wastes within the unincorporated area of the County of
San Bernardino.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of Division 3, Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, Public
Resources Code (PRC) § 40059, Code of Regulations § 17200; and other applicable
State law, the Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health
Services (DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino shall enforce the provisions of
this Article within the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 2854, passed - -1984; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed -
-1996)
§ 33.0802   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions in Chapters
1 and
3 of
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code:
   BARREL. A container which may or may not be provided by a Refuse Collection
Operator for residential refuse collection.
   BULKY WASTES. Large items of solid waste such as appliances, furniture,
trees, branches, stumps and other oversize wastes whose large size precludes or
complicates their handling by normal collection, processing or disposal
methods.
   COLLECTION VEHICLE OR EQUIPMENT. Includes any vehicle or equipment used in
the collection of residential, industrial or commercial waste.
   COMMERCIAL BINS. A type of container provided by the refuse collection
operator to commercial, industrial and multi-family dwelling customers for
refuse storage and collection purposes and which is emptied by the refuse
collection operator by means of a front-loading mechanism into the refuse
vehicle.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTES. The nonhazardous waste building
materials, packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair
and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other
structures.
   DOMESTIC WASTE. Includes all refuse which does not fall under the definition
of “nondomestic waste.”
   GARBAGE. Includes all kitchen and table food waste, animal waste, vegetable
waste and all household waste or residue resulting from the storage,
preparation, cooking, handling, or treatment of food and shall also include
putrescible wastes.
   GARBAGE HAULER. Any person or entity who collects garbage, unmixed with
rubbish, and transports it to a commercial garbage-feeding hog ranch or to a
commercial establishment for processing for use in livestock feeding.
   HEALTH AND SAFETY PERMIT. That permit which is issued by the Division of
Environmental Health Services to all refuse collection operators, garbage
haulers and/or nondomestic waste haulers that operate within the incorporated
and/or unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County.
   NONDOMESTIC WASTE HAULER. A person or entity involved in removing
nondomestic wastes, either from their own property or from another’s property.
   NONDOMESTIC WASTES. Wastes which may be solid, semisolid, slurries, dust,
nonpetroleum oils, and related substances or combinations thereof, which
constitute a potentially dangerous health or environmental risk to residents of
the County of San Bernardino. Nondomestic wastes may be determined as such by
DEHS upon finding that special transportation requirements are necessary due to
the nature of the material, the intended disposal method, or the intended end
use. Said term shall not include any wastes classed as infectious, toxic or
hazardous by State or Federal Statute.
   PERMITTEE. Any person who has been issued a health and safety permit to
collect, transfer, or remove solid wastes under the provisions of this
ordinance. A PERMITTEE may include refuse collection operators, garbage haulers
and/or nondomestic waste haulers.
   PROHIBITED WASTES. Dead animals exceeding 15 pounds in weight, battery acid,
poisonous, caustic or toxic material, or other substances capable of damaging
clothing or causing injury to the person and dangerous or destructive
chemicals.
   PUTRESCIBLE WASTES. Wastes that are capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances because of odors,
gases or other offensive conditions.
   REFUSE. All solid waste as defined in Public Resources Code § 40191.
   REFUSE COLLECTION OPERATOR. Any person or entity engaged in the collection,
transportation and removal of refuse, except that it shall not mean a garbage
hauler.
   RESIDENTIAL BINS. A container provided by the refuse collection operator to
a single-family dwelling customer for refuse storage and collection purposes
and which is emptied by the refuse collection operator by means of a front-
loading mechanism into the refuse vehicle.
   ROLL-OFF BOXES or DROP OFF BOXES. A large, open-topped, detachable
container, 20 cubic yards or more in capacity, employed in a system of
materials handling in which the loaded container is pulled onto the collection
vehicle mechanically and transported to an approved site for emptying.
   RUBBISH. Includes, but is not restricted to, all nonputrescible solid waste
or debris such as paper, ashes, cardboard, wood, clothing, yard clippings,
metal, plastic, construction waste and debris litter and other similar
materials.
   SOLID WASTE. As defined in Public Resources Code § 40191 as presently
enacted or as it may be later amended.
   SOLID WASTE FACILITY. As defined in Public Resources Code § 40194 as
presently enacted or as later amended.
   SOLID WASTE HANDLING. As defined by Public Resources Code § 40195 as
presently enacted or as later amended.
(Ord. 2854, passed - -1984; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed -
-1996)
§ 33.0803   Storage of Refuse.
   All refuse generated on a property or premises shall be stored in
appropriate containers and in a manner which does not promote the propagation,
harborage, or attraction of vectors, or the creation of nuisances. Each owner,
operator or occupant shall provide sufficient numbers of suitable refuse
containers to contain, without overflowing, all refuse generated between refuse
removal dates.
(Ord. 2854, passed - -1984; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed -
-1996)
§ 33.0804   Refuse Removal,
   Refuse removal shall be in accordance with the following, unless modified in
§
33.0805, below:
   (a)   All owners, operators, or occupants of any residence, premises,
business establishment or industry shall be responsible for the satisfactory
removal of all refuse accumulated on their property or premises. No refuse
shall be allowed to remain on the premises for longer than the periods
specified in §
33.0805 below, except when:
      (1)   Disruptions due to strikes occur; or
      (2)   Severe weather conditions or natural disasters such as earthquakes
or fires make collection impossible using normal collection equipment; or
      (3)   Official holidays interrupt the normal seven day collection cycle
in which case collection may be postponed until the next working day.
   (b)   The refuse collection operator is responsible for picking up any
spillage that may be caused during collection. This shall not include spillage
caused by animals, vandals, wind or other such causes.
(Ord. 2854, passed - -1984; Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed -
-1996)
§ 33.0805   Refuse Collection Frequency.
   (a)   All waste which contains garbage produced or accumulated in or about a
residence shall be removed from the premises at least once each seven day
period to an approved solid waste facility.
   (b)   All waste which contains garbage produced or accumulated in or about
hotels, food establishments, or other businesses shall be removed from the
premises at least twice each seven day period to an approved solid waste
facility.
   (c)   All rubbish, which does not contain garbage, produced or accumulated
in or about any premises shall be removed from the premises at least once every
14 days.
   (d)   DEHS may require an increase in collection frequency upon finding that
an unhealthful, unsightly, or public nuisance condition is created by adhering
to the minimum collection frequency.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0806   Residential Refuse Containers and Collection Standards.
   Containers used for storage of refuse until collection and/or transportation
to an approved solid waste facility shall comply with the following:
   (a)   Refuse containers shall be made of a durable, nonabsorbent material
and shall be watertight with a tight-fitting lid or cover, except as provided
for in this Article.
   (b)   The user of any refuse container shall ensure that lids are kept
tightly attached so as to completely close off the container and to keep such
containers in a clean condition without excessive build-up of clinging, sticky,
or encrusted wastes in or on the container.
   (c)   All refuse containers which must be manually emptied by a permittee
shall have a gross filled weight not to exceed 55 pounds and a maximum capacity
not to exceed 32 gallons.
   (d)    A container for refuse that does not meet the standards of
Subdivisions (a)—(c) above, is substandard and shall not be used for
residential refuse collection. Substandard containers shall be adequately
repaired before being put back into service or shall be replaced.
   (e)   Tree trimmings shall be tied in bundles of not more than four feet in
length and shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight; cardboard boxes shall be
flattened and tied in bundles not exceeding four feet in length nor 50 pounds
in weight.
   (f)   Plastic bags used for refuse collection shall be of sufficient
strength and water tightness to contain the refuse.
   (g)   Refuse containers of one cubic yard or more owned by the refuse
collection operator shall be identified with the name and telephone number of
the company servicing the container.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0807   Commercial Refuse Containers.
   Refuse containers provided to commercial customers by a permittee for
storage and collection purposes shall comply with the requirements for
residential refuse containers in §
33.0806 above, as well as the following applicable standards:
   (a)   Roll-off boxes shall be identified with the name of the permittee, and
uniquely identified with a box number to aid in locating boxes which require
maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to keep all boxes
painted and maintained.
   (b)   Roll-off boxes are exempted from the provision for a tight-fitting lid
or cover, provided any putrescible wastes is fully contained in closed plastic
bags or equivalent and such roll-off boxes are covered or otherwise secured to
prevent the blowing out, or other loss, of the contents whether such boxes are
moving or stationary.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0808   Placement of Refuse Containers.
   Placement of refuse containers shall be in accordance with the following:
   (a)   Refuse containers for residential pick-up service shall be placed in a
convenient and accessible location adjacent to a street or public thoroughfare
for not more than 12 hours prior to scheduled pick-up and shall be removed
within 24 hours after pick-up. Other locations shall be subject to approval by
the permittee and DEHS.
   (b)   At all other times refuse containers shall be stored away from the
street and in such a manner as to minimize creating an environmental or public
health nuisance.
   (c)   At no time shall a refuse container be placed in such a manner as to
create a traffic problem or hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare.
   (d)   All residential bins shall be located upon the customer’s property in
a manner that minimizes traffic, safety, aesthetic, and other problems. If a
suitable location can not be arranged, DEHS may determine that the permittee
cannot provide bin service at the residence and shall instead provide barrel
service.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0809   Bulky and Prohibited Wastes.
   (a)   Bulky wastes shall not be set out for collection without having made
prior arrangements with the refuse collection operator for pickup of the waste.
   (b)   No prohibited wastes shall be mixed or placed with any rubbish or
garbage which is to be collected, removed or disposed of by the refuse
collection operator.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0810   (Reserved).
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0811   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all administration, enforcement
procedures, remedies and penalties as to this Article shall proceed as is set
forth in Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of
Division 3, Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code and otherwise as provided
by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§§ 33.0812 — 0819   (Reserved).
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
ARTICLE 2: REFUSE COLLECTION
§ 33.0820   (Reserved).
§ 33.0821   Statement of Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this Article is to protect the health and safety of the
community through the establishment of minimum health and safety standards for
the collection and transportation of Solid Waste within the County of San
Bernardino.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of Title 3, Division 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, Public
Resources Code §§ 43200 and 43209, and other applicable State law, the Board of
Supervisors authorizes the Department of Public Health, Division of
Environmental Health Services (DEHS) as the Local Enforcement Agency (LEA) of
the County of San Bernardino to enforce and administer the provisions of this
Article within the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0822   Definitions.
   Definitions provided in
Article 1 of this Chapter as well as all definitions in Chapters
1 and
3 of
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code shall apply to this
Article.
(Am. Ord. 3551, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0823   Health and Safety Permits.
   (a)   Except for those persons exempt from the permit requirement pursuant
to §
33.0824 of this Article, it shall be unlawful for a person or entity to operate
a refuse collection or transportation activity, garbage hauling activity or
nondomestic waste hauling activity within the incorporated or unincorporated
areas of the County without possessing the current health and safety permit to
do so issued by the Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental
Health Services (DEHS) and having paid fees to DEHS, as set forth in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
Possession of such a permit does not excuse or substitute for compliance with
other laws or regulations applying to solid waste handling operations,
including, without limitation,
Division 6 of Title 4 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (b)   Any refuse hauler who, at the effective date of this Subdivision, has
an existing A, B, or D permit shall also be considered to have a health and
safety permit effective until December 31, 1996.
(Am. Ord. 3651, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0824   Exceptions.
   Excepted from the requirements of §
33.0823 are:
   (a)   Those hauling domestic waste generated upon their own property,
residence or business.
   (b)   Those hauling segregated rubbish composed of ashes, abandoned vehicles
and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, construction and
demolition wastes, or recyclable materials, including green waste.
   (c)   Clean up crews, landscapers and yard maintenance services who
physically gather, collect and remove rubbish only. This does not include
merely providing a refuse container without providing the additional service of
gathering materials and placing them in the container.
   (d)   DEHS may elect to except haulers of other segregated rubbish on a
case-by-case basis upon submittal of the permit application required in §
33.0825.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0825   Application for a Permit or Renewal of a Permit.
   Applications for a health and safety permit to collect, transfer, or remove
refuse, garbage or nondomestic wastes shall be made to DEHS upon forms provided
by DEHS, shall be accompanied by an application fee, and shall contain the
following information:
   (a)   The name, business address, permanent home address, business and 24-
hour emergency phone number(s) of the applicant;
   (b)   The owner(s) of the garbage hauling, nondomestic waste hauling or
refuse collection and transportation operation. If a joint venture,
partnership, or limited partnership, the name of all participants and/or
partners. If a corporation or limited liability company, the name of each
officer and manager, the nature of their office or participation, and the name
and address of the agent for the service of process;
   (c)   The location of all proposed facilities that will be used;
   (d)   Trade and firm names under which the applicant operates;
   (e)   Proof that the applicant owns or controls adequate collection vehicles
and other necessary equipment in good mechanical condition to adequately
conduct the proposed refuse collection and transportation business. The
applicant shall provide a list of the number and types of vehicles to be used
in the collection and/or transportation of refuse;
   (f)   Proof that the applicant owns or has access to suitable facilities for
maintaining the collection vehicles and other necessary equipment in a clean
and sanitary condition. Applicant shall also provide adequate off-road parking
for the refuse vehicles;
   (g)   Proof that the applicant’s refuse, garbage or nondomestic waste
collection vehicles and equipment conform to all applicable provisions of this
Article;
   (h)   A list of the types of materials the applicant proposes to collect/
transport;
   (i)   Proof that the applicant possesses the necessary insurance policies
which, at minimum, comply with the requirements of this Article;
   (j)   Indemnification. Separate and distinct from the insurance provisions
required by this Division, each permittee shall appear and defend (with counsel
approved by County) all actions against the Department and the County, and the
permittee agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold the County and/or its officers,
agents, volunteers and employees harmless from and against, any and all claims
and demands, causes of action of every kind and description, damages,
liabilities, costs or expenses for any damages or injuries to any person or
property, including, but not limited to, injury to permittee’s officers,
agents, or employees which arise directly or indirectly from or are connected
with or are caused or claimed to be caused by acts, errors or omissions of
permittee, or its officers, agents, or employees, in exercising its rights or
in performing its duties under its permit or under this Division, and all costs
and expenses of investigating and defending against same; except to the extent
such indemnification is prohibited by law.
   (k)   Insurance. The permittee shall obtain and keep in force during the
term of said permit, comprehensive general and vehicular liability insurance of
at least $1,000,000.00 combined single limits for bodily injury and property
damage, and a program of Workers’ Compensation Insurance or a state-approved
Self-Insured Workers’ Compensation Program in an amount and form to meet all
applicable requirements of the Labor Code of the State of California including
employer’s liability with $250,000.00 limits covering all employees of the
permittee. The County of San Bernardino shall be named as an additional insured
on all policies except Workers’ Compensation and all policies shall contain a
provision requiring written notice to be given to DEHS prior to cancellation,
modification, or reduction of limits. A permittee shall furnish DEHS, prior to
expiration or termination of the period covered by premium payment when renewal
is automatic, evidence of renewal and of full payment of the premium on
required insurance coverage. Nonreceipt by DEHS of this information shall
result in the insurance policy being considered to be expired and justification
for the suspension, revocation or cancellation of the permit in the manner set
forth in this Article and
Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   Insurance Review. The above insurance requirements are subject to periodic
review by the County. The Risk Manager of the County of San Bernardino is
authorized, but not required, to reduce or waive any of the above insurance
requirements whenever the Risk Manager determines that any of the above
insurance is not available, is unreasonably priced, or is not needed to protect
the interests of the County. In addition, the Risk Manager is authorized, but
not required, to change the above insurance requirements to require additional
types of insurance coverage or higher coverage limits, provided that any such
change is reasonable in light of past claims against the County, inflation, or
any other item reasonably related to the County’s risk.
   (l)   Permittee shall not be required to maintain separate policies of
insurance for any type of insurance required under this Section, any other
Section of this Chapter or under
Division 6 of Title 4 of this Code. However, the permittee must maintain the
level of insurance which is the higher of that required in this Chapter or
Division 6 of Title 4 of this Code and must obtain and maintain insurance
coverage which satisfies all of the provisions of this Chapter and
Division 6 of Title 4 of this Code, including without limit, providing
certificates of insurance to all specified Departments of the County and
requiring notification of the cancellation or termination of any insurance
policy be given by the insurance company to all specified Departments of the
County.
   (m)   The application called for in this Section may be combined with the
application called for in §
33.0845 dealing with Class A Permits, if the applicant is required to obtain or
renew a Class A Permit at the same time as it is required to submit an
application under this Section (“Joint Application”). Such joint application
must satisfy all of the requirements of both this Section and §
33.0845. In the event the applicant chooses to submit a joint application,
applicant shall give DEHS one duplicate original of the joint application. DEHS
shall take all actions with respect to the issuance or renewal of the health
and safety permit sought in the joint application, to the same effect as if the
applicant had submitted an application solely under this §
33.0825.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0826   Issuance, Suspension, and Revocation of Permits; Change of
Ownership.
   (a)   Issuance. Where DEHS finds that the statements in the application are
true and that the applicant is reasonably capable of complying with the
provisions of this Article, DEHS shall issue a health and safety permit for
refuse collection, including the removal of garbage and nondomestic wastes; for
garbage hauling only; or for nondomestic wastes only.
   (b)   Suspension and Revocation. Where DEHS determines that any permittee
has not complied with the provisions of this Article and all other applicable
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, the permit may be suspended or
revoked in accordance with
Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code
   (c)   Statement of Ownership. The permittee shall file a true and correct
statement of ownership with DEHS at the time of permit renewal each year under
penalty of perjury. A notice of change in ownership in the operating company or
of the business operating under the permit shall be submitted in writing to
DEHS before a permit will be issued to the new owners.
   (d)   Transfer of Permit. A permittee shall not lease, sublet, subcontract,
or in any manner allow any other person or entity to engage in refuse
collection and transportation services, garbage hauling or nondomestic waste
hauling under permission of the permit issued to the permittee without first
receiving prior written approval from DEHS. The permit issued may be suspended
or revoked by DEHS in the event there is a change in the person or entity
owning the operating company, unless prior notice has been given in writing to
DEHS pursuant to Subdivision (c) of this Section.
(Am. Ord. 3411, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0827   Causes and Procedures for Denial, Denial of Renewal, Revocation and
Suspension of Permits.
   (a)   DEHS may deny, deny renewal of, revoke, or suspend a health and safety
permit for any one or more of the following causes pertaining to conduct of the
applicant or permittee:
      (1)   When falsified information is submitted to DEHS in a permit
application, report(s) or correspondence;
      (2)   When false information is submitted to DEHS;
      (3)   When Federal, State, or local laws or regulations pertaining to the
collection, or transportation, of solid wastes are violated; or
      (4)   When any violation of conditions to operate exists pertaining to a
conditional use permit or special use permit, if such are required.
      (5)   When DEHS finds that the collection vehicles or other equipment
used or to be used in conducting or operating the garbage hauling, nondomestic
waste hauling or refuse collection service is inadequate, unfit, or incapable
of being used and maintained to comply with the provisions of this Article.
      (6)   When DEHS determines that a permittee has not operated in the
County for 30 days or more.
   (b)   Upon determining cause for the denial, denial of renewal, revocation,
or suspension of a permit, DEHS shall give written notice to the applicant or
permittee to show cause why the permit should not be denied, revoked, suspended
or its renewal denied, and conduct a hearing if requested in accordance with
the provisions of
Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, beginning
with §
33.0200.
   (c)   A person or entity whose permit has been denied, revoked or had its
renewal denied pursuant to this Section shall not be considered by DEHS for a
permit until after one year from the date of such denial, denial of renewal or
revocation. After three such denials, denials of renewal, or revocations, or
combinations thereof, no new permit shall be granted to such applicant.
(Am. Ord. 3652, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0828   Renewal of Permits.
   All health and safety permits shall be renewed annually through DEHS
provided DEHS finds that the permittee, during the period of the unexpired
permit, operated in compliance with the provisions of this Article.
(Am. Ord. 3652, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0829   Permit Fees and Charges for Service.
   (a)   Payment of Permit Fees. Health and safety permit fees shall be paid as
specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (b)   Any of the fees pertaining to this Article may be prorated on a
quarterly basis when applied to an additional vehicle for which a permit is
requested. Unused portions of such fees may be refunded, prorated on a
quarterly basis, to the permittee in the event said vehicle(s) should be
discontinued from use in the business, upon proper written notice to DEHS.
   (c)   Transfer of Permits Between Vehicles. Where any vehicle operating
under a valid current permit is replaced by another vehicle, the permit may be
transferred to the replacement vehicle upon payment of a transfer fee as
specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code contingent
upon an inspection of the new vehicle and approval by DEHS.
   (d)   Each permittee issued an annual health and safety permit shall be
inspected by DEHS to assure compliance with the provisions of this Article.
Whenever DEHS determines that any permittee is not in compliance with this
Article, DEHS may suspend or revoke the health and safety permit in accordance
with the procedures provided in §
33.0827. Any subsequent inspection(s) for the purpose of compliance may be
billed as special inspection(s) per
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Am. Ord. 3652, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0830   Vehicle Specifications.
   Collection vehicles and equipment used by permittees for the collection and/
or transportation of refuse shall be of a type designed and manufactured
specifically for such purposes, as determined by DEHS, and shall comply with
the following minimum specifications:
   (a)   All vehicle bodies shall be constructed of metal. All joints and seams
shall be welded and leakproof.
   (b)   All refuse compartment doors shall be tight-fitting and shall not leak
any contents of the collected refuse.
   (c)   All vehicles classified over three-quarter ton by the manufacturer
shall be equipped with an automatic dumping mechanism.
   (d)   The permittee’s name or firm name and telephone number shall appear in
legible letters not less than three inches high. The business address, if
provided, shall appear in letters not less that two inches high on both sides
of the vehicle.
   (e)   All vehicles shall at all times be maintained in a clean, sanitary
condition, and shall be well-painted. Vehicles shall be well-maintained and
shall not leak oil or other fluids, including hydraulic fluids.
   (f)   All operators of vehicles or equipment used for transporting refuse,
in which the refuse storage compartment is open or partially open at the top
shall take suitable measures, including tarps, if necessary, to prevent litter
release during transportation.
   (g)   All vehicles used for the collection and/or transportation of garbage,
unmixed with rubbish, shall be equipped with watertight metal tanks. When used
for collection, the tanks shall be covered so that not more than one-half of
any tank can be uncovered at any one time. The cover shall be fully closed when
the vehicle is transporting garbage. All equipment used for collecting or
transporting garbage, unmixed with rubbish, shall be cleaned and disinfected at
least once daily.
   (h)   Vehicles collecting and/or transporting nondomestic wastes shall be of
a type and construction DEHS determines on a case-by-case basis to be necessary
for the particular waste and to protect the public health and safety.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0831   Equipment Required.
   (a)   Each vehicle collecting or transporting refuse, garbage, or
nondomestic waste shall at all times carry in the cab current California DMV
Registration, proof of current insurance, and the name, address, and phone
number to be contacted in case of an accident or emergency.
   (b)   Permittee’s facilities shall be clean, orderly and safe. Out-of-
service vehicles shall be clearly identified. Washing facilities shall have
adequate drainage.
   (c)   Solid waste containers stored in the permittee’s yard shall be free
from refuse and shall be clean.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0832   Records Required.
   All permittees shall keep, maintain, and furnish copies of such operating
records as DEHS may request to ascertain compliance with this Article. All
permittees shall maintain a log of all complaints received for review by DEHS.
   The complaint log shall contain the following information: date and time the
complaint was received; name, address and phone number of the complainant, if
possible; date and time of incident; nature of the complaint; and date of final
action. All complaint logs shall be retained for at least 18 months and shall
be available for DEHS inspection.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0833   Requirements of Permittee.
   (a)   All permittee’s vehicles and equipment shall be subject to DEHS
inspection at any operating location during regular business hours.
   (b)   No permittee shall hold putrescible wastes in a vehicle for more than
24 hours.
   (c)   Each employee driving a permittee’s vehicle shall at all times have a
current valid and appropriate California DMV operator’s license.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0834   Office for Inquiries and Complaints.
   The permittee shall take all steps as may be reasonable and necessary in
order to assure that the collection of solid waste is completed in a timely and
efficient manner. The permittee shall maintain customer service phone lines
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and during hours of service
on Saturdays, if any waste collection service is provided on Saturday. The
number of local phone lines provided shall be sufficient to adequately serve
the public. The permittee shall notify DEHS in writing seven days prior to any
change in business name, address, or telephone number. Such notice shall set
forth the corrected information. This Section shall not require the permittee
to maintain an office which is different than or separate from the office for
inquiries and complaints maintained by permittee under any other Section of
this Chapter or under
Division 6 of Title 4 of this Code.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0835   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all administration, enforcement,
remedies, and penalties as to this Article shall generally proceed as set forth
in Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code and otherwise as
provided by law.
   In addition, and in accordance with the provisions in §
33.0112 of this Division of the County Code, any party convicted of violating
this Division, may be held liable by the court for reimbursement to the County
for all or part of the costs incurred in the investigation, analysis,
inspection, abatement and prosecution of the enforcement action against the
guilty party.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§§ 33.0836—33.0839   (Reserved).
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
ARTICLE 2.1: CLASS A PERMITS
§ 33.0840   Statement of Purpose and Authority.
   This purpose of this Article is to establish permitting requirements and
minimum standards for refuse collection and transportation within the
unincorporated areas of the County of San Bernardino.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code; Public
Resources Code § 40059; and other applicable State law, the Board of
Supervisors authorizes the Division of Environmental Health Services,
Department of Public Health to enforce this Article prior to July 1, 1997.
After June 30, 1997, the Board of Supervisors authorizes Waste System Division,
Public Services Group, to enforce this Article.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0841   Definitions.
   The following definitions apply only to this Article and are in addition to
definitions in Articles
1 and
2 of this Chapter.
   CLASS A PERMIT. A permit required by all refuse haulers to provide refuse
collection and transportation service to residential, commercial and or
industrial customers within the unincorporated areas of the County which areas
are not serviced through a franchise agreement issued under the provisions of
Division 6 of Title 4 of this Code.
   CLASS A PERMIT HOLDER. Any person or entity engaged in the collection,
transportation and removal of refuse who has been issued a Class A Permit;
except those persons exempted under §
33.0843 of this Article.
   DEPARTMENT. The Local Enforcement Agency, Division of Environmental Health
Services, Department of Public Health prior to July 1, 1997 and means the Waste
System Division, Public Services Group, after June 30, 1997.
   NONDOMESTIC WASTES. Wastes which may be solid, semisolid, slurries, dust,
nonpetroleum oils, and related substances or combinations thereof, which
constitute a potentially dangerous health or environmental risk to residents of
the County of San Bernardino. Wastes may be determined as such by DEHS upon
finding that special transportation requirements are necessary due to the
nature of the material, the intended disposal method, or the intended end use.
Said term shall not include any wastes classed as infectious, toxic, or
hazardous by State or Federal statute.
   REFUSE. All solid waste as defined in Public Resources Code § 40191.
   REFUSE COLLECTION AREA. Those portions of the County of San Bernardino
designated on certain maps entitled “Refuse Collection Areas in San Bernardino
County” including all amendments and changes thereto, which maps are
incorporated by reference and are on file with Department and in the Office of
the Clerk of the Board.
   REFUSE HAULER. Any person or entity engaged in the collection,
transportation and removal of refuse, except that it shall not mean a garbage
hauler.
   ROUTE VEHICLE. A vehicle which is used in the day-to-day collection/
transportation of refuse.
   SPARE VEHICLE. A vehicle which is used to temporarily replace the regular
route vehicle of a Class A Permit holder when the route vehicle is being
serviced or is otherwise unavailable for use. A SPARE VEHICLE is subject to the
same standards and requirements as a regular route vehicle.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0842   Permits.
   It shall be unlawful for a refuse hauler to operate a refuse collection,
transportation or disposal activity except where exempt by this Code, without
possessing the applicable unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked Class A Permit(s)
to do so, approved by the Board of Supervisors and issued by the Department and
having paid fees to the Department required by this Article, as set forth in
the County of San Bernardino Schedule of Fees. Permits shall be issued for a
term of 12 months or for such shorter term as determined by the Board of
Supervisors.
   The permittee under a health and safety permit is not considered to be a
holder of, nor to have received or have the right to receive a Class A Permit.
Without limiting the generality of the forgoing, any holder of a Class B or D
Permit, as it existed prior to the effective date of this Section, shall not be
considered to be a holder of nor to have received or have the right to receive,
a Class A Permit by virtue of his, her or its status as either a prior holder
of a Class B or D Permit or as a current permittee of a health and safety
permit.
   The Class A Permit shall be issued for specified refuse collection areas as
defined in §
33.0844 of this Article.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0843   Exemptions.
   Exempted from the requirements of §
33.0842 are:
   (a)   Those hauling domestic waste generated upon their own property,
residence or business;
   (b)   Those who collect garbage, unmixed with rubbish, and transport it to a
commercial garbage-feeding hog ranch or to a commercial establishment for
processing;
   (c)   Construction/demolition clean up crews, landscapers and yard
maintenance services who physically gather, collect and remove materials, such
as construction debris, demolition waste, yard trimmings or similar materials
only. This does not include merely providing a refuse container without
providing the additional service of gathering materials and placing them in the
container.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0844   Refuse Collection Areas.
   (a)   For the purpose of this Article, the County of San Bernardino shall be
divided into refuse collection areas. Such areas are designated on those
certain maps entitled “Refuse Collection Areas in San Bernardino County.” Such
maps are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with Department and
in the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this Article, it shall be unlawful for
any person or entity, other than a Class A Permit holder, to operate a refuse
collection service within any refuse collection area.
   (C)   Any refuse collection area may be modified by the Board of Supervisors
at any time should they find that such modification is necessary for the
efficient conduct and operation of refuse collection in the area involved. In
the event of such action, all concerned Class A Permit holders shall be given a
ten-day written notice thereof before such modification is acted upon by the
Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0845   Application/Renewal of Permit.
   In addition to all the provisions of
Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, the
following are prerequisite to issuance or renewal of a Class A Permit:
   (a)   Applicants for a Class A Permit or a renewal thereof must complete the
Department verified application form which shall include:
      (1)   Complete name and description of the applicant;
      (2)   Permanent home address and business addresses of the applicant;
      (3)   Trade, dBA, fictitious business and firm names the applicant
operates under;
      (4)   If a joint venture, partnership or limited partnership, the names
of all participants and/or partners. If a corporation, the name of each
officer, the nature of their office or participation and their permanent
address; and the name and address of the agent for service of process.
      (5)   The location of all appropriate waste facilities that will be used
together with a statement indicating that the waste being delivered to each
site will be within the classification limits of that site;
      (6)   The geographical boundary of the area for which the Class A Permit
is to apply;
      (7)   Facts showing that the applicant is qualified to render efficient
service. This statement shall include any prior experience that will help
establish the applicant’s capability to perform this function. New applicants
shall include a written statement of net worth or other financial data that
will establish the applicant’s capability to discharge applicant’s obligations
under the applicable provisions of this Article.);
      (8)   An applicant for a Class A Permit, if applying for a permit to
service 500 or less customers, shall give the number of customers that the
Class A applicant proposes to serve.
      (9)   That the applicant owns or controls sufficient refuse vehicles and
other necessary equipment in good mechanical condition to adequately conduct
the proposed refuse collection business. That the applicant owns or has access
to suitable facilities for maintaining the vehicles and other necessary
equipment in a clean and sanitary condition;
      (10)   That the refuse collection/ transportation vehicles and equipment
of the applicant conform to all applicable provisions of this Chapter; the
issuance of a Class A Permit is in the public interest in that it is likely to
satisfy an existing public need; and
      (11)   Such other facts or information as Department may reasonably
require.
   (b)   Indemnification. Separate and distinct from the insurance provisions
required by this Division, each permittee shall appear and defend (with counsel
approved by County) all actions against the Department and the County, and the
permittee agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold the County and/or its officers,
agents, volunteers and employees harmless from and against, any and all claims
and demands, causes of action of every kind and description, damages,
liabilities, costs or expenses for any damages or injuries to any person or
property, including, but not limited to, injury to permittee’s officers,
agents, or employees which arise directly or indirectly from or are connected
with or are caused or claimed to be caused by acts, errors or omissions of
permittee, or its officers, agents, or employees, in exercising its rights or
in performing its duties under its permit or under this Division, and all costs
and expenses of investigating and defending against same; except to the extent
such indemnification is prohibited by law.
   (c)   Insurance. The Class A Permit holder shall obtain and keep in force
during the term of said permit, comprehensive general and vehicular liability
insurance of at least $1,000,000.00 combined single limits for bodily injury
and property damage and a program of Workers’ Compensation insurance or a
state-approved Self-Insured Workers’ Compensation Program in an amount and form
to meet all applicable requirements of the Labor Code of the State of
California, including employer’s liability with $250,000.00 limits covering all
employees of the permit holder. The County of San Bernardino shall be named as
an additional insured and all policies, except Workers’ Compensation, shall
contain a provision requiring written notice to be given to the Department
prior to cancellation, modification or reduction of limits.
   Insurance Review. The above insurance requirements are subject to periodic
review by the County. The Risk Manager of the County of San Bernardino is
authorized, but not required, to reduce or waive any of the above insurance
requirements whenever the Risk Manager determines that any of the above
insurance is not available, is unreasonably priced, or is not needed to protect
the interests of the County. In addition, if the Risk Manager determines that
heretofore unreasonably priced or unavailable types of insurance coverage or
coverage limits become reasonably priced or available, the Risk Manager is
authorized, but not required, to change the above insurance requirements to
require additional types of insurance coverage or higher coverage limits,
provided that any such change is reasonable in light of past claims against the
County, inflation or any other item reasonably related to the County’s risk.
   (d)   Class A Permit holder shall not be required to maintain separate
policies of insurance for any type of insurance required under this Section,
any other Section of this Chapter or under
Division 6 of Title 4 of this Code. However, the Class A Permit holder must
maintain the level of insurance which is the higher of that required in this
Chapter or
Division 6 of Title 4 of this Code and must obtain and maintain insurance
coverage which satisfies all of the provisions of this Chapter and
Division 6 of Title 4 of this Code, including without limit, providing
certificates of insurance to all specified Departments of the County and
requiring notification of the cancellation or termination of any insurance
policy be given by the insurance company to all specified Departments of the
County.
   (e)   The application called for in this Section may be combined with the
application called for in §
33.0825 dealing with health and safety permits, if the applicant is required to
obtain or renew a health and safety permit at the same time as it is required
to submit an application under this Section (“joint application”). Such joint
application must satisfy all of the requirements of both this Section and §
33.0825. In the event the applicant chooses to submit a joint application,
applicant shall give Department one duplicate original of the joint
application. Department shall take all actions with respect to the issuance or
renewal of the Class A Permit sought in the joint application, to the same
effect as if the applicant had submitted an application solely under this §
33.0845.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0846   Issuance, Renewal, Suspension, Transfer and Revocation of Permits.
   (a)   Issuance or Renewal. Where Department finds that the statements in the
application are true and that the applicant for issuance or renewal of a Class
A Permit is reasonably capable of complying with the provisions of this
Article, Department shall recommend issuance or renewal of a Class A Permit for
the collection of the refuse. The proposed issuance or renewal shall then be
approved or denied by the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   Suspension/Revocation/Non-Renewal. A Class A Permit holder shall not
lease, sublet, subcontract, or in any manner allow any other person or entity
to engage in refuse operations under permission of the Class A Permit issued to
the permit holder. The Class A Permit may be suspended, revoked or not renewed
at the option of the Board of Supervisors in the event there is a change in the
person or entity owning or operating the company or in the person to whom the
permit is issued, unless approval therefore has been obtained in writing from
the Board of Supervisors.
   (c)   Transfer of Class A Permit. Requests for approval of transfer of a
Class A Permit because of a change in ownership of any kind or nature in the
operating company or of the business operating under the Class A Permit, shall
be submitted in writing to Department and approved by the Board of Supervisors
prior to any such change. Any transfer of a Class A Permit to the new owners
shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of
Department, in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. Such
transferred Class A Permit may be for a term shorter than the remaining
unexpired permit term and be subject to such conditions as determined by the
Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   Payment of Insurance. A Class A Permit holder shall furnish
Department, prior to expiration or termination of the period covered by premium
payment when renewal is automatic, evidence of renewal and of full payment of
the premium on required insurance coverage. Nonreceipt by Department of this
information shall result in the insurance policy being considered to be expired
and justification for the suspension, revocation or cancellation of the permit
in the manner set forth in this Article and
Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (e)   Statement of Ownership. The Class A Permit holder shall file a true
and correct statement of ownership with Department at the time of permit
renewal each year under penalty of perjury.
   (f)   Temporary Permit. The Board of Supervisors may, for any reason, choose
to postpone the decision on the approval or denial of a new Class A Permit, the
annual renewal of a Class A Permit or the transfer of a Class A Permit to new
owners if it issues a separate temporary Class A Permit having a term less than
or equal to six months (“temporary permit”). The issuance of a temporary permit
may be subject to such terms as determined by the Board of Supervisors and does
not constitute either the issuance of a new Class A Permit, the renewal of an
existing Class A Permit or the approval or denial of the transfer of a Class A
Permit, as the case may be. The issuance of a temporary Class A Permit shall
confer no rights beyond the rights set forth in the temporary Class A Permit
for the time period set forth in the temporary Class A Permit.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0847   Procedure for Denial, Denial of Renewal, Revocation and Suspension
of Permits.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors may deny, deny renewal of, revoke or suspend
a Class A Permit for any one or more of the following causes pertaining to
conduct of the applicant or permit holder:
      (1)   When falsified information is submitted to Department in a permit
application, report(s) or correspondence;
      (2)   When false information is submitted to Department on a material
question;
      (3)   When Federal, State or local laws or regulations pertaining to
solid waste handling are violated;
      (4)   When the holder of the Class A Permit or applicant for a Class A
Permit is in arrears or not current with the charges or fees due for use of any
county-maintained solid waste facility used for refuse hauler operations,
unless waived by the Waste System Division; or
      (5)   When any violation of conditions to operate exists pertaining to
the conditional use permit or special use permit.
   (b)   Upon determining cause for the denial, denial of renewal, revocation
or suspension of a Class A Permit, Department shall give written notice to the
applicant or Class A Permit holder to show cause why the Class A Permit should
not be denied, revoked, suspended or its renewal denied and conduct a hearing
if requested in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, beginning
with §
33.0200. The Hearing Officer shall then recommend to the Board of Supervisors
whether the permit should be renewed, revoked, suspended or denied. The
recommendation of the Hearing Officer shall then be approved, modified or
rejected by the Board of Supervisors or the Board may call for additional
testimony before making a decision. The decision of the Board shall be final.
   (c)   When the request for denial, denial of renewal, revocation or
suspension of a permit is the result of a request by another Department,
hereinafter the Initiating Department, that Department shall reimburse
Department for any expenses incurred as provided for in a memorandum of
understanding (MOU) between Department and the Initiating Department. The
Initiating Department shall be responsible for the presentation of the facts of
the case involved in the requested action.
   (d)   A person or entity whose Class A Permit has been denied, revoked or
had its renewal denied pursuant to this Section shall not be considered by the
Board of Supervisors for a Class A Permit until one year from the date of such
denial, denial of renewal or revocation. After three such denials, denials of
renewal or revocation, or combinations thereof, no new Class A Permit shall be
granted to such applicant.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0848   Specification of Permit Areas.
   Department shall specify in all Class A Permits or renewals thereof, the
territory within the refuse collection area in which the Class A Permit holder
may collect refuse. No Class A Permit holder may, at any time, collect refuse
within the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino outside the
territorial limits fixed in the Class A Permit issued. The territory so
specified in any such permit may be modified by Department with Board of
Supervisors approval if such modification is found to be necessary for the
efficient conduct and operation of refuse collection in the territory involved.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0849   Renewal of Permits.
   Class A Permits must be renewed annually. Where Department finds that the
Class A Permit holder, during the period of the unexpired Class A Permit,
operated in conformity with the law, Department shall recommend renewal of the
Class A Permit for the collection of refuse. The proposed renewal shall then be
approved or denied by the Board of Supervisors. No permit shall be renewed or
reissued as long as the would-be holder of the renewed or reissued permit is in
arrears or not current with the charges or fees due for use of any County-
maintained solid waste facility used for refuse hauler operations. Only when no
sum of money is due and owing to the County for such charges or fees shall such
a Class A Permit be renewed or reissued.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0849A   New Applicants.
   (a)   Every new applicant who desires to engage in any activity of refuse
collection, transportation, hauling or disposal within the County of San
Bernardino shall obtain a Class A Permit as provided herein prior to commencing
such activities.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors may deny an application on the grounds of
infeasibility. Whenever a new application is filed under the provisions of this
Article for a Class A Permit to provide refuse collection service within this
jurisdiction where one or more Class A Permits already exist, the Board of
Supervisors, after due investigation, may find and determine, as a matter of
fact, that there does not exist in the area sufficient potential source of
refuse to justify the granting of an additional, separate and distinct Class A
Permit for use within that refuse collection area. Predicated on such findings,
the Board of Supervisors may deny the application for a Class A Permit on the
grounds that the granting of such new permit is not economically for
financially feasible and not in the public interest and welfare.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0849B   Permit Fees and Charges for Services.
   (a)   All permit fees, charges for services and fees for use of approved
County solid waste facilities shall be paid as specified in the San Bernardino
County Code Schedule of Fees.
   (b)   Payment of Permit Fees. Any of the fees pertaining to this Article may
be prorated on a quarterly basis when applied to an additional vehicle for
which a permit is requested. When a Class A Permit holder engages in refuse
collection operations in more than one refuse collection area, a separate Class
A Permit shall be required for each refuse collection area in which it
operates. The minimum permit fee shall be as specified in the San Bernardino
County Code Schedule of Fees.
   Fees for vehicles shall be prepaid for the permit period for which
application for a Class A Permit has been made. Unused portions of such fees
may be refunded, prorated on a quarterly basis, to the Class A Permit holder in
the event said vehicle(s) should be discontinued from use in the business, upon
proper written notice to Department.
   (c)   Transfer of Class A Permits Between Vehicles. Where any vehicle
operating under a valid current Class A Permit is replaced by another vehicle,
the Class A Permit may be transferred to the replacement vehicle upon payment
of a transfer fee as specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code contingent
upon any required inspection and approval of the new vehicle by the Department.
   (d)   Basis for Class A Permit holder’s Charges. All charges for services by
Class A permittees shall be nondiscriminatory and uniform for equal services
rendered. Charges shall be reasonably based upon the number of containers, type
of refuse, whether compacted or loose, number of separate pick-up points at any
place of collection, placement of container or distance of carry-out, frequency
of collection, remote location, geographical terrain and whether residential,
commercial or industrial collection. An inclusive rate schedule shall be filed
with Department by each permit holder as a condition of approval of any permit
issued or renewed.
   (e)   Rate Adjustments. Annual and special rate adjustments shall be made in
accordance with the adopted policy of the Board of Supervisors.
   (f)   Reasonable Rates. Any subscriber who believes an unreasonable charge
has been billed for collection service may file a written complaint with
Department setting forth the facts of such alleged overcharge. Department shall
notify the refuse collector of such complaints and conduct a hearing in
accordance with
Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, if
requested to do so, to determine the reasonableness of the charge for such
service. In such a hearing, the subscriber shall bear the burden of proof by a
preponderance of the evidence.
   (g)   Verification of Rates. Department shall review and maintain a
continuous evaluation of refuse collection operating costs and make
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors as to the reasonableness of a Class
A Permit holder’s rates and whether they are nondiscriminating and uniform for
equal service.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0849C   Records Required.
   All Class A Permit holders shall keep, maintain and furnish copies of such
operating records as Department may require to ascertain compliance with this
Article. All Class A Permit holders shall maintain a log of all complaints
received for review by Department.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0849D   Hours of Collection.
   Class A Permit holders shall not collect refuse within a residential area or
contiguous commercial area between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the
next day.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0849E   Office for Inquiries and Complaints.
   The Class A Permit holder shall take all steps as may be reasonable and
necessary in order to assure that the collection of waste is completed in a
timely and efficient manner. The Class A Permit holder shall maintain customer
service phone lines from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and
during hours of service on Saturdays, if any refuse collection service is
provided on Saturday. The number of local phone lines provided shall be
sufficient to adequately serve the public. A Class A Permit holder shall notify
Department in writing seven days prior to any change in business name, address,
or telephone number. Such notice shall set forth the corrected information.
This Section shall not require a Class A Permit holder to maintain an office
which is different than or separate from the office for inquiries and
complaints maintained to comply with any other Section of this Chapter or under
Division 6 of Title 4 of this Code.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
§ 33.0849F   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all administration, enforcement,
remedies and penalties as to this Article shall proceed as set forth in
Chapters
1,
2 and
3 of
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   In addition, and in accordance with the provisions in §
33.0112 of this Division of the County Code, any party convicted of violating
this Article be held liable by the court for reimbursement to the County for
all or part of the costs incurred in the investigation, analysis, inspection,
abatement and prosecution of the enforcement action against the guilty party.
(Ord. 3671, passed - -1996)
ARTICLE 3: LIQUID WASTE (SANITARY) PUMPERS
§ 33.0850   Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this Article is to establish standards for permitting the
operations of persons or entities servicing, pumping, or transporting sanitary
wastes from septic tanks, seepage pits, cesspools, portable toilets, sewage
holding tanks, grease interceptors, and other repositories of such wastes, to
ensure that environmental public health hazards, nuisances, and pollution do
not occur as a result of improper handling or disposal.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code; Water
Code § 13304; Health and Safety Code §§ 5410 et seq. (Sewage and Other Waste);
Public Resources Code §§ 40000; and other applicable State law, this Board
designates the Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the County
of San Bernardino as the enforcement authority for the purposes of this Article
within this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0851   Definitions.
   Definitions herein are in addition to all definitions in Chapters
1 and
3 of
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES. Any substance placed in the waste receptacle of a
portable toilet for the purpose of controlling odors and/or decomposition.
   PORTABLE TOILET. An enclosed unit intended for temporary use at a given
location with a total floor space not exceeding 36 square feet. The term does
not include toilets in camping trailers or similar units whose primary intended
use is recreational.
   SANITARY WASTES. Liquid or semiliquid wastes contained within septic tanks,
seepage pits, cesspools, sewage holding tanks, or other repositories of human
body wastes, or similar materials, including grease interceptors, which may
contain human pathogens.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0852   Permits and Hearing Procedures.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to pump or otherwise remove
the contents of a septic tank, seepage pit, cesspool, sewage holding tank,
portable toilet, grease interceptor, or other receptacle of sanitary wastes or
to transport sanitary wastes without an unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked
permit issued by the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health
Services (DEHS) and having paid all fees specified in the San Bernardino County
Code Schedule of Fees. All procedures in
Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code relating
to permits/hearings apply to this Article except as provided herein.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0853   Application for Permits.
   When applying for a permit to comply with §
33.0852 of this Code, an applicant shall complete in full an application form
provided by the San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health
Services (DEHS) to include:
   (a)   Complete name and description of the applicant;
   (b)   Permanent home address and business addresses of the applicant;
   (c)   Trade, dBA, fictitious business and firm names the applicant operates
under;
   (d)   If a joint venture, or a partnership or limited partnership, the names
of all participants/partners. If a corporation, the name of each officer,
title, and the nature of their participation, and their permanent address, and
the name and address of the agent for the service of process;
   (e)   The location of all approved disposal sites that will be used;
   (f)   Facts showing that the applicant is qualified to render efficient
services. This statement shall include any prior experience that will help
establish the applicant’s capability to perform this function; where the
applicant has provided a similar service in any other jurisdiction, a letter
from that local health authority shall be included;
   (g)   Facts showing that the applicant owns or controls vehicle(s) and
equipment that conform to all applicable provisions of this Article;
   (h)   Such other information as DEHS may reasonably require, pertinent to
the applicant’s capability to carry out the permitted activity;
   (i)   Such information as required to show applicant may legally conduct his
or her business at the proposed locations pursuant to Title 8 of the San
Bernardino County Code (the Development Code).
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0854   Issuance of Permits.
   The San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS)
shall act upon permit applications within 30 days unless special uses or
conditions exist causing additional review by DEHS or the San Bernardino County
Department of Land Management, Office of Planning. Notification of special
review shall be made to applicant within the 30 days.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0855   Indemnification and Insurance.
   A permittee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the County of San
Bernardino and their authorized agents, officers, volunteers and employees
against any and all claims or actions arising from the permittee’s acts or
omissions and for any costs or expenses incurred by the San Bernardino County
Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS), County of San Bernardino or
permittees on account of any claim therefore.
   In order to accomplish the indemnification herein provided for, but without
limiting the indemnification, the permittee shall secure and maintain
throughout the term of the permit the following types of insurance within the
limits as shown:
   (a)   Worker’s Compensation. A program of Worker’s Compensation Insurance or
a state-approved Self-Insurance Program in an amount and form to meet all
applicable requirements of the Labor Code of the State of California, including
Employer’s Liability with $250,000.00 limits, covering all persons providing
services on behalf of the permittee and all risks to such person under this
permit.
   (b)   Comprehensive General and Automobile Liability Insurance.
      (1)   All permittees must have automobile liability coverage for owned,
hired, and nonowned vehicles. The policy shall have combined single limits for
bodily injury and property damage of not less than $500,000.00.
      (2)   Permittees with three or more trucks must also have Comprehensive
General liability insurance. The policy coverage shall have combined single
limits for bodily injury and property damage of not less than $500,000.00.
   Permittee shall immediately furnish certificates of insurance and within 60
days provide certified copies of all policies and endorsements to DEHS
evidencing the insurance coverage above required prior to the commencement of
performance of services hereunder, which certificates shall provide that such
insurance shall not be terminated or expire without 30 days written notice to
DEHS, and shall maintain such insurance from the time the permittee commences
business activities upon permit receipt and throughout any hearings for denial,
revocation and/or suspension of permits or renewals.
   All policies, with respect to the insurance coverage above required, except
for the Worker’s Compensation Insurance coverage, if applicable, shall have
endorsements naming DEHS and the County of San Bernardino, their employees,
agents, volunteers and officers as additional named insured with respect to
liabilities arising out of performance of services hereunder.
   The permittee shall require the carriers of the above required coverage to
waive all rights of subrogation against DEHS and the County of San Bernardino,
their offices, volunteers, employees, contractors and subcontractors.
   (c)   Insurance Review. The above insurance requirements are subject to
periodic review by the County. The Risk Manager of the County of San Bernardino
is authorized, but not required, to reduce or waive any of the above insurance
requirements whenever the Risk Manager determines that any of the above
insurance is not available, is unreasonably priced, or is not needed to protect
the interests of the County. In addition, if the Risk Manager determines that
heretofore unreasonably priced or unavailable types of insurance coverage or
coverage limits become reasonably priced or available, the Risk Manager is
authorized, but not required, to change the above insurance requirements to
require additional types of insurance coverage or higher coverage limits,
provided that any such change is reasonable in light of past claims against the
County, inflation, or any other item reasonably related to the County’s risk.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0856   Renewal of Permits.
   Permits may be renewed annually when the San Bernardino County Department of
Environmental Health Services (DEHS) finds that the permit holder, during the
period of the unexpired permit, operated in conformity with the law, except
that no permit shall be renewed or reissued as long as the would-be holder of
the renewed or reissued permit is in arrears or not current with the charges or
fees due for use of any County maintained disposal site used for liquid waste
pumper operations. Only when no sum of money is due and owing to the County for
such charges or fees shall such a permit be renewed or reissued. Renewal
procedures shall generally follow the provisions of
Chapter 2 of this Division beginning with §
33.0200.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3294, passed - -1988)
§ 33.0857   Denial, Denial of Renewal, Revocation, and Suspension of Permits.
   (a)   The San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services
(DEHS) may deny, deny renewal of, revoke, or suspend a permit for any one or
more of the following causes pertaining to conduct of the applicant or permit
holder:
      (1)   When falsified information is submitted to DEHS in a permit
application, report(s), or correspondence;
      (2)   When false information is submitted to DEHS on a material question;
      (3)   When Federal, State, or local laws or regulations pertaining to the
collection, transportation, or disposal of liquid wastes are violated, or the
issuing of a DEHS permit may create such a violation;
      (4)   When the DEHS has been notified by the San Bernardino County Solid
Waste Management Department or a County Special District, that the holder of
the permit or applicant for a permit is in arrears or not current with the
charges or fees due for use of any County maintained disposal site used for
liquid waste pumper operations, unless waived by the Solid Waste Management
Department or County Special District; or
      (5)   When any violation of conditions to operate exists pertaining to
the conditional use permit or special use permit issued for the uses permitted
by this Chapter.
   (b)   Upon determining probable cause for the denial, denial of renewal,
revocation, or suspension of a permit, DEHS shall give written notice to the
applicant or permittee to show cause why the permit should not be denied,
revoked, suspended or its renewal denied, and conduct a hearing if requested in
accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, beginning
with §
33.0200.
   (c)   When the request for denial, denial of renewal, revocation or
suspension of a permit is the result of a request by another department or
district, hereinafter the Initiating Department, that department or district
shall reimburse the DEHS for any expenses incurred as provided for in a
memorandum of understanding (MOU) between DEHS and the Initiating Department.
The Initiating Department shall be responsible for the presentation of the
facts of the case involved in the requested action.
   (d)   A person or entity whose permit has been denied, revoked or had its
renewal denied pursuant to this Section shall not be considered by DEHS for a
permit until after one year from the date of such denial, denial of renewal or
revocation. After three such denials, denials of renewal or revocations, or
combinations thereof, no new permit shall be granted to such applicant.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3294, passed - -1988)
§ 33.0858   Nontransferability of Permits and Change of Address.
   Permits issued pursuant to this Article are nontransferable as to any person
or entity. A permittee shall not lease, sublet or subcontract the activities
regulated under the permit to any person. A permittee may hire employees to
perform permit activities.
   A change of ownership, dBA or address of the place of residence or business
of any person permitted under this Article shall be reported in writing to the
San Bernardino County Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) within
ten days after said changes occur.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0859   Records and Reports.
   Each permittee shall maintain accurate records and keep them available at
the business office of the permittee for inspection by the San Bernardino
County Department of Environmental Health Services (DEFIS) any time during
business hours. The records shall include the location where sanitary wastes
are collected; and the type, quantity, and location of all waste discharges
made pursuant to the permit for the present and last two calendar years.
Additionally:
   (a)   Such information shall be submitted to DEHS for each month of
operation on forms approved or provided by DEHS, by the fifteenth day of the
following month.
   (b)   For portable toilets only, the quantity of waste from several units
may be summarized on a daily basis if discharge is made to a single disposal
site.
   (c)   DEHS may require such other information as is reasonably necessary and
pertinent to ensure that the provisions of this Article are met.
   (d)   Each permittee shall provide to each customer for whom the permittee
has provided pumper services for sanitary waste removal a receipt and/or bill
for said services which shall include:
      (1)   Number of compartments pumped;
      (2)   Estimated gallonage or volume of sanitary wastes removed;
      (3)   Intended location to which the sanitary wastes are to be
discharged, and;
      (4)   Estimated disposal charges to be incurred upon disposal of said
sanitary wastes.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0860   Disposal of Sanitary Wastes.
   No sanitary wastes, including wash or rinse water used to clean the interior
of the liquid waste hauler’s vehicle tank or any portable toilet, shall be
disposed of at any location which is not approved by the San Bernardino County
Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) and which does not meet
either or both, as applicable, of the following conditions:
   (a)   The current unrevoked waste discharge requirements for the treatment
and/or disposal of liquid wastes from the appropriate California Regional Water
Quality Control Board.
   (b)   A current, unrevoked solid waste disposal site permit sanctioning the
disposal of septic or other liquid wastes from the California Integrated Waste
Management Board.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0861   Required Health and Safely Equipment.
   Every vehicle requiring a permit by this Article shall at all times of
operation have necessary equipment as determined by the San Bernardino County
Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) to protect the public health
and safety.
   DEHS will periodically publish standards for the operation, maintenance and
care of liquid waste hauling units. These standards shall be subject to a 30
day review period prior to approval by the Director of DEHS.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0862   Cleanliness and Markings for Vehicles.
   Every vehicle requiring a permit by this Article shall at all times be
operated and kept in a clean, well-maintained condition. Each shall be marked
on each side with the name, address, and telephone number of the permittee, in
letters a minimum of three inches in height. The certified volume of the tank
shall be placed upon the tank or vehicle in minimum three inch high numbers.
All such markings shall be kept legible at all times.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0863   Sanitary Wastes, Hazardous and/or Toxic Wastes and Materials.
   Vehicles approved and registered for the transportation of hazardous
materials or hazardous waste as defined by Health and Safety Code §§ 25411(c)
or 25117, or which otherwise transport sanitary wastes, are not exempt from the
requirements of this Article, including payment of annual inspection fees as
set forth by the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0864   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all administration, enforcement,
remedies, and penalties as to this Article shall generally proceed as is set
forth in Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, and otherwise in the
manner provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0865   Portable Toilets.
   All liquid waste haulers that provide portable toilets shall comply with the
following:
   (a)   Portable toilets shall be operated and kept in a clean, well-
maintained condition.
   (b)   Portable toilets shall be pumped as necessary and at least within a
week after use.
   (c)   Portable toilets shall be cleaned and disinfected thoroughly,
including the inner walls, receptacle, seats, and lids.
   (d)   Chemical additives used in portable toilets shall be chosen from the
list of acceptable additives provided by the California Regional Water Quality
Control Board.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
ARTICLE 4: SEWAGE HOLDING TANKS
§ 33.0870   Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this Article is to ensure that sewage holding tanks are
installed and utilized so as not to create a danger to the public health or
safety. Pursuant to the authority cited in San Bernardino County Code
Title 3, Division 3, Chapter 1, Health and Safety Code §§ 5400 et seq. (Sewage
and Other Waste), and other applicable State law, the Division of Environmental
Health Services (DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino is designated as the
enforcement authority for the purposes of this Article.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0871   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions in San Bernardino County
Code
Title 3, Division 3, Chapters
1 and
3.
   APPLICANT or PROPERTY OWNER. The person or entity who is the owner of record
of the land for which a permit for a sewage holding tank has been sought.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of waters within the
unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino by wastes or other
degrading elements to any degree which creates a hazard to the public health
through the possibility of poisoning or the spread of disease.
   DISTRICT. Any sanitation district governed by the Board of Supervisors of
the County of San Bernardino.
   POLLUTION. An alteration of the quality of the waters within the
unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino by waste to a degree which
adversely affects: (1) Such water for beneficial uses; (2) Facilities which
serve such beneficial uses. POLLUTION may include contamination.
   SEPTIC TANK PUMPER. Any person subject to
Article 3 of this Chapter (beginning with §
33.0850) and holding such DEHS permit.
   SEWAGE. A combination of liquid wastes which may include chemicals, house
waste, human excreta, animal or vegetable matter, and other solids in
suspension or solution, which are discharged from a dwelling, building, or
other establishment.
   SEWAGE HOLDING TANK. A watertight-covered receptacle designed to receive,
and temporarily store, the discharge of sewage prior to periodic removal of its
contents to an approved permanent disposal site. This does not include holding
tanks used for the purpose of collecting and reusing graywater.
   SEWERING ENTITY. Any public agency which operates sewage collection and
treatment facilities.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0872   Use of Sewage Holding Tanks Restricted. Permits Required.
   No person or entity shall install, utilize, or control the use of any sewage
holding tank within the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino for
the confinement of sewage discharged from a dwelling, business establishment,
or other facility except upon conditions provided in §
33.0873 herein and possessing a current unsuspended, unrevoked permit to do so
from DEHS pursuant to the procedures set forth in San Bernardino County Code
Title 3, Division 3, Chapter 2 and paying fees to DEHS in accordance with the
San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0873   Conditions for Construction and Operational Permits.
   A permit to install, utilize or control a sewage holding tank may be granted
by DEHS upon the following conditions:
   (a)   The property for which the permit is requested is within the
boundaries or sphere of influence of a district or sewering entity pursuant to
§
33.0876 herein, and the property is unsuitable for a conventional sewage
disposal system. For an existing dwelling, business establishment or other
facility not within the boundaries or sphere of influence of a sewering entity,
an exemption from the requirement to be within the boundaries of a sewering
entity may be granted by DEHS in order to eliminate a hazardous condition or
code violation where no other acceptable means of sewage disposal is feasible
or available.
   (b)   A completed sewage holding tank application, including documentation
that all required conditions of San Bernardino Code §§
33.0876,
33.0877 and
33.0880 have been completed.
   (c)   Any cash bond required by §
33.0878 herein has been posted with the appropriate agency or with DEHS.
   (d)   The Division of Building and Safety of San Bernardino County has
reviewed the proposed installation and found that the standards adopted in §
33.0879 herein have been met.
   (e)   The existence of a sewage holding tank on a property has been recorded
on the real property pursuant to Government Code §§ 27280 et seq. or in a
manner approved by DEHS.
   (f)   For an existing dwelling, business establishment or other facility not
within the boundaries or sphere of influence of a sewering entity, an exemption
may be granted by DEHS in order to eliminate a hazardous condition or code
violation, where no other acceptable means of sewage disposal is feasible or
available.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0874   Required Agreements with District or Sewering Entity.
   Nothing in this Article precludes the sewering entity or district from
providing direct services, contracting with another sewering entity or
district, or contracting with a private agency to carry out the provisions of
this Article.
   The following written agreements shall be satisfactorily completed and
signed by the appropriate official representing the sewering entity, and filed
with DEHS prior to the issuance of any permit.
   (a)   Subsequent to issuance of an operational permit, notice of the
existence of a sewage holding tank as the approved means of sewage disposal for
a property will be recorded by DEHS. The application for the permit shall serve
as recordation notice and the signature of the property owner shall signify the
owner(s) agreement to this recordation action. The cost of recordation shall be
per the San Bernardino County Schedule of Fees.
   (b)   For all sewage holding tanks with operating permits that were
installed prior to July 1, 1995, notice of the existence of a sewage holding
tank on a property will be recorded by DEHS. Prior to recording notice of the
existence of a sewage holding tank on a property, notice shall be sent to the
owner of the property by mail at the address shown on the latest assessment
roll or at any other address known to DEHS. Within 20 days of the date of the
notice, the owner may present evidence that a sewage holding tank does not
exist on the property. The cost of recordation shall be per the San Bernardino
County Schedule of Fees.
   (c)   That the number of sewage holding tanks permitted by the district or
sewering entity is not exceeded by the addition of the applicant’s proposed
sewage holding tank.
   (d)   That the sewering entity or district is authorized to hold any bond
required as per §
33.0876 herein and to utilize said bond to render services necessary to
eliminate any hazardous condition created by the applicant’s sewage holding
tank.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0875   Required Agreements with Property Owners.
   A written agreement with DEHS covering the following shall be satisfactorily
completed and signed by all property owners utilizing the proposed sewage
holding tank and filed with DEHS prior to the issuance of any DEHS permit.
   (a)   Properties served by a sewage holding tank shall be subject an annual
operating permit fee, as set forth in the San Bernardino County Schedule of
Fees, to pay the cost of routine inspections and program administration.
   (b)   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code §§ 101325 and 101340, where a
permitted sewage holding tank is located on real property owned by the operator
of a business, the property will be assessed the operating permit fee under the
following circumstances:
      (1)   On all newly approved holding tanks;
      (2)   On existing holding tanks, when the property is transferred to a
new owner;
      (3)   On existing holding tanks, when the operating permits fees have not
been paid for 60 days or more beyond the permit expiration date.
   (c)   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 101345. in those instances where
direct assessment is not authorized by Health and Safety Code § 101325, the
DEHS may record a certificate specifying the amount, interest, penalty due and
the name and last known address of the person liable for the permit fee. From
the time of recordation of the certificate, the amount required to be paid
constitutes a lien upon all real property in the County of San Bernardino owned
or thereafter acquired by the liable person, which lien shall have the force,
effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for ten years from
the time of recording. Prior to recording the lien, the DEHS shall determine
that the operating permit fees have not been paid for 60 days or more beyond
the permit expiration date and shall notify the person liable for the fees by
certified mail of the intent to record such certificate.
   (d)   If the appropriate Regional Water Quality Control Board adopts rules
or regulations which prohibit or curtail the use of sewage holding tanks,
thereby rendering the property unavailable for occupancy, the County of San
Bernardino shall be held harmless from the results of such action.
   (e)   If sewage collection lines become available for service to properties
utilizing a sewage holding tank, the property owner shall connect within 90
days to the sewage collection line and abandon the sewage holding tank in
accordance with the provisions of §
33.0879 of this Article.
   (f)   If property containing a sewage holding tank is sold, the present
property owner shall notify the new property owner of the DEHS requirement to
obtain a new permit. DEHS shall give the new property owner written notice of
the permit conditions to be completed prior to occupancy of the property.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0876   Bonds.
   DEHS may require a cash bond, in the amount specified in the San Bernardino
County Code Schedule of Fees, to be posted with DEHS or other appropriate
agency. DEHS or the appropriate agency may utilize the bond to render services
necessary to eliminate any hazardous conditions created by the sewage holding
tank which the property owner has failed to correct within 48 hours of being
given notice by DEHS. If the required bond amount is increased in the Fee
Schedule, the increase in the bond amount shall be provided upon demand by
DEHS.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0877   Standards.
   The standards for the design criteria, location, and installation of the
sewage holding tank shall be those contained within the County of San
Bernardino Division of Building and Safety’s handout entitled, “Guidelines for
Design and Installation of Temporary Sewage Waste Holding Tanks,” revised June
16, 1993, or the current edition of such publication of this jurisdiction,
copies of which are on file in the Office of the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors. The Division of Building and Safety shall approve all plans for
the design, location and installation of sewage holding tanks.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0878   Contract with Septic Tank Pumper.
   A copy of the current maintenance contract with a septic tank pumper
required pursuant to §
33.0877 herein shall be placed on file with DEHS and shall include the
following terms:
   (a)   A minimum of one inspection of the sewage holding tank per month with
servicing (pumping) as necessary;
   (b)   That the pumper shall provide all emergency servicing required;
   (c)   In the event the contract is cancelled or property ownership changes,
the septic tank pumper shall immediately notify DEHS of the cancellation or
change in ownership.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0879   Abandonment of Sewage Holding Tanks.
   If DEHS or any agency orders the abandonment of the sewage holding tank, or
if connection is made to sanitary sewers, the permittee operating a sewage
holding tank shall abandon the sewage holding tank. Abandonment means having
the contents removed from the property by a septic tank pumper and either: (1)
Removing the tank from the property; or (2) Backfilling the tank with a
material acceptable to the San Bernardino County Division of Building and
Safety. The abandonment operation shall be conducted under a valid permit from
the Division of Building and Safety.
   DEHS shall, upon payment by the property owner of fees per the San
Bernardino County Schedule of Fees, record notice of removal of the holding
tank with the County Recorder.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§ 33.0880   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all administration, enforcement,
remedies, and penalties as to this Article shall be as provided in San
Bernardino County Code
Title 3, Division 3, Chapters
1,
2, and
3 or as otherwise as provided by law.
(Am. Ord. 3564, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3624, passed - -1995)
§§ 33.0881 — 0889   (Reserved).
ARTICLE 5: LIQUID WASTE DISPOSAL
§ 33.0890   Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this Article is to set forth criteria and standards for the
installation of onsite wastewater treatment systems to minimize hazards to
water quality and the public health and safety. Pursuant to the authority cited
in Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, Health
and Safety Code §§ 5410 et seq., Water Code §§ 13520 et seq., and other
applicable state law, the Board of Supervisors designates the Division of
Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the Department of Public Health of the
County of San Bernardino as the enforcement authority for the purposes of this
Article.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4330, passed - -2017)
§ 33.0891   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions in Chapters 1 and 3 of
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   ALTERNATIVE ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS. Onsite wastewater treatment
systems (OWTS) that do not meet the criteria of a conventional OWTS, but are
allowed under conditions specified by DEHS.
   LIQUID WASTE. Includes the term “sewage” and means water that flows out of a
septic tank, aerobic treatment unit, dispersal system, or other component.
   LOCAL AGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (LAMP). A program approved by the Regional
Water Quality Control Board in April 2017, and as thereafter amended, for the
siting, design, operation, and maintenance of OWTS.
   MOUNTAIN AREAS. Those areas included within the boundaries of the San
Bernardino National Forest and of the Angeles National Forest.
   ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS (OWTS). Wastewater treatment systems
that use subsurface disposal, including: individual systems; community
collection and disposal systems; and, alternative collection and disposal
systems. OWTS do not include “graywater” systems as defined in Chapter 16 of
the California Plumbing Code.
   REGIONAL WATER QUALITY CONTROL BOARD (RWQCB). A regional water quality board
that regulates wastewater discharges to surface water (rivers, ocean, etc.) and
to groundwater (via land). It also regulates storm water discharges from
construction, industrial, and municipal activities; discharges from irrigated
agriculture; dredge and other activities with practices that could degrade
water quality.
   SEEPAGE PITS. A lined excavation in the ground that receives the discharge
of a septic tank so designed as to permit the effluent from the septic tank to
seep through its bottom and sides.
   STANDARDS. DEHS’ “On-Site Wastewater Disposal System Soil Percolation (PERC)
Test Report Standards: Suitability of Lots and Soils for Use of Leachlines or
Seepage Pits” adopted in April 2017 and as thereafter amended.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4330, passed - -2017)
§ 33.0892   Approved Liquid Waste Disposal Systems.
   (a)   No person or entity shall install, utilize, or control the use of any
OWTS within this jurisdiction unless:
      (1)   The OWTS complies with applicable portions of the California
Plumbing Code and the LAMP; and,
      (2)   A permit is obtained from the Building & Safety Division of the
Land Use Services Department.
   (b)   No person or entity shall install, utilize, or control the use of an
alternative OWTS unless such person or entity applies for, receives, and
retains an unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked permit from DEHS.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4330, passed - -2017)
§ 33.0893   Mountain Areas.
   Because of special conditions for liquid waste disposal in the mountain
areas, the following standards shall apply:
   (a)   All liquid waste disposal systems in mountain areas shall be installed
only in compliance with the LAMP unless the conditions of a RWQCB permit
otherwise allows.
   (b)   Installation of seepage pits in mountain areas of this jurisdiction is
prohibited.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4330, passed - -2017)
§ 33.0894   Soil Testing Requirements.
   DEHS requires soil percolation testing for all new construction. Testing
shall be as directed by DEHS and in compliance with the LAMP. DEHS may charge
fees for review and/or soil percolation testing done by DEHS or its agents as
set forth in Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County
Code.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4330, passed - -2017)
§ 33.0895   Soil Testing Administration.
   Persons performing soil percolation tests for review by DEHS shall be
registered or certified as one or more of the following:
   (a)   State of California Registered Civil Engineer;
   (b)   State of California Certified Engineering Geologist;
   (c)   State of California Registered Environmental Health Specialist;
   (d)   State of California Registered Geologist;
   (e)   State of California Geotechnical Engineer.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4330, passed - -2017)
§ 33.0896   Revocation by DEHS of Testing Privileges.
   Any tester may have DEHS testing privileges revoked or suspended for having
lost the required State of California Registration/Certification under§
33.0895.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4330, passed - -2017)
§ 33.0897   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all administration, enforcement,
remedies, and penalties of Chapters 1,2, and 3 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the
San Bernardino County Code shall apply to this Article in addition to all
others provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4330, passed - -2017)
ARTICLE 6: DESIGNATED MAINTENANCE AREAS
§ 33.08100   Purpose and Authority.
   (a)   The purpose of this Article is to establish criteria and minimum
requirements for the discharge of sewage effluent from DEHS-approved on-site
individual waste disposal system within designated maintenance areas as listed
in §
33.08102 of this Article without endangering the public health and safety.
   In enacting this Article, the Board or Council of this jurisdiction has
determined that the designated maintenance areas as listed in §
33.08102 of this Article have unique topographical and hydrogeologic conditions
which require the application of the provisions set forth herein in order to
protect the public health, welfare, and safety.
   (b)   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code), Health and Safety Code
§§ 5410 et seq., and other applicable State law, this Board or Council
designates the Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the County
of San Bernardino as the enforcement authority for the purposes of this Article
within this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08101   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions in Chapters
1 and
3 of this E.H. Code.
   FAILING SYSTEM. A system which allows surfacing of effluent or septage, or
back-up of septage toward the fixtures.
   OWNER. For the purpose of this Article only, means any person or entity who
owns property, including improvements and possessory interests on U.S.
Government land, from which sewage is generated or discharged. The term shall
not include persons who hold a right, title, or interest in such property for
security purposes only.
   SEWAGE. Any liquid waste which may include chemicals, household waste, human
excreta, animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution, and which is
discharged from a dwelling, building, or other establishment.
   WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. Any process by which sewage is collected, treated, or
disposed of by subsurface means. For the purpose of this Article, the term
shall not include sewage holding tanks as defined in this Chapter.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08102   Designated Maintenance Areas.
   The following areas are designated maintenance areas as defined by maps on
file with the Clerk of the Board or Council of this jurisdiction.
   (a)   U.S. Forest Service Polique Canyon Tract;
   (b)   U.S. Forest Service Lakeview Tract;
   (c)   Mill Creek Basin above 2,600 feet, including but not limited to the
communities of Forest Falls, Angeles Oaks and Mountain Home Village;
   (d)   U.S. Forest Service Pine Knot Tract;
   (e)   U.S. Forest Service Metcalf Creek Tract;
   (f)   U.S. Forest Service Big Bear Tract;
   (g)   U.S. Forest Service Willow Glen Tract.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am Ord. 4166, passed - -2012)
§ 33.08103   Persons Authorized to Certify Compliance.
   Any person possessing one or more of the following qualifications may
certify compliance of a waste disposal system with the requirements of this
Article, if such person is first registered with DEHS to do so:
   (a)   State of California License as a C-42 Contractor;
   (b)   State of California Registration as a Civil Engineer;
   (c)   State of California Registration as a Sanitarian;
   (d)   State of California Certification as an Engineering Geologist.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08104   Revocation of DEHS Authorization to Perform Certifications.
   Any person authorized by DEHS to perform certification of compliance with
this Article may have such authorization revoked or suspended for:
   (a)   Having lost the status required under §
33.08103 above;
   (b)   Having falsified any information to DEHS on a material question.
Administrative hearing procedures for the revocation or suspension of any DEHS
certification authorization shall generally proceed as is set forth in
Chapter 2 of this E.H. Code.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08105   Minimum Requirements.
   No person or entity shall install, construct, utilize, modify, maintain, or
abandon any liquid waste disposal system within designated maintenance areas of
this jurisdiction except pursuant to the minimum requirements hereinafter set
forth, and of the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by this
jurisdiction.
   (a)   Part I—Standards Generally. The basic standards and criteria for
liquid waste disposal within designated maintenance areas shall be as follows:
      (1)   Septic tank and leach field systems shall be the preferred method
of individual on-site sewage disposal. Exceptions, modifications, and
alternative systems will be considered upon petition to DEHS on a case-by-case
basis.
      (2)   All liquid waste disposal systems shall have an initial review to
determine compliance with these standards within one year of the date of
adoption of the same. Within three years of adoption, systems shall be in
compliance with these minimum standards. All failing systems shall be in
compliance within 30 days or less as determined by DEHS.
      (3)   Chemical toilets shall not discharge to on-site disposal systems.
      (4)   Pit privies are prohibited.
      (5)   Cesspools are prohibited.
      (6)   No new or replacement liquid waste disposal system or the discharge
component of that system shall be placed or installed on land with a ground
slope greater than 30 percent unless engineering data is presented to DEHS to
show that no surfacing of effluents or contamination of groundwater will occur.
      (7)   Percolation rates shall conform to the requirements adopted by this
jurisdiction.
      (8)   Minimum separations shall be as follows:
         (A)   Septic tank to:
            Water supply source: 100 ft.
            Buildings or structures: five ft.
               (Includes porches and steps whether covered or uncovered,
breezeways, roofed porte-cocheres, roofed patios, carports, covered walls,
covered driveways, and similar structures or appurtenances.)
            Perennial streams: 50 ft.
            Ephemeral streams: 50 ft.
            Large trees: ten ft.
               (Any tree with a trunk diameter of one foot or more.)
            Disposal field(s): five ft.
            Private domestic water lines: five ft.
               (Building service line)
            Public domestic water lines: ten ft.
               (Water purveyor’s line)
         (B)   Soil absorption system to:
            Water supply source: 100 ft.
            Building or structures: eight ft.
               (Includes porches and steps whether covered or uncovered,
breezeways, roofed porte-cocheres, roofed patios, carports, covered walls,
covered driveways, and similar structures or appurtenances.)
            Perennial streams: 100 ft.
            Ephemeral streams: 50 ft.
            Septic tank: five ft.
            Distribution box: five ft.
            Private domestic water line: six ft.
               (Building service line)
            Public domestic water line: ten ft.
            High ground water table level: five ft.
               (The highest known level to which ground water is known to have
occurred rather than the level at the time when testing occurred.)
            Ground surface on sloping ground: 15 ft.
               (When disposal fields are installed in sloping ground, the
minimum horizontal distance between any part of the leaching system and ground
surface shall be 15 ft.)
      (9)   Special Requirements.
         (A)   Special Soil Conditions.
            (I)   Percolation rates of less than five minutes/inch may require
substantial increases in the minimum separations normally applied.
            (II)   Special soil conditions may require special solutions and
must be considered on a case-by-case basis by DEHS
         (B)   Special Discharge Conditions.
            (I)   Protection of special resources (drinking water supply,
recreation area, etc.).
            (II)   Fractured rock.
            (III)   Other limitations requiring special solutions will be
considered on a case-by-case basis by DEHS.
   (b)   Part II—Review Inspections and Maintenance. All existing liquid waste
disposal systems within a designated maintenance area shall be reviewed to
determine compliance as follows:
      (1)   Categories of Initial Review and Compliance Schedules:
         (A)   For systems installed under permit after December 31, 1984, only
a limited initial inspection will be required to determine the systems are
functioning properly and not failing.
         (B)   For systems installed prior to 1965 and where documentation
provided to DEHS substantiates compliance with current standards, only a
limited initial inspection will be required to determine such systems are
functioning properly and not failing.
         (C)   Undocumented systems shall require an on-site certification
inspection by a DEHS registered inspector to substantiate compliance.
         (D)   Absent such foregoing review and certification, nonfailing
systems shall be deemed in noncompliance and shall be upgraded to meet current
standards within three years after adoption of these standards.
         (E)   All systems shall be reviewed initially and every two years
thereafter by DEHS or its agents for evidence of failure. All failing systems
shall be brought to code compliance within 30 days or less as determined by
DEHS to protect the public health and safety.
      (2)   When any initial limited or certification inspection is required,
it shall be performed by a person registered (registrant) with DEHS for that
purpose.
      (3)   Where only a limited initial inspection is required, the registrant
shall certify the system is in compliance and acceptable for continued
discharge prior to permit issuance.
      (4)   Initial certification inspection procedures shall include:
         (A)   Verification of the type of system (e.g., septic tank/leach line
system).
         (B)   Verification that the capacity and construction of the septic
tank comply with the requirements of that edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code
adopted and as amended by this jurisdiction.
         (C)   An accurate plot plan showing the location of the liquid waste
disposal system components relative to all improvements, buildings, large
trees, and significant boulders and showing that the distance from banks of all
perennial and/or ephemeral steams to the nearest portion of the disposal system
discharge is in compliance with the requirements of the Code of this
jurisdiction.
         (D)   Verification that all liquid waste discharges are made to an
approved liquid waste disposal system.
         (E)   Verification that the dimensions and absorption area of the soil
absorption system are per the currently adopted and as amended edition of the
Uniform Plumbing Code of this jurisdiction.
         (F)   Data showing that separation between the bottom of the soil
absorption system and the high level of groundwater is five feet or greater of
suitable soil.
         (G)   Data on special soil and discharge conditions requiring special
solutions, when applicable as required by DEHS.
      (5)   Biennial survey inspection procedures for failing systems shall
include:
         (A)   Review of the plot plan for any changes since the previous
inspection.
         (B)   Inspection of the liquid waste disposal system and site to
determine if the system is failing.
         (C)   Review of any alternate liquid waste disposal system.
         (D)   At least 14 days prior notice of the survey dates by DEHS
placing a legal advertisement in a local newspaper or by other suitable means
of public notification.
      (6)   System maintenance requirements for all systems shall include:
         (A)   Verification submitted to DEHS prior to permit issuance or
renewal indicating that the system has been pumped at least once every six
years and more often as required; or
         (B)   In lieu of pumping, an inspection of the system by a registrant
at least once every six years and certification to DEHS that the system does
not require pumping or corrective action.
      (7)   Permit Requirements.
         (A)   All generators of liquid wastes shall possess a valid permit to
do so as provided by this Article within one year of the adoption of these
standards.
         (B)   Permit applicants with systems in compliance shall be granted
regular permits. Applicants with noncompliance (but nonfailing) systems shall
be granted temporary permits to operate until such date that the systems are
required to be in compliance.
         (C)   Permits shall be renewed every two years. Temporary permits are
not renewable.
   (c)   Part III—Special Requirements for Certain U.S. Forest Service Tracts.
All requirements contained within this §
33.08105 as modified herein by Part III shall apply to the U.S. Forest Service
Tracts listed in §
33.08102 at (a), (b), (f), (g), (h), and (i). These special requirements do not
apply to new construction or additions equal to or exceeding 50 percent of the
floor area of the structure involved.
      (1)    Septic tanks serving existing structures shall be 500 gallons or
more. Any replacement components to a septic system shall conform to the
currently adopted edition (as amended) of the Uniform Plumbing Code of this
jurisdiction.
      (2)   Special Considerations for Existing Structures with Limited Water
Supply.
         (A)   Where the owner of a structure can document that piped water
under pressure is not available to that structure, an alternative sewage
disposal system may be approved by DEHS.
         (B)   Where an adequate domestic water supply is available or becomes
available, the owner shall provide piped domestic water to the structure and
comply with the provisions of this Section.
      (3)   Adverse Site Conditions for Sewage Disposal. Where adverse site
conditions will not allow installation of a septic system in conformance with
this Section for an existing structure, DEHS may approve an alternative sewage
disposal method until such adversities cease to exist.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08106   Permits Required.
   No person or entity shall install, construct, utilize, modify, maintain, or
abandon any waste disposal system within the designated maintenance areas
except with an unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked permit to do so from DEHS, and
having paid all applicable fees to DEHS as set forth in the San Bernardino
County Code Schedule of Fees.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08107   Holding Tanks.
   Use of sewage holding tanks within the Designated Maintenance Areas shall be
in accordance with the provisions of
Article 4 (Sewage Holding Tanks) of
Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, as the
same may be amended from time to time, or the equivalent provisions of the Code
of this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08108   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all administration, enforcement,
remedies, and penalties of this Article shall generally proceed as is set forth
in Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code, and be in addition to all others provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§§ 33.08109—08119 (Reserved).
ARTICLE 7: OPERATION OF MULTIPLE OWNERSHIP SEPTIC SYSTEMS
§ 33.08120   Purpose.
   It is the intent of this Article to ensure that multiple ownership septic
systems serving two or more dwelling units are operated and maintained by
qualified personnel, and that such operation and maintenance is provided as
needed, to prevent a public nuisance or threat to public health or degradation
of water quality from occurring. The provisions of this Article shall not apply
to any existing industrial or commercial multiple ownership septic systems,
except that the provisions of this Article as in effect prior to January 1,
1986, shall be applicable to any systems for which an application for permit
had been made prior to January 1, 1986.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08121   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code), Health and Safety Code
§§ 15000 et seq. (Sewer and Other Waste), and as otherwise provided by law, the
Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the County of San
Bernardino shall enforce the provisions of this Article within this
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08122   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement those in Chapters
1 and
3 of this E.H. Code, except that for purposes of this Article:
   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof which contains living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation,
as the primary use of the building, for not more than one family.
   MULTIPLE OWNERSHIP SEPTIC SYSTEM. A multiple-use septic system which
services two or more dwelling units even if the ownership of the system is not
equal.
   OWNER. Any person or entity who owns property, including improvements and
possessory interests on U.S. Government land, from which sewage is generated or
discharged and includes a homeowners’ association incorporated to manage the
affairs of a group of property owners with interests in one or more common
septic systems. The term does not include a person or entity who holds right,
title, or interest in such property for security purposes only.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. As defined at Civil Code §§ 3479 et seq., Penal Code § 370,
and § 33.0302(a)(5) and (12) of this E.H. Code.
   PUBLIC OPERATING AGENCY. Any public agency which assumes responsibility for
the physical operation, maintenance, and/or repair of septic systems regulated
by this Article.
   SEPTIC SYSTEM. A sewage disposal system consisting of a septic tank and a
soil absorption system which conforms to the codes of this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08123   Ownership and Control.
   Multiple ownership septic systems shall be owned, operated, and maintained
by a property owners’ association or homeowners’ association which has been
incorporated under the laws of the State of California and has complied with
the requirements of this Article.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08124   Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions (C. C. & R.’s).
   The C.C.&R.’s of each property owners’ association or homeowners’
association shall include DEHS-approved provisions for obtaining and collecting
from the membership, any funds necessary for operation, maintenance, and
repairs to their septic system. Proposed C. C. & R.’s shall be reviewed and
approved by DEHS before becoming effective. No changes in any DEHS-approved C.
C. & R.’s shall be made until proposed changes have been approved by DEHS.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08125   Types of Permits.
   (a)   Development Permit. For the purpose of satisfying conditions of
approval as may be adopted by the Planning Commission or the Board or Council
of this jurisdiction, DEHS may issue a permit to the developer of a project
subject to the terms of this Article. This permit shall be valid for the term
of the planning approval process, the construction of the project, and for six
months following the issuance of a satisfactory final inspection notice by the
Building and Safety Authority, or upon activation of the association required
by §
33.08123, whichever comes first.
   (b)   Operating Permit. Following the termination of the development permit,
if any, a multiple-owned septic system subject to this Article shall only be
operated under an annual permit from DEHS issued to an owner and renewed upon
the determination that the facility is in compliance with the requirements of
this Article. If property is developed in different phases according to
development plans, one permit shall be required for the first phase, and
additional permits shall be required for any subsequent phase not covered by
the first permit.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08126   Requirements For DEHS Permits.
   No person or entity shall construct, install, modify, own, operate, or
maintain any multiple ownership septic system to which this Article applies
without first holding unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked development and
operating permits to do so from DEHS and having paid fees to DEHS as specified
in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees, and unless currently has:
   (a)   Posted bonds as security for the proper installation and functioning
of the system as follows:
      (1)   Preliminary Bond. A preliminary bond shall be placed with DEHS in
the form of a passbook account which has been assigned to DEHS by means of a
properly executed agreement form provided by DEHS and in an amount determined
by DEHS, but not less than $5,000.00, prior to issuance of a development
permit. Following the issuance of the operating permit, DEHS shall terminate
its assignment of this passbook account and release the balance to the person
(s) named in the passbook.
      (2)   Operating Permit Bond. A cash bond shall be provided by the
responsible association in an amount determined by DEHS, but not less than
$5,000.00, prior to issuance of an operating permit. The amount of the bond
shall be returned to the association upon termination of the permit and the
need, as defined by this Code, for the operating permit.
      (3)   Bond Amounts. Bond amounts shall be set by DEHS and may be
established on the basis of five percent of a California Registered Civil
Engineer’s estimate of installation of the septic system(s) or $5,000.00,
whichever is the greater amount.
   (b)   Obtained DEHS review and approval of the septic system design and
specifications prior to the commencement of construction, and has obtained DEHS
inspections and approval at the completion of each construction phase.
   (c)   Satisfied all DEHS operating permit conditions for the purpose of
protecting public health and water quality and agreed to by the permittee at
the issuance of an operating permit and prior to any changes being made in the
terms of the permit. Conditions which may be included are:
      (1)   Periodic monitoring and submission of test results to DEHS;
      (2)   Quantity limitations to a specific septic system or systems;
      (3)   Notification to DEHS of the names of these officers of the
association and others overseeing the operation and maintenance of the system.
Telephone numbers and addresses for routine contacts and emergency use shall be
included;
      (4)   Waste discharge requirements, or portions thereof, issued to the
permittee by the Regional Water Quality Control with jurisdiction;
      (5)   Any other conditions which are necessary due to the circumstances
of the discharge; and
      (6)   Statement as to what land or property is subject to placement of a
lien or liens against the property should such be necessary in accordance with
§
33.08131 of this Article.
   (d)   Obtained and passed the DEHS-required annual inspection. Each septic
system for which a multiple ownership permit is required shall be inspected
each year and the permit holder shall submit proof of that inspection with the
renewal application. Only persons qualified under Article 6 (Designated
Maintenance Areas), §
33.08103 of this Chapter shall inspect and certify to DEHS that the system is
adequate, in good repair, and working order.
   (e)   Notified DEHS when a change is proposed in the number of total
available services, type of facility served, change in ownership, or any other
changes which affect the septic system, the discharge, or the permit to
operate.
   (f)   Where an applicant or permittee is required by another regulatory
agency to have a public entity as an operating agency, such applicant or
permittee has secured the agreement and services of an operating agency to
assume such responsibilities as may be required by such regulatory agency.
Where a public operating agency has assumed operational responsibilities, no
permit pursuant to this Article shall be required for operation of the septic
system(s).
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08127   Existing DEHS Operating Permits.
   Any DEHS operating permit issued prior to January 1, 1986, shall be subject
to the provisions of this Article that were in effect when such a permit was
issued, and not subject to any such provisions first coming into effect on
January 1, 1986. This shall be the case only so long as such a permit is
continuously renewed prior to expiration and no applicable provisions of this
Code or conditions of the permit are violated. After the latter event, the
current provisions of this Article shall be applicable and enforced as to the
permitted facility.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08128   Public Sewering Entity.
   Where an existing public entity with sewering powers has authority or has a
sphere of influence over a site for which a permit to operate a septic system
is requested, the following shall apply:
   (a)   DEHS shall notify the entity of the application for a permit and shall
not issue a permit until concurrence is received from the entity.
   (b)   If requested by the entity, DEHS shall revoke a permit to operate a
septic system in order to facilitate connection of the developed property(ies)
to the entity’s sewerage system.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08129   DEHS Contracted Services.
   DEHS may contract with, or otherwise make arrangements to have, persons with
special expertise or qualifications to perform services, such as plan review or
inspections or provide consultation on technical matters concerning any septic
system(s) subject to this Article. The applicant or permittee shall reimburse
DEHS for such expenditures.
§ 33.08130   Placement of Utilities.
   (a)   Easements. Easements for placement of utilities shall be designated
and subject to review and approval by DEHS to assure compliance with all
applicable codes.
   (b)   Separations. Separations of domestic water lines and all sewerage
lines and appurtenances shall conform to the Administrative Code §§
64511_64644, “California Waterworks Standards.”
   (c)   Placement of Easements. Easements shall be placed so that they are
fully accessible and are not restricted by placement of structures, other
easements with conflicting uses, or other factors which inhibit or delay
necessary repair activities or accessibility.
   (d)   Location of Absorption System. Soil absorption systems shall not be
located under public or private roads. Private roads do not include off-street
parking areas or the approach driveway to individual lots or spaces.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08131   Compliance Procedures, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. If DEHS makes a determination that a sewerage system is not in
compliance with the requirements of this Article, DEHS shall make a demand of
the owner(s), and any other person known to be occupying or using the real
property, to correct such noncompliance. This demand shall consist of a
reasonable effort, including personal service, or posting the property, or
government mail service, according to the availability of the person(s) to whom
the notice is to be given and the practicality of the method chosen, to reach
such person. Personal service shall not be required, but mailed notice to the
surety of any posted bond shall be given. If at 48 hours after the effort to
give notice to all such parties is made, the noncompliance has not been
corrected, the Director of DEHS may declare the posted bond forfeited and make
such arrangements as are necessary to abate the public nuisance caused by the
offending septic system. The forfeited bond shall be the source of funds drawn
upon by DEHS to defray the actual cost to DEHS of any abatement action to
correct the offending septic system. If such funds are not available for any
reason or are insufficient, or there is a default or dishonoring, DEHS may act
pursuant to §§
33.0311 et seq. of
Chapter 3 (Public Nuisance Abatement) of this E.H. Code to recover its cost,
including a lien attaching to real property for unrecovered costs.
   (b) Except as provided herein, in addition to the foregoing, all remedies/
penalties and other provisions of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Article, and are in addition to all
others provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§§ 33.08132—08140   (Reserved).
ARTICLE 8: STORAGE OF MANURE AND COMMERCIAL FERTILIZER OPERATIONS (CFO)
§ 33.08141   Statement of Purpose and Authority.
   This Article provides minimum standards for the storage of manure and
commercial fertilizer operations (CFO), to protect the public health and
safety.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code), Administrative Code §§
17200 et seq. (Solid Waste Management Standards), and other applicable State
law, this Board/Council authorizes the Department of Environmental Health
Services (DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino to administer the provisions of
this Article within this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08142   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions in Chapters
1 and
3 of
Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   COMMERCIAL FERTILIZER OPERATION (CFO). The storage, stockpiling, drying,
mechanical processing, packing or stacking of manure in substantial quantities.
   MANURE. Animal excrement or livestock excreta. MANURE does not include waste
(“paunch”) from the alimentary canal of cows, horses, sheep, goats, pigs or
other animals.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08143   Prohibition of Manure Storage Upon the Premises Where Manure is
Produced.
   No person shall store manure in piles, stacks or heaps, for more than 120
days unless prior written approval is obtained from DEHS. Requests for time
extension shall be made in writing to DEHS and state why an extended period is
necessary and the number of days requested.
   In responding to such requests, DEHS shall balance the potential hardship to
the public and neighboring properties in granting an extension, with the
potential hardship to the petitioner in complying with the 120 day rule.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08144   Permits Required for CFO.
   No person shall construct, own or operate a commercial fertilizer operation
(CFO) without first obtaining written approval from the Office of Planning of
this jurisdiction, other appropriate permits from regulatory agencies, DEHS,
and paying fees to DEHS as set forth in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule
of Fees.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08145   Enforcement Activities.
   Enforcement activities shall generally proceed as set forth in Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code, and relevant State law pertaining to manure storage and
CFO.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08146   Construction and Operational Requirements.
   The following shall be provided and made conditions of each CFO permit
issued by DEHS:
   (a)   Completed and detailed plans showing CFO contours at two foot
elevations shall be submitted with each application showing all details of the
storage and/or processing operations incorporating all items required by this
Section.
   (b)   All CFO driveways and employee parking areas shall be adequately dust
proofed.
   (c)   There shall be no manufacturing or chemical additives on the CFO
premises.
   (d)   Inorganic chemical additives shall be limited to ten percent of the
total CFO raw material inventory.
   (e)   The CFO installation and operation shall comply with the rules,
regulations and orders of all appropriate regulatory agencies including Air
Pollution Control Districts and the Regional Water Quality Control Boards.
   (f)   The CFO stockpiling area shall be enclosed by a six foot high chain
link fence which will be screened, planted with globular eucalyptus or similar
plant material, on six foot centers; or equivalent upon review and approval by
DEHS and the Office of Planning for this jurisdiction.
   (g)   Except for the stockpiling of raw materials, all CFO operations
including: screening, grinding, mixing, adding, and sacking shall be confined
wholly inside a building.
   (h)   All CFO stockpiling areas shall confine their rainstorm runoff waters
so they do not drain onto adjoining properties.
   (i)   CFO stockpiling shall be shaped to one-to-four minimum slope to
minimize the area subject to rainfall.
   (j)   Appropriate facilities shall be installed to collect or divert
drainage from surrounding lands, away from the stockpile areas.
   (k)   CFO stockpiles shall be at least 150 feet from the front street
centerline and 35 feet from side and rear property lines.
   (l)   CFO stockpiles shall not exceed a height of 25 feet. DEHS may require
a lesser height so that the stockpile will not cause a nuisance to neighboring
properties.
   (m)   CFO stockpiles and/or processing of manure shall not occur within 150
feet of a milking barn or milk house of a producer dairy, or a dwelling on
adjoining property. DEHS may require greater distances upon determining the
direction and magnitude of prevailing winds at the site.
   (n)   Noise levels from the CFO shall not exceed local ambient levels found
in general agricultural uses, to adjoining occupied residences.
   (o)   Vehicles carrying CFO materials shall be adequately covered to confine
the contents and prevent materials from being windblown or otherwise scattered.
   (p)   No public nuisance shall occur as a result of the CFO. DEHS shall
abate all CFO dust, odor, noise, attracting or breeding of flies or other
vermin, and other public nuisances as set forth in
Chapter 3 (Public Nuisance Abatement) of this E.H. Code.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.08147   Administration, Enforcement, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all administration, enforcement,
remedies, and penalties of this Article shall generally proceed as is set forth
in Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code, and be in addition to all others provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
ARTICLE 9: OUT-OF-COUNTY REFUSE
§ 33.08150   Findings and Determinations.
   The Board of Supervisors finds and determines that:
   (a)   (1)   County refuse disposal sites generally located in the mountain
and some portions of the desert areas of the County are maintained and operated
primarily through land use fees paid by the residents of these areas.
      (2)   Refuse from outside the County has historically been discharged at
some of these sites in sufficient quantities to substantially increase the
ongoing costs of operation and maintenance of the sites while concurrently
shortening the usable life of the sites.
      (3)   There are limited feasible and economically viable methods
available to collect fees for disposal of out-of-county refuse at these sites
and, to the extent such methods exist, they do not protect the existing
capacity of the County Solid Waste Disposal System.
   (b)   (1)   County refuse disposal sites located in the valley area and the
balance of the desert area of the County are financed through fees received
upon delivery to a site determined by weight of the refuse.
      (2)   Rapid development of the valley area has created a historic
shortage of landfill capacity in the valley area. While expansion of the
capacity within the County’s Disposal Systems has currently alleviated this
problem to a certain extent, the continued rapid development of the valley and
desert is expected to continue which, in turn, will continue to exert pressure
on the landfill capacity within the County’s Solid Waste Disposal System.
      (3)   It is necessary to manage the valley and desert area waste stream
and the acceptance for disposal of waste generated outside of the County in
order to achieve optimum life of the disposal sites within the County’s Solid
Waste Disposal System.
      (4)   Discharge of unlimited waste originating out of County shortens
landfill life and effects (and if unchecked, impedes) short- and long-range
planning of waste disposal.
   (c)   The small remote community of Wrightwood in Los Angeles County
bordering the County of San Bernardino near the Phelan Transfer Station is
geographically, historically, and uniquely dependent on the Phelan Transfer
Station (and previously the Phelan Disposal Site) for its disposal service and
the County of San Bernardino is currently capable of supplying this minimal
service. Likewise, although a portion of the Joshua Tree National Monument is
situated in Riverside County, refuse collected in the Monument has historically
been taken to the Twentynine Palms Disposal Site (now to the Twentynine Palms
Transfer Station which replaced the Disposal Site) for disposal; the County of
San Bernardino is currently capable of supplying this minimal service.
   (d)   The exportation of refuse generated by several west valley cities
located in San Bernardino County to landfills located outside of this County
has created unused, and therefore excess, capacity at the Colton Landfill and
has also created the possibility that the remaining capacity of the Colton
Landfill will not be utilized in the most operationally efficient manner.
Operational inefficiency will result in higher costs of operation and, given a
fixed solid waste disposal fee, correspondingly less revenue for system
liabilities. refuse collected by haulers serving communities outside of San
Bernardino County could be disposed at the Colton Landfill, offsetting the loss
of the refuse resulting from the exportation of the refuse from certain west
valley cities. Accepting such refuse for disposal at the Colton Landfill will
help insure sufficient daily refuse to help insure the efficient operation of
the Colton Landfill. The County of San Bernardino is capable of supplying this
minimal service, since it will help insure the efficient utilization of the
remaining capacity of the Colton Landfill by replacing refuse lost to
exportation.
   (e)   The exportation of refuse generated by several west valley cities
located in San Bernardino County to landfills located outside of this County,
together with the expansion of landfilling capacity within the County’s Solid
Waste Disposal System, has created some excess capacity within the County’s
Solid Waste Disposal System. Limited amounts of refuse collected by haulers
serving communities outside of San Bernardino County could be disposed of
within the County’s Disposal System, in part offsetting the loss of the refuse
resulting from the exportation of the refuse from certain west valley cities
and also helping to supply the funds necessary to continue the efficient and
environmentally appropriate operation of the County’s Solid Waste Disposal
System. The County of San Bernardino is currently capable of supplying a
limited amount of disposal service for out of County generated waste, with that
amount being determined and controlled through the County’s discretion in
entering into written contract(s) setting out the amount of out of County waste
which may be disposed, the disposal facility at which such waste can be
disposed and the fee to be paid for such disposal.
(Am. Ord. 3145, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3396, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3471,
passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 3553, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3711, passed - -1998;
Am. Ord. 3931, passed - -2004)
§ 33.08151   Discharge of Out-of-County Refuse.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge at any County refuse
disposal site any matter of any kind whatsoever the source of which is outside
of San Bernardino County, except:
   (a)   That persons residing In dwellings within that area of Los Angeles
County described below and known as the Wrightwood Community may discharge
solid waste at the Phelan Transfer Station on payment of fees specified in §
16.0222(j) of the San Bernardino County Code. Service area description: Swallow
Hill Drive, Logwood, Red Start, Blue Jay, Bobolink, Rapid Grove, Timberline
Drive, Raven, Cardinal Road and Flume Canyon (the foregoing constituting all of
the roads in the Wrightwood Community).
   (b)   That the refuse hauler serving the Joshua Tree National Monument may
discharge solid waste collected in the portion of the monument located in
Riverside County at the Twentynine Palms Transfer Station on payment of all
fees applicable to the discharge of such solid waste (determined as though such
solid waste was generated in San Bernardino), as specified in § 16.0222 of the
San Bernardino County Code.
   (c)   That refuse haulers (including operators of transfer stations,
material recovery facilities or like facilities) or refuse generators may
discharge solid waste generated in counties other than San Bernardino County at
facilities within the County Solid Waste Disposal System, if and only to the
extent provided for in a written contract entered into with the County allowing
for such disposal, on payment of all fees applicable to the discharge of such
solid waste, as specified in § 16.0222 of the San Bernardino County Code
(including as specified in the required written contract).
   (d)   In no event, however, will any solid waste generated outside of San
Bernardino County be accepted for disposal at any County landfill or other
disposal site, to the extent that the disposal of such waste would violate the
provisions of Public Resources Code § 41903.
(Am. Ord. 3148, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3230, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3376,
passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3396, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3471, passed - -1991;
Am. Ord. 3711, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3931, passed - -2004)
§ 33.08152   Posting of Restriction.
   Each entrance to County sites shall be posted by a sign of such size and
appearance as to give notice of the use restriction contained in this Chapter.
(Am. Ord. 3145, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3396, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3471,
passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 3553, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3711, passed - -1998)
§ 33.08153   Penalty.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor which upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period not
exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Am. Ord. 3145, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3396, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 3471,
passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 3553, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3711, passed - -1998)
ARTICLE 9.5
§ 33.08155   Prohibition on Acceptance at or Delivery of Waste or Related
Material to an Unauthorized Facility; Definitions; Application of Prohibition.
   (a)   No person shall accept waste or related material at or deliver waste
or related material to an unauthorized facility.
   (b)   As used in this
Article 9.5, the following words shall have the following meanings.
      (1)   Facility. A facility is any property (including solely developed
real estate, solely undeveloped real estate and real estate which is in part
developed and in part undeveloped), regardless of its nature of ownership or
the nature of the right giving rise to its use, which is being used as a place
for the acceptance, delivery and/or processing of waste or related material.
      (2)   Governmental Approval. Governmental approval means any permit,
license, authorization or land-use approval required under Federal, State or
local law (including regulation) to be obtained from the Federal, State or
local government in order for a facility to accept waste or related material of
the type being accepted and/or for the processing of the waste or related
material being accepted in the manner it is being processed.
         (A)   A governmental approval includes, but is not limited to, a solid
waste facility permit (Public Resources Code §§ 40000 et seq.), a permit from
an air board, a waste discharge requirement, a building permit, a general plan
land use district amendment, a conditional use permit or other land use
approval.
         (B)   In order for such permit, license, authorization or land-use
approval to be considered valid for the purposes of accepting and/or delivering
waste or related material within the meaning of this
Article 9.5:
            (i)   It must be issued either with respect to the facility (e.g.,
land-use approval) or, where applicable, to the facility operator with respect
to the facility (e.g., a solid waste facility permit);
            (ii)   It must be issued with respect to the type of waste or
related material being delivered, accepted and/or processed;
            (iii)   It must be issued with respect to the type of processing
the waste or related material is being subjected to at the facility; and
            (iv)   It must be current and not subject to any suspension or
other regulatory or judicial process which impairs the right of the operator of
the facility to accept or perform processing on the waste or related material
sought to be delivered to the facility.
      (3)   Processing. Processing involves any use, consumption,
containerization, storage or disposal of waste or related material at the
facility, including, but not limited to, its use, consumption,
containerization, storage or disposal in: manufacturing; fabricating;
construction; operation of a vermicomposting or vermiculture facility; or
(within the meaning of Public Resources Code §§ 40000 et seq.) the biomass
conversion, composting, disposal, processing, recycling, source reduction or
transformation of solid waste, recyclable material or green waste.
      (4)   Unauthorized Facility. An unauthorized facility means a facility
which does not possess a governmental approval for either or both:
         (A)   Accepting waste or related material of the type being delivered
and accepted at the facility; or
         (B)   Processing the waste or related material being delivered and
accepted in the manner it is being processed at the facility.
      (5)   Waste or Related Material. Waste or related material means solid
waste as defined in Public Resources Code § 40191, recyclable material and
green waste, whether or not the recyclable material and green waste are source
separated or otherwise segregated from other waste material, hazardous waste
(as defined in Public Resources Code § 40141) and medical waste (as defined in
Health and Safety Code § 117690).
   (c)   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to acceptance and delivery
of waste or related material to an unauthorized facility:
      (1)   Located wholly within the unincorporated portion of San Bernardino
County; or
      (2)   Located such that the waste or related material is being delivered,
accepted or being subjected to processing (or any combination of the foregoing)
on a portion of the unauthorized facility which is within the unincorporated
portion of San Bernardino County.
(Ord. 3683, passed - -1997)
§ 33.08156   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code and other
relevant State and local law, the San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors
authorized the Chief of the County Fire Department (CFD) or the Chief of the
Division of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the Public Health
Department and the Enforcement Officers of the CFD or the DEHS of the County of
San Bernardino to enforce the provisions of this
Article 9.5 within this jurisdiction. Such authority includes the right to
enter land for investigation, posting or serving notice, or to cause abatement
of public nuisances.
(Ord. 3683, passed - -1997)
§ 33.08157   Penalty.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
Article 9.5. In addition to those listed herein or elsewhere provided by law,
all enforcement procedures, remedies and penalties of San Bernardino County
Code
Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Title 3 (Authority and Administration) shall apply
to this
Article 9.5 and violation of any provision of this
Article 9.5
(Ord. 3683, passed - -1997)
§ 33.08158   Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Article 9.5 is for any reason held to be invalid, preempted or unconstitutional
by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
Article 9.5. The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino hereby
declares that it would have adopted the ordinance establishing this
Article 9.5 and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, or portion may be declared invalid, preempted or
unconstitutional.
(Ord. 3683, passed - -1997)
ARTICLE 10 (Reserved)
§ 33.08160   (Repealed by Ord. 4195, passed - -2013).
§ 33.08161   (Repealed by Ord. 4195, passed - -2013).
§ 33.08162   (Repealed by Ord. 4195, passed - -2013).
§ 33.08163   (Repealed by Ord. 4195, passed - -2013).
§ 33.08164   (Repealed by Ord. 4195, passed - -2013).
§§ 33.08165—33.08169    (Reserved).
ARTICLE 11: LANDSPREADING OF SLUDGE
§ 33.08170   Purpose.
   (a)   This Article is to prevent public health hazards, surface and ground
water pollution, and contamination of food-chain products by improper
landspreading of sludges. Sludges may contain heavy metals, pathogenic
organisms, and chemical pollutants and heretofore have not been regulated other
than by “guidelines” prepared by the State Department of Health Services. To
prevent large importations of sludges to critical ground water basins and food
production areas, this Article provides local control and assures that safe
landspreading practices will be observed.
   (b)   This Board designates the Department of Environmental Health Services
(DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino as the enforcement authority for
purposes of this Article within this jurisdiction.
(Ord. 3260, passed - -1988)
§ 33.08171   Definitions.
   The following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions in this
Article.
   DAIRY. Any place or premises upon which milk or milk products are produced
for sale or distribution and where more than two cows or six goats are in
location.
   HYDROGEOLOGIC REPORT. A report submitted to satisfy the requirements of this
Article and shall comply with minimum standards set forth by this Code.
   INSTITUTIONS. As used in the Article shall be those permanent facilities
such as schools, hospitals, day care centers, convalescent care centers,
religious, fraternal, recreational facilities and related places where
substantial groups of people could be impacted by obnoxious odors and airborne
microorganisms or chemicals from landspreading.
   LANDSPREADING. The use or disposal of sludge within six inches of the land
surface, or, in the case of land used for production of agricultural food-chain
crops, within three feet of the land surface.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WATER WELL. A water well used to supply water for
domestic purposes in systems supplying domestic water to users and shall
include noncommunity water systems and state small water systems. Such wells
are variously referred to as municipal wells, city wells or community water
supply wells.
   SLUDGE. Any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste containing human fecal matter
and/or other high concentrations of putrescible organic material, generated
from a municipal or community sewage treatment plant, industrial process, or
septic system. SLUDGE does not include sewage effluent or, for the purposes of
this Article, commercially bagged sludge products intended for home landscaping
use.
(Ord. 3260, passed - -1988)
§ 33.08172   Approvals.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to landspread sludge whether for
purposes of fertilizing or amending soils or for disposal of the sludge without
first applying for and obtaining approval from the DEHS.
(Ord. 3260, passed - -1988)
§ 33.08173   Filing for Department Approval.
   Each applicant shall complete an application form prepared by the DEHS for
landspreading of sludge and file that application, including the fee required
by §§ 16.0213B et seq. of this Code, with the DEHS. Landspreading shall not
commence until DEHS issues written approval for that application.
(Ord. 3260, passed - -1988)
§ 33.08174   Application Form.
   The DEHS application form shall include the following:
   (a)   Name and address of the owner(s) and manager(s) of the entity making
application including any “doing business as (DBA),” fictitious name(s), or
corporate name(s);
   (b)   Property owner, address, Assessor’s Parcel Number, location of the
property where the landspreading is proposed;
   (c)   Name, address, and written approval (signed contract) of property
owner(s) where landspreading is proposed;
   (d)   Name and address of contiguous property owners where the landspreading
operation is proposed;
   (e)   Verification that all standards are met as set forth in §
33.08175 of this Code;
   (f)   Any other supplemental information reasonably required by the DEHS at
the time of submission relevant to the particular circumstances stated in the
application.
(Ord. 3260, passed - -1988)
§ 33.08175   Standards.
   The following standards shall be considered as minimum requirements to be
met when the DEHS reviews for approval a landspreading proposal. The DEHS may
with cause increase these minimum standards for the protection of the public
health and surface and ground water resources. These standards are:
   (a)   Filing of an analysis of the sludge, not more than one year old,
prepared by a qualified California Department of Health Services Certified
Laboratory which lists concentrations of all heavy metals of concern, including
cadmium, copper, nickel, lead, chromium and zinc, nitrogen content (total
Kjeldahl nitrogen and ammonium), selected organic compounds, pH, solids
content, and any other constituents as determined by the DEHS at the time of
application submission. The applicant shall certify that the sample of sludge
tested for the analysis mentioned here was a composite sample of the type of
sludge, and a true sample of the sludge, that will be handled under the
applied-for approval;
   (b)   Certification by the applicant that the following minimum separations
from the landspreading shall be met:
      (1)   Operating dairy with lactating cattle: one-half mile.
      (2)   Any public water supply well: one-half mile.
      (3)   Any residence(s) other than that of the property owner: 500 feet.
      (4)   Any institution: 500 feet.
      (5)   Any live stream, lake or surface impoundment: one-half mile.
      (6)   Produce farms, vegetables, fruits and other crops for human
consumption: 500 feet.
   (c)   Statement by the property owner as to whether any application of
sludge has been made to the property proposed for landspreading within the past
ten years. If yes, then a current analysis of the soil and/or plant growth from
the proposed landspreading area as directed by the DEHS;
   (d)   Copy of the most recent National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) or waste discharge requirements (WDR) permit from the California
Regional Water Quality Control Board with jurisdiction for the facility(ies)
and discharges approving the sludge to be landspread;
   (e)   The proposed rate in tons per acre at which the landspreading is to be
made;
   (f)   The material(s) which may be mixed with the sludge before, during, or
after landspreading and in what proportions. The Department of Environmental
Health Services may make requirements for additional information concerning
content, storage, and handling of such materials as it shall deem necessary;
   (g)   A hydrogeologic report certificated by a California registered
engineer or certified engineering geologist qualified under the California
Business and Professional Code for preparation of such a report that the
application of the sludge to include any additives does not violate current
Federal, State, or local standards or guidelines. Required items shall include:
      (1)   Depth(s) to ground water (present and historic);
      (2)   Ambient ground water quality;
      (3)   Information concerning perennial stream(s), lake(s), or surface
impoundments within one-half mile of the proposed landspreading site and the
anticipated impact to water resources resulting from the proposed landspreading
operation;
      (4)   Other requirements may be made by DEHS at the time of application
submission.
(Ord. 3260, passed - -1988)
§ 33.08176   Substitute Standards.
   Where the appropriate California Regional Water Quality Control Board with
jurisdiction at the point of discharge has issued either a NPDES or WDR permit
with requirements equal to or greater than those of this Code, DEHS may, upon
receipt of such verification from that Board’s executive officer that the
standards are met, waive the requirement for DEHS application review.
(Ord. 3260, passed - -1988)
§ 33.08177   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Violations of this Article shall be misdemeanors. All other
administration, enforcement, remedies, and penalties as to this Article shall
generally proceed as is set forth in Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this County Code, and otherwise as provided by law including §
33.0107 (Interference unlawful/criminal penalties for) of Chapter
1.
(Ord. 3260, passed - -1988)
§ 33.08178   (Reserved).
§ 33.08179   (Reserved).
ARTICLE 12: SOLID WASTE FACILITY PERMITS
§ 33.08180   Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this Article is to establish locally adopted procedures for
carrying out a permit and inspection program for solid waste facilities. Public
Resources Code § 43209 authorizes the Local Enforcement Agency (LEA) to adopt
an enforcement program consisting of regulations necessary to implement the
permitting and inspection of solid waste facilities and to establish specific
local standards for solid waste handling and disposal, including a description
of the locally adopted procedures for carrying out the solid waste facilities
permit and inspection program. Public Resources Code § 44014 provides that each
county may determine aspects of solid waste handling which are of local
concern, including, but not limited to, charges and fees.
(Ord. 3550, passed - -1993)
§ 33.08181   Legal Defense Fee Responsibility.
   As a condition of approval of a solid waste facilities permit, the applicant
shall agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the County of San
Bernardino and its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action, or
proceeding against the County of San Bernardino or its agents, officers or
employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul an approval of the County, an
advisory agency, appeal board or legislative body concerning the solid waste
facilities permit or an exemption or any other action relating to or arising
out of such approval.
(Ord. 3550, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3566, passed - -1993)
CHAPTER 9: INSECT, RODENT AND OTHER VECTOR CONTROL
Section
Article 1: Mosquito, Fly, Rat and Other Public Health Vector Abatement
   
33.0901   Purpose and Authority.
   
33.0902   Definitions.
   
33.0903   Violations.
   33.0904—0910   (Reserved).
Article 2: Fly Control on Commercial Poultry Ranches and Other Locations
   
33.0911   Intent.
   
33.0912   Definitions.
   
33.0913   Fly Abatement and Appeals Board.
   
33.0914   Duties and Powers of the Director of DEHS.
   
33.0915   Hearing Request.
   
33.0916   Permit Required.
   
33.0917   Application Requirements.
   
33.0918   Transport of Wastes.
   
33.0919   Fly Bait Stations and Pesticides.
   
33.0920   Poultry Ranch Standards.
   
33.0921   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   33.0922—0930   (Reserved).
Article 3: Riding Academies
   
33.0931   Authority.
   
33.0932   Definitions.
   
33.0933   Permits Required.
   
33.0934   Compliance.
   
33.0935   Suspension and/or Revocation of Permit.
   
33.0936   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   33.0937—0940   (Reserved).
Article 4: San Bernardino County Vector Control Program
   
33.0941   Purpose.
   
33.0942   Authority.
   
33.0943   City Assessments.
   
33.0944   Regional Assessments.
   
33.0945   Method of Collection; Authorization to Add to Tax Roll.
Article 5: 4-H/FFA Educational Animal Projects
   
33.0951   General Provisions.
   
33.0952   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   33.0953—0960   (Reserved).
ARTICLE 1: MOSQUITO, FLY, RAT, AND OTHER PUBLIC HEALTH VECTOR ABATEMENT
§ 33.0901   Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this Article is to provide for the general public health
protection in regards to mosquito, fly, rat, and other public health vector
management and abatement.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code), and as elsewhere
provided in State law, this jurisdiction designates the Department of
Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino as the
enforcement authority for the purposes of this Article and of the applicable
laws and regulations related to public health vector abatement as currently
adopted by the State Department of Food and Agriculture and Department of
Health Services. This jurisdiction hereby finds and declares that breeding and
harborage places for mosquitoes, flies, rats, and other vectors under
conditions of known public health significance are public nuisances. DEHS is
authorized to assist in epidemiological studies conducted by the San Bernardino
County Department of Public Health and other health agencies, to provide
education on vector-borne disease and control measures, and otherwise
appropriately monitor the status of public health vertebrate and invertebrate
vectors within this jurisdiction. Such authority includes the right to
reasonably enter upon, without hindrance, any lands to inspect, survey,
monitor, or issue notices related to suspected public nuisances.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0902   Definitions.
   The definitions provided in
Chapter 1 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Article except that:
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. For the purposes of this Article means any of the
following:
      (1)   (A)   Any breeding place for mosquitoes, flies, rats, or other
vectors of public health importance which exists by reason of any use made of
the land on which it is found, or of any artificial change in its natural
condition. Presence of immature arthropods of public health importance shall
constitute prima facie evidence that a place is a breeding place for
arthropods. The presence of rodent droppings, trails, or evidence of feeding
activity, shall constitute prima facie evidence that a place is a breeding
place for rats.
         (B)   Where DEHS determines than an agricultural operation is growing
or processing crops or raising fowl or animals in a manner consistent with
proper and accepted practices and standards, and employing measures for rat
control, for fly control, for manure management, removal, and disposal, and for
disposal of agricultural crop waste, which prevent excessive domestic fly
larval development and excessive adult fly emergence on the property, and
excessive rat population, then that place shall not be deemed a public
nuisance.
         (C)   As used in this Subdivision, EXCESSIVE means the presence of
domestic flies and rats associated with agricultural operations, which do all
of the following:
            (I)   Occur in immature stages and as adults in numbers
considerably in excess of those found in the surrounding environment;
            (II)   Are associated with the design, layout, and management of
agricultural operations;
            (III)   Disseminate widely from the property;
            (IV)   Cause detrimental effects on the public health and well-
being of a majority of the surrounding population.
      (2)   Water which is a breeding place for mosquitoes, flies, or other
arthropods of public health importance.
   VECTOR. Any animal capable of transmitting the causative agent of human
disease or capable of producing human discomfort or injury, including, but not
limited to, mosquitoes, flies, fleas, ticks, mites, and rats, but not including
any domesticated animal.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0903   Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to create or allow the
existence of a public nuisance as defined in this Article.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§§ 33.0904—0910    (Reserved).
ARTICLE 2: FLY CONTROL ON COMMERCIAL POULTRY RANCHES AND OTHER LOCATIONS
§ 33.0911   Intent.
   It is the intent of this Article to promote good fly control practices and
to provide a system of abatement for all fly breeding sources on commercial
poultry ranches and other places within this jurisdiction. Except as provided
herein, all authority and provisions of Chapters
1 and
2 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code) shall apply to this Article.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0912   Definitions.
   In addition to the definitions provided in
Chapter 1 of this E.H. Code, the following shall apply to this Article:
   COMMERCIAL POULTRY RANCH. Any building, structure, enclosure, or premises
where poultry are kept or maintained for the primary purpose of producing
poultry, eggs, or meat for sale or other distribution. This term shall not
apply to premises where less than 100 chickens are kept.
   FLY BREEDING HAZARD. The accumulation, existence or maintenance of any
substance, matter, material, or condition resulting or likely to result in the
breeding of flies in an amount or manner such as to endanger public health or
safety, or to create unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment
and use of life and property by others.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any fly breeding hazard within this jurisdiction.
   STANDARDS FOR THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF FLY BREEDING ON COMMERCIAL
POULTRY RANCHES. Those sections provided in this Article setting forth
standards for the construction, operation, and maintenance of commercial
poultry ranches.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0913   Fly Abatement and Appeals Board.
   (a)   Establishment. There shall be a County-wide Fly Abatement and Appeals
Board of the County of San Bernardino, State of California.
   (b)   Appointment of Members. The Appeals Board shall be composed of five
members appointed by the Director of the Department of Environmental Health
Services (DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino. Two persons shall he
commercial poultry ranchers. One person shall be a graduate of a biological or
environmental science, knowledgeable in fly control procedures and not
associated with DEHS or any local commercial poultry ranch. Two persons shall
represent the community at large. Members of the Board shall be appointed for a
term of two years, and shall serve without compensation, reimbursements, or
allowances.
   (c)   Functions. The functions of the Board are as follows:
      (1)   The Board shall conduct public hearings relating to fly breeding
hazards, but shall not take up the subject of denial, suspension, or revocation
of any permit.
      (2)   The Board shall choose a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from its
own members.
      (3)   A quorum shall be necessary in order to transact business of the
Board.
      (4)   The Board may, upon evidence presented, recommend methodology for
abatement of a violation of this Article.
      (5)   The Board may issue a recommendation to the Director of DEHS
regarding a determination of breeding hazards and issuance of abatement orders.
      (6)   A majority vote of the Board members present shall be necessary to
issue a recommendation.
      (7)   Administration of abatement orders, notices of violation,
citations, and court actions shall be the responsibility of the Director of
DEHS.
   (d)   Recommendation Procedure. The Board shall issue its recommendations to
the Director of DEHS in writing within five days of the hearing. Final
determination is the responsibility of the Director of DEHS.
§ 33.0914   Duties and Powers of the Director of DEHS.
   (a)   Inspection. It is the duty of the Director of DEHS or authorized agent
to inspect any premises when there is probable cause to believe that a fly
breeding hazard exists. The Director or authorized agent thereof may also
routinely inspect commercial poultry ranches and may take photographs, collect
samples, or other evidence.
   (b)   Notice. When the Director or authorized agent determines that a fly
breeding hazard exists on any premises, or in addition, pertaining to
commercial poultry ranches, that there is a violation of any of the standards
listed within this Article or of any other governing laws or rules, a written
notice of violation shall be issued to the owner or operator of the premises to
correct the violation within a specified period of time. A notice of violation
shall allow at least five days to correct the violation(s). Continuing or
subsequent violations may result in immediate citation.
   (c)   Service of Notice or Order. The notice required by this Section shall
be served by any or all of the following methods:
      (1)   Mail to the owner as shown on the tax rolls;
      (2)   By personal service;
      (3)   By posting the property.
   (d)   Citation. If the owner or operator fails to correct the violation
within the specified period of time indicated on a written notice of violation,
the Director or designated agent may proceed with an action in court to enforce
the provisions of this Article.
   (e)   Repeated Violations. If the Director or designated agent has served
upon the owner or operator two or more written notices of violation within the
previous 12-month period, at the time of service of the current notice of
violation, a written notice of a right to a hearing before the Fly Abatement
and Appeals Board shall also be served.
   (f)   Remedies. The Director or designated agent may use any other remedy
provided by law for the abatement of a nuisance in addition to any remedy
provided in this Article.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0915   Hearing Request.
   Any commercial poultry ranch receiving a written notice of violation may
request a public hearing before the Fly Abatement Appeals Board. The request
shall be in writing addressed to the Director of DEHS within five days of
issuance of a Notice of Violation. The hearing shall be scheduled within ten
days of the written request. At the hearing, the commercial poultry ranch
operator may advise the Appeals Board of any compliance problems and the
Appeals Board may advise the operator of procedures which would provide
abatement. The Appeals Board shall inform the Director of DEHS of the
proceedings of this informal hearing. Final determination shall be the
responsibility of the Director of DEHS.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0916   Permit Required.
   In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 2 of this E.H. Code, every owner or operator of a commercial poultry
ranch shall possess an unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked permit from DEHS to
engage in the business of operating or managing a poultry ranch. The
appropriate fee shall be submitted with each application in the amounts set
forth in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees. An operator of
several separate commercial poultry ranches shall obtain a separate valid
permit for each ranch operation. Permits shall not be transferable and may be
denied, suspended, or revoked. Upon notification by the Director of DEHS or
authorized agent of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a permit, the permittee
may request a hearing as provided in
Chapter 2 of this E.H. Code. The grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation
shall be the existence of a fly breeding hazard on the applicable property of
such a nature that imminent abatement is not foreseeable, or noncompliance with
the other requirements of this Article as to the use of facilities and
equipment.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0917   Application Requirements.
   (a)   The following information shall be submitted to DEHS in connection
with all existing caged poultry operations:
      (1)   Owner, operator, firms and/or corporation name and address;
      (2)   Construction details of existing operational systems (cages,
floors, water, feeds, waste-water disposal, house space, cooling and
ventilating systems);
      (3)   Density of birds for existing operation; and
      (4)   Statements describing existing method of manure management and dead
bird disposal.
   (b)   Plans for new construction shall be submitted to DEHS and the planning
and/or land management departments of this jurisdiction for approval and DEHS
development permit prior to construction with appropriate fees as set forth in
the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees and shall include:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale;
      (2)   The owner, operator, firm, and/or corporation name and address;
      (3)   Location of proposed construction and type of existing buildings;
      (4)   Prevailing wind directions;
      (5)   Location of access roads and servicing areas;
      (6)   Human and animal population densities of adjoining areas; and
      (7)   Construction details of proposed and existing operational systems
(cages, floors, watering, feeds, waste-water disposal, house spacing, cooling
ventilating systems).
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0918   Transport of Wastes.
   All trucks and other equipment used in removing, processing, or disposal of
manure or dead birds shall be kept reasonably clean of manure and dead birds
after disposal to prevent fly and odor nuisances. The beds of all trucks and
other hauling equipment used for these practices shall be completely covered
and/or sealed with a tarpaulin or otherwise properly covered and secured to
prevent spillages when operating on public roadways, in accordance with the
California Vehicle Code. Trucks and other equipment containing manure or dead
birds shall not be parked within a residential neighborhood area for longer
than 24 hours and not within 500 feet of a neighboring residential or
commercial building.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0919   Fly Bait Stations and Pesticides.
   (a)   Fly bait stations, when required by DEHS and approved by DEHS, shall
be maintained in an operable condition on each cage operation type ranch or
other fly breeding place. The number of fly bait stations shall be determined
by DEHS.
   (b)   The standards herein shall be interpreted to promote good fly control
practices in accordance with recognized biological control practices to reduce
the possibility of fly breeding. However, they do not preclude the use of
pesticides when necessary or other good fly control practices as approved by
DEHS. Additionally, DEHS may require any reasonable action necessary to insure
fly control and to prevent a public nuisance.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0920   Poultry Ranch Standards.
   The following standards herein shall be utilized to promote good fly control
practices in accordance with recognized Integrated Pest Management techniques.
These shall include physical, biological, and chemical control methods such as
those currently recommended in the bulletin “Integrated Management of Pest
Flies on Poultry Ranches,” published by the University of California Division
of Agricultural Sciences or as set forth in equivalent publications.
   (a)   Construction and Maintenance.
      (1)   Structures and equipment for both ground and cage operations shall
be constructed so as to facilitate the drying and removal of manure when
required, and shall provide drainage of moisture away from all manure.
      (2)   All watering and cooling systems shall be so installed to prevent
backflow and so maintained that they do not overflow, splash, or leak upon
manure and feeds.
      (3)   All waste water shall be disposed of by using a subsurface drainage
system or other method that will not result in a nuisance.
      (4)   All housing operations shall be so designed and maintained to allow
adequate ventilation and weather protection by proper spacing, elevation, and
roofing designs.
      (5)   All feed storage facilities shall be designed and maintained so as
to prevent fly and rodent development.
      (6)   Any person or entity proposing to construct or reconstruct a
commercial poultry ranch or any building, structure, or enclosure on a
commercial poultry ranch shall follow the current guidelines as provided by the
University of California Cooperative Extension, or other industry-wide
acceptable standards.
   (b)   Fly Control Through Manure Management.
      (1)   Drying and Coning Operation. If the commercial poultry ranch owner
or operator employs the drying and coning operation method of manure
management, the following shall be complied with:
         (A)   The process shall begin on dry ground or on a pad of dry manure
in order to harbor predators and parasites and to provide an absorbent surface
for fresh droppings. A deeper pad of dry manure may be necessary if the area
beneath the poultry cages is sunk below the levels of the aisles. If necessary,
to facilitate drying, broken up fresh droppings shall be stirred or otherwise
mixed with the dry pad until a satisfactorily dry condition is attained.
         (B)   Any system used for watering the poultry shall be maintained so
as to prevent water from reaching the manure. System leaks shall be promptly
repaired so as not to disrupt the effectiveness of the drying method. When
necessary, the watering system shall be changed or upgraded to eliminate future
leaks.
         (C)   All wet spots in the manure created by water leaks or diarrhetic
poultry shall be thoroughly removed and replaced with an adequate base of dry
material as necessary.
         (D)   Whenever it becomes necessary to remove the manure from under
the cages, a six to eight inch pad of dry manure shall be left to facilitate
the drying of the new cones and maintain a habitat for predators and parasites
by one of the following methods:
            (I)   Removing every other row, then pushing half of the manure
from the remaining row into the cleaned out row.
            (II)   Cleaning so as to leave at least six to eight inches of
manure in each row.
            (III)   Cleaning out all manure and replacing it with at least a
six to eight inch pad of dry manure from some other source.
      (2)   Frequent Manure Removal Operation. If the commercial poultry ranch
owner or operator employs the frequent manure removal operation method of
manure management, the following procedures shall be complied with:
         (A)   Manure shall be removed frequently enough from under poultry
cages to prevent fly larval migration and adult emergence.
         (B)   Each time manure is removed from under the poultry cages, larvae
and pupae shall also be removed in the fringe areas.
         (C)   Aisles and borders of the poultry houses shall be cleaned of
feathers and other debris frequently to eliminate pupation areas for fly
larvae.
   (c)   Manure Disposal.
      (1)   Raw manure shall not be stockpiled or stored on the ranch premises
for more than 15 days.
      (2)   Any manure removed from under the poultry cages or the premises by
any person, shall be processed and/or disposed of in a manner that will not
create a fly nuisance.
      (3)   Manure which is processed on the ranch shall be processed by one of
the following means, provided there is sufficient area available for whichever
method is selected. Methodology for manure processing and disposal shall be
that approved by the Director of DEHS. Obtaining the Director’s approval shall
be the responsibility of the operator. Manure shall be:
         (A)   Placed under a tarp which is properly sealed around the edges or
in a fly-tight storage bin to prevent the emergence of adult flies.
         (B)   Spread thinly and dried and/or disced under in a manner that
will not create a fly problem.
         (C)   Incorporated into an effective decomposition or drying operation
so that any larvae or pupae in the manure cannot advance in the life cycle, and
such operation be so conducted that dusts, odors, and nuisances to adjacent
properties do not occur.
   (d)   Fly Control of Other Sources on Commercial Poultry Ranches.
      (1)   Dead Poultry Disposal. Dead poultry shall be removed from the cages
at least once a day and immediately disposed of by one of the following
methods:
         (A)   Placed in a fly-tight container or structure for proper off-site
removal and removed from the premises at least weekly. Containers shall be kept
clean to prevent fly breeding.
         (B)   Placed in a disposal pit of approved construction similar to
that shown in current University of California Cooperative Extension
publication, “How to Dispose of Dead Birds,” or as stated in equivalent
publications.
      (2)   Waste Egg Disposal. Waste eggs shall be disposed of by one of the
following methods:
         (A)   Placed daily in the dead bird disposal;
         (B)   Placed in fly-tight containers or structures and removed from
the premises at least weekly.
      (3)   Feed Management.
         (A)   Feed storage area shall be kept dry.
         (B)   Spilled feed from feed troughs shall be immediately removed.
   (e)   General Ranch Operation.
      (1)   There shall be sufficient equipment and personnel to implement the
manure management program for fly prevention and control.
      (2)   Whenever necessary, the fly population on the ranch shall be
chemically controlled to prevent nuisances. Larviciding shall be kept at a
minimum. Appropriate adulticides, including both sprays and baits, may be used
to control adult fly populations.
      (3)   Dropping boards or wires may be used in speeding the drying process
and to reduce the expense of pesticides. Excessive accumulations of manure on
dropping boards or wires to prevent fly breeding shall be cleaned frequently.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0921   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all remedies and penalties of Chapters
1 and
2 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Article, and are in addition to all
others provided by law.
§§ 33.0922—0930    (Reserved).
ARTICLE 3: RIDING ACADEMIES
§ 33.0931   Authority.
   Except as provided herein, all authority and provisions of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code) shall apply to this Article,
which shall be enforced by the Department of Environmental Health Services
(DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino within this jurisdiction. Matters
pertaining to animal disease and abuse shall be referred to the Health Officer.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0932   Definitions.
   In addition to those definitions in Chapters
1 and
3 of this E.H. Code, the following shall apply to this Article:
   RIDING ACADEMY. Any place where horses are rented or held for rent to the
public, or where such horses are stabled, kept, or maintained.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0933   Permits Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to construct, own, operate, or
allow the operation of any riding academy without a valid DEHS permit to do so,
issued in accordance with the provisions of this Article and
Chapter 2 of this E.H. Code.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0934   Compliance.
   Operators of riding academies shall comply with all provisions of this E.H.
Code and of this jurisdiction for the location, operation, maintenance, and
care of such places and animals, and the stockpiling and disposal of manure and
waste material therefrom, in a manner which shall not create a hazard to human
or animal health or be or become a public nuisance.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0935   Suspension and/or Revocation of Permit.
   In accordance with the administrative procedures set forth in
Chapter 2 of this E.H. Code, a permit may be suspended or revoked by DEHS for
failure to comply with the provisions of this E.H. Code, the laws of this
jurisdiction, or if at any time such place becomes a hazard to human or animal
health, or a public nuisance.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0936   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all remedies and penalties of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Article, and are in addition to all
others provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§§ 33.0937—0940    (Reserved).
ARTICLE 4: SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY VECTOR CONTROL PROGRAM
§ 33.0941   Purpose.
   The San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors has found and determined:
that mosquito, fly, rodent, and other vector producing areas capable of
producing public health vectors are present within the County; that these
vectors are known to transmit human diseases; that the effective control of
these vectors should be conducted on a County-wide basis in order to protect
the health and safety, and enhance the comfort of the citizens; that the
participation of the County of San Bernardino County Vector Control Program
through the Department of Public Health (PH), Division of Environmental Health
Services (DEHS) will best control public health vector problems of the County;
that there is a need for the program in the zones and areas to be assessed and
that the properties within such program benefited by the program.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3549, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3672,
passed - -1996)
§ 33.0942   Authority.
   (a)   Pursuant to Government Code § 25842.5, the Board of Supervisors hereby
establishes the San Bernardino County Vector Control Program which shall
provide the services and exercise the powers of a Vector Control District
within the County of San Bernardino as set forth in the Health and Safety Code
§§ 2000 et seq. Before exercising such authority within incorporated territory,
the consent of the city council shall first be obtained. The San Bernardino
County Vector Control Program shall be carried out by the Department of Public
Health (PH), Division of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the County of
San Bernardino. PH/DEHS will consult with each jurisdiction, consenting to
participation in the Vector Control Program, to determine the parameters of
services to be performed and to establish mechanisms for funding.
   (b)   For the purposes of an assessment levied under this Article, the
property so assessed within a given zone, city or region is equally benefitted.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3549, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3672,
passed - -1996)
§ 33.0943   City Assessments.
   (a)   The city councils of the following cities have resolved, pursuant to
Government Code § 25842.5, to consent to approve the inclusion of their
incorporated territory in the San Bernardino County Vector Control Program, and
have entered into separate agreements with County to that end:
      (1)   Colton;
      (2)   Fontana;
      (3)   Grand Terrace;
      (4)   Highland;
      (5)   Loma Linda;
      (6)   Needles;
      (7)   Ontario (excluding all areas within the West Valley Vector Control
District);
      (8)   Redlands;
      (9)   Rialto;
      (10)   San Bernardino;
      (11)   Upland; and
      (12)   Yucaipa.
   (b)   The San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors hereby establishes
annual benefit assessment rates and/or collection methods for all incorporated
and unincorporated areas within the San Bernardino County Vector Control
Program, as set forth in this Article.
   (c)   The benefit assessment rates for the following valley floor cities
(excluding incorporated area and areas within the West Valley Vector Control
District) shall be as established by Subdivision (d) of this Section:
      (1)   Colton;
      (2)   Fontana;
      (3)   Grand Terrace;
      (4)   Highland;
      (5)   Loma Linda;
      (6)   Redlands;
      (7)   Rialto;
      (8)   San Bernardino;
      (9)   Upland; and
      (10)   Yucaipa.
   (d)   The benefit assessment rates for the cities listed in Subdivision (c)
of this Section shall be as follows:
      (1)   Vacant assessable parcels: $1.00.
      (2)   Residential:
         (A)   SFD: $5.32.
         (B)   Five—14 units: $5.32.
         (C)   15—80 units: $7.64.
         (D)   81 units and over: $9.96.
      (3)   Commercial assessable parcels: $9.96.
      (4)   Industrial assessable parcels: $9.96.
   (e)   The San Bernardino County Vector Control Program within the City of
Ontario (excluding all areas within the West Valley Vector Control District)
shall be funded pursuant to a contract between the County of San Bernardino and
City of Ontario.
   (f)   The areas within the West Valley Vector Control District are described
as: That portion of the Southwest corner of the County of San Bernardino, State
of California, bounded as follows: on the east, south and west by the San
Bernardino County Line; and on the north by the following described line:
beginning at the northeast corner of Section 1, Township 2 South, Range 7 West,
San Bernardino Meridian, said point being also in the Easterly prolongation of
the center line of Philadelphia Avenue; thence westerly along said prolongation
and center line to the center line of Euclid Avenue; then northerly along said
center line of Euclid Avenue to the center line of Francis Street; thence
westerly along said center line of Francis Street to the center line of
Palmetto Avenue; thence northerly along said center line of Palmetto Avenue to
the center line of Mission Boulevard; thence westerly along said center line of
Mission Boulevard to the San Bernardino County line, being the point of
terminus. Contains 123 square miles.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3549, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3577,
passed - -1994; Am. Ord. 3672, passed - -- -1996)
§ 33.0944   Regional Assessments.
   (a)   The benefit assessment rates for the San Bernardino Valley Region,
Unincorporated, shall be as follows:
      (1)   Vacant assessable parcels: $1.00.
      (2)   Residential:
         (A)   SFD: $5.32.
         (B)   Five—14 units: $5.32.
         (C)   15—80 units: $7.64.
         (D)   81 units or more: $9.96.
      (3)   Commercial assessable parcels: $9.96.
      (4)   Industrial assessable parcels: $9.96.
   (b)   The legal and area description of the San Bernardino Valley Region,
unincorporated, benefit assessment zone is described as follows: that portion
of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, described as follows:
south and west of the southerly boundary of the San Bernardino and Angeles
National Forest. Except therefrom those portions lying within the various
corporate city boundaries and the West Valley Vector Control District.
   (c)   The benefit assessment rates for the Mountain Region shall be as
follows:
      Assessable parcels: $2.00.
   (d)   The legal area and description of the San Bernardino County Vector
Control Program Mountain Region is as follows: all that portion of the County
of San Bernardino, State of California, described as follows: beginning at the
intersection of the San Bernardino County line with the north line of Section
31, Township 4 North, Range 7 West, San Bernardino Meridian, said point being
also on the boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest; thence easterly
along said National Forest boundary and continuing along said boundary,
following all of its various courses to the southeast corner of Section 36,
Township 1 South, Range 2 East, San Bernardino Meridian, said point being also
on the San Bernardino County line; thence leaving said National Forest boundary
west along said County line to the southwest corner of Section 31, Township 1
South, Range 1 East, San Bernardino Meridian, said point being also on the
boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest; thence north along said
National Forest boundary and continuing along said boundary, following all of
its various courses the boundary of the Angeles National Forest, said point
being on the South line of Section 13, Township 1 North, Range 8 West, San
Bernardino Meridian; thence west along the South line of said Section 13 and
said boundary of the Angeles National Forest to the San Bernardino County line;
thence northerly along said County line to the point of beginning. EXCEPT
THEREFROM all portions lying within any incorporated city, including: CITY OF
BIG BEAR LAKE.
   (e)   The benefit assessment rates for the Desert Region shall be as
follows:
   Assessable parcels: $2.00.
   (f)   Legal area and description of the Desert Region is described as
follows: all that portion of the County of San Bernardino, State of California,
described as follows: beginning at the intersection of the North line of
Section 31, Township 4 North, Range 7 West, San Bernardino Meridian with the
San Bernardino County line; thence northerly along said County line and
continuing along said County line, following all of its various courses to the
intersection of the township line between Townships 11 and 12 North with the
California and Nevada State line; thence west along said township line to the
range line between Ranges 18 and 19 East; thence south along said range line to
the southeast corner of Township 11 North, Range 18 East, San Bernardino
Meridian; thence west along the south line of said township to the range line
between Ranges 18 and 19 East; thence south along said range line to the
township line between Townships 8 and 9 North; thence east along said township
line to the west line of Section 6, Township 8 North, Range 20 East, San
Bernardino Meridian; thence north along said west line to the northwest corner
of said Section 6; thence east along the north line of said Township 8 North,
Range 20 East, to the range line between Ranges 20 and 21 East. Thence south
along said range line to the north line of Section 1, Township 5 North, Range
20 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along said north line to the
range line between Ranges 20 and 21 East; thence south along said range line to
the township line between Townships 3 and 4 North; thence east along said
township line to the range line between Ranges 21 and 22 East; thence south
along said range line to the township line between Townships 1 and 2 North;
thence east along said township line to the range line between Ranges 23 and 24
East; thence south along said range line to the southeast corner of Section 13,
Township 1 South, Range 23 East, San Bernardino Meridian, said point being on
the San Bernardino County line; thence west along said County line and
continuing along said line, following all of it various courses to the
southwest corner of Section 31, Township 1 South, Range 3 East, San Bernardino
Meridian, said point being on the boundary of the San Bernardino National
Forest; thence north along said National Forest boundary and continuing along
said boundary, following all of its various courses to the point of beginning.
EXCEPT THEREFROM the following cities: Adelanto, Apple Valley, Barstow,
Hesperia, Twentynine Palms, Victorville, Yucca Valley.
   (g)   The benefit assessment rates for the Colorado River Region shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Vacant assessable parcels: $1.00.
      (2)   Residential:
         (A)   SFD: $4.32.
         (B)   Five—14 units: $4.32.
         (C)   15—80 units: $6.64.
         (D)   81 units or over: $8.96.
      (3)   Commercial assessable parcels: $8.96.
      (4)   Industrial assessable parcels: $8.96.
   (h)   The legal and area designation for the Colorado River Region Benefit
Assessment Zone is described as follows: that portion of the County of San
Bernardino, State of California, described as follows: beginning at the
southwest corner of Section 18, Township 1 South, Range 24 East, San Bernardino
Meridian, said corner being also on the San Bernardino and Riverside County
line; thence north along the range line between Ranges 23 and 24 East to the
township line between Townships 1 and 2 North; thence west along said township
line to the range line between Ranges 21 and 22 East; thence north along said
range line to the township line between Townships 3 and 4 North; thence west
along said township line to the range line between Ranges 20 and 21 East;
thence north along said range line to the south line of Section 31, Township 6
North, Range 21 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence west along said south
line to the Southwest corner of said Section 31; thence north along the range
line between Ranges 20 and 21 East to the township line between Townships 8 and
9 North; thence west along said Township line to the east line of Section 36,
Township 9 North, Range 19 East; thence south along said east line to the
Southwest corner of said Section 36; thence west along the township line
between Township 8 and 9 North to the range line between Ranges 18 and 19 East;
thence north along said range line to the northwest corner of Section 6,
Township 10 North, Range 19 East, San Bernardino Meridian; thence east along
the north line of said Township 10 North, Range 19 East to the Southwest corner
of Section 31, Township 11 North, Range 19 East, San Bernardino Meridian;
thence north along the range line between Range 18 and 19 East to the township
line between Townships 11 and 12 North; thence east along said township line to
the California and Nevada State line; thence southeasterly along said State
line to the center line of the main channel of the Colorado River; thence
southerly along said center line, following all of its various courses to the
San Bernardino and Riverside County line; thence west along said County line to
the point of beginning. EXCEPT therefrom those portions lying within the
corporate boundary of the City of Needles. Contains 1690 Square miles, more or
less.
   (i)   The benefit assessment rates for the City of Needles shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Vacant assessable parcels: $1.00.
      (2)   Residential:
         (A)   SFD: $8.32.
         (B)   Five—14 units: $8.32.
         (C)   15—80 units: $10.64.
         (D)   81 units or over: $12.96.
      (3)   Commercial assessable parcels: $12.96.
      (4)   Industrial assessable parcels: $12.96.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3549, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3672,
passed - -1996)
§ 33.0945   Method of Collection; Authorization to Add to Tax Roll.
   (a)   All assessments fixed and authorized in this Article may be collected
directly by the County or added to the tax roll. When added to the tax roll,
the assessment shall appear as a separate item on the tax roll for the vector
control program and on the tax bill. The charge shall be collected at the same
time and in the same manner as general ad valorem and shall be subject to the
same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
provided for such County taxes.
   (b)   All laws applicable to the levy and collection of taxes shall apply
except that if the real property to which such charges relates has been
transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a
bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attached thereon, prior to
the date on which the first installment of such taxes would then become
delinquent, then the charge confirmed pursuant to this Article shall not result
in a lien against such real property, but instead shall be transferred to the
unsecured roll for collection. When collected directly by the County, said
assessment shall be due at the same time as if collected on the tax roll.
Delinquencies arising during direct County collection methods shall be assessed
an additional $10.00 per parcel due to delinquent collections processing costs
and all legal costs.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3549, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3672,
passed - -1996)
ARTICLE 5: 4-H/FFA EDUCATIONAL ANIMAL PROJECTS
§ 33.0951   General Provisions.
   Except as provided herein, all authority and provisions of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code) shall apply to this Article.
   Prior to placement of an educationally oriented animal husbandry project as
specified by the San Bernardino County Development Code § 84.03.030(b), a
completed application from the Department of Environmental Health Services
(DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino for a permit to operate an animal
project within this jurisdiction shall be filed with that amount listed in the
San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees as an application fee paid to DEHS.
On the DEHS application form, the applicant shall submit the following
information:
      (1)   Signature of applicant’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   Signature of applicant’s youth organization advisor or counselor;
      (3)   The signatures of all residents within a radius of 300 feet from
the perimeter of the proposed animal project location. Such signatures shall
indicate that the applicant has provided notification of the animal project
proposal to each resident;
      (4)   A plot plan to indicate location of the animal project, proposed
structures, and surrounding residential structures;
      (5)   The application shall include a proposed expiration date; however,
the Director of DEHS reserves the right to make the final determination on the
length of time for which the permit will be issued, after which the permit
shall be automatically revoked and the project shall discontinue operation. The
applicant may request an extension of up to six months as approved by the
Director and also may submit a new application.
      After the Director of DEHS has given the application an initial review,
and determined that the applicant can comply with the effective provisions of
this Article and the provisions of the San Bernardino County Development Code,
a notice of intent to issue a permit to operate shall be forwarded to those
neighborhood residents within 300 feet of the project, notifying them that a
permit will be issued within 14 days unless otherwise appealed to the Director.
      During this 14-day period, any resident within 300 feet may file an
appeal to the Director. This appeal shall be heard by the Planning Commission
Subcommittee of the County of San Bernardino.
      If the appeal of the denial of the issuance of the permit is sustained by
the Planning Commission Subcommittee, that decision shall be forwarded to the
Director and a permit to operate shall not be issued. There shall be no further
administrative appeal to the denial of issuance of the permit to operate.
      In the event the Director’s initial review indicates the applicant cannot
meet the said provisions of this ordinance, the Director shall deny the permit.
The applicant may appeal this denial to the Planning Commission Subcommittee by
filing a written appeal with the Director within ten days of the denial date.
      If at any time the animal project is deemed to be in violation of
applicable Environmental Health or Development Code regulation of this
jurisdiction, the Director of DEHS or authorized representative shall issue the
permit holder or the parent or guardian thereof a written notice to appear
before a hearing officer of DEHS to show cause why the permit to operate should
not be revoked. After evidence has been presented to the hearing officer of
compliance or noncompliance, the Director shall make a determination and may
order the permit to be revoked if sufficient cause is shown. Administrative
hearing procedures shall generally follow those set forth in Chapter 2 of this
E.H. Code.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.0952   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all remedies and penalties of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Article, and are in addition to all
others provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§§ 33.0953—0960    (Reserved).
CHAPTER 10: HOUSING AND INSTITUTIONS
Section
Article 1: Regulations of Buildings Used for Human Habitation
   
33.1001   (Reserved).
   
33.1002   Purpose and Intent.
   
33.1003   Authority and Enforcement.
   
33.1004   Administration and Enforcement Procedure.
   
33.1005   Definitions.
   
33.1006   Certificate of Occupancy (C of O).
   
33.1007   Late Application.
   
33.1008   Inspection.
   
33.1009   Revocation of C of O.
   
33.1010   Health Permit Required.
   
33.1011   Expiration of Permits.
   
33.1012   Supplemental Permit Fees.
   
33.1013   Violations, Remedies and Penalties.
Article 1.5: Criminal Offender Eviction Program For Landlords
   
33.1014   Purpose.
   
33.1015   Definitions.
   
33.1016   Tenant's Duties.
   
33.1017   Remedies.
   33.1018 —1019   (Reserved)
Article 2: Operation of Mobilehome Parks (Repealed by Ord. 4051, passed - -
2008)
Article 3: Organized Camps and Boarding Schools
   
33.1030   Purpose and Intent.
   
33.1031   Authority and Enforcement.
   
33.1032   Definitions.
   
33.1033   Permit Required.
   
33.1034   (Reserved).
   
33.1035   Sleeping Rooms.
   
33.1036   Isolation Rooms.
   
33.1037   Compliance Required for Establishment and Maintenance.
   
33.1038   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
ARTICLE 1: REGULATIONS OF BUILDINGS USED FOR HUMAN HABITATION
§ 33.1001   (Reserved).
§ 33.1002   Purpose and Intent.
   It is the purpose and intent of this Article to provide regulation for the
maintenance, sanitation, ventilation, use, occupancy, and safety of rental
dwelling units, hotels, and motels within this jurisdiction for the public
health, safety, and general welfare. It is hereby declared that in any instance
where the provisions of this Article do not encompass all of the State
regulations pertaining to the subject of this Article, such regulations are
included herein and incorporated by reference.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1003   Authority and Enforcement.
   Pursuant to the authority in
Chapter 1 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code); the Health and Safety
Code Division 13, Part 1.5, and the Administrative Code Title 25, Chapter 1,
and the applicable articles pursuant thereto and as otherwise provided by law,
the Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the County of San
Bernardino shall enforce the provisions of this Article within this
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided by this Board or Council.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1004   Administrative and Enforcement Procedures.
   Except where otherwise provided by this jurisdiction, and herein, DEHS shall
include all provisions of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E. H. Code in enforcing this Article.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1005   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions in Chapters
1 and
3 of this E. H. Code and the development code of this jurisdiction. Except as
otherwise provided in this Section, all terms used in this Article which are
defined in the Health and Safety Code Division 13, Part 1.5 and the
Administrative Code Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, and the applicable
articles adopted pursuant thereto, are used in this Article as so defined,
unless from the context thereof, it clearly appears that a different meaning is
intended.
   APARTMENT. A dwelling unit which is rented or offered for rent as a
residence and shall not include a dwelling unit intended for the accommodation
of transients.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof containing three or more
apartments or dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more habitable rooms which are occupied or which are
intended to be, or designed to be, occupied by one family with facilities for
living, sleeping, eating and cooking.
   GUEST ROOM. Any room or suite of rooms designed, used, and intended for the
accommodation of a person, family, or party.
   HOTEL. Any structure, or any portion of a structure, including any lodging
house, boarding house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel,
studio hotel, public club, or private club, containing three or more resident
guest rooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupation by
three or more guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or
otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital asylum, sanitarium,
orphanage, prison, or other building in which human beings are housed and
detained under legal restraint.
   MOTEL. A building or buildings each containing one or more guest rooms or
dwelling units or combinations thereof designed, used, and intended wholly or
in part, for the accommodation of transients. MOTEL also includes any auto
court, resort, and “bed and breakfast” lodging.
   MULTIPLE APARTMENTS. Three or more apartments located on the same premises
and/or parcel.
   PREMISES. Include all buildings located on contiguous parcels of land under
common ownership.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1006   Certificate of Occupancy (C of O).
   No person or entity shall allow the occupancy of any multiple apartment
units, apartment house, hotel, motel, or similar operation, without possessing
an unexpired, unrevoked, unsuspended certificate of occupancy (C of O) from
DEHS for each operation or premises, and paying fees to DEHS as provided by the
San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
   (a)   A new C of O is required when:
      (1)   The occupancy classification of a building or portion thereof is
changed;
      (2)   The number of apartments, guest rooms, or dwelling units is
changed;
      (3)   The ownership of the multiple apartments, apartment house, hotel,
or motel is changed;
      (4)   The C of O has expired or has been revoked.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1007   Late Application.
   Upon the failure of the owner or operator to make application for a C of O
within 60 days of notification by DEHS concerning occupied premises, DEHS may
charge a late processing fee equal to the original fee.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1008   Inspection.
   Prior to the issuance of the C of O, DEHS shall inspect each premise to
assure compliance with the provision of this Article. When it is determined
that the premises are in substantial compliance with the provisions of this
Article, the C of O shall be issued. Should DEHS find substantial violations of
this Article which render the premises or any portion thereof substandard, the
C of O shall be withheld.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1009   Revocation of the C of O.
   Whenever DEHS determined that any premises, or portion thereof, for which a
C of O has been issued, has become substandard, the C of O shall be revoked.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1010   Health Permit Required.
   No person or entity shall allow the operation of a hotel, motel, auto court,
resort, “bed and breakfast” lodging facility, or similar facility without
possessing an unexpired, unrevoked, unsuspended permit for each facility and
paying fees to DEHS in those amounts set forth in the San Bernardino County
Code Schedule of Fees.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1011   Expiration of Permits.
   Permits issued pursuant to this Chapter expire the December 31 following
issuance and such permit shall be renewed and all fees paid within 30 days
following the expiration date.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1012   Supplemental Permit Fees.
   Fees of supplemental permits issued for guest rooms, dormitories, and
dwelling units added after the issuance of the original permit shall be paid as
prorated by DEHS on a monthly basis and the expiration date of supplemental
permits shall be the same as the expiration date of the original permit.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1013   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
Article. Except as provided herein, all administrative procedures, enforcement,
remedies, and penalties of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Article, and are in addition to all
others provided by law.
§§ 33.1014—1019    (Reserved).
ARTICLE 1.5: CRIMINAL OFFENDER EVICTION PROGRAM FOR LANDLORDS
§ 33.1014 Purpose.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors has determined that criminal offenses
involving illegal drugs and/or firearms or other deadly weapons, and/or a gang-
related offense, are a serious concern that endangers the public health and
safety of residents within the unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors has further determined that such criminal
offenses, as described in §
33.1016, also constitute public nuisances within the neighborhoods where they
occur; contributing to the blight, decay, and unhealthful conditions that harm
the quality of life of the residents and their community.
(Ord. 4041, passed - -2008)
§ 33.1015 Definitions.
   GANG-RELATED OFFENSE. Any crime motivated by gang membership in which the
perpetrator, victim or intended victim is a known member of a criminal street
gang as defined at Penal Code § 186.22(f).
   LANDLORD. An owner, lessor, or sub-lessor, or the agent, representative or
successor of any of the foregoing (including any person, firm, corporation,
partnership, or other entity) who leases the rental unit for a specified term,
or permits a periodic tenancy, a tenancy at will or a tenancy at sufferance.
   PREMISES. A rental unit and the land on which it and other buildings of the
complex are located and common areas, including but not limited to, garage
facilities, streets, alleyways, stairwells and elevators.
   RENTAL UNIT. All dwelling units, efficiency dwelling units, guest rooms, and
suites, including one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and condominiums
that are leased for a specific term or occupied pursuant to a periodic tenancy,
a tenancy at will or a tenancy at sufferance. The term RENTAL UNIT shall also
include mobile homes, whether rent is paid for the mobile home and the land
upon which the mobile home is located, or the rent is paid for the land alone.
Further, RENTAL UNIT shall include recreational vehicles, as defined in Civil
Code §799.29, if located in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park,
whether rent is paid for the recreational vehicle and the land upon which it is
located, or rent is paid for the land alone.
   TENANT. A tenant, subtenant, lessee, sub-lessee, any person entitled to use
or occupancy of a rental unit, or any other person residing in the rental unit.
(Ord. 4041, passed - -2008)
§ 33.1016 Tenant's Duties.
   A tenant shall not use, maintain, or occupy, or allow the premises to be
used, maintained, or occupied, for the purpose of committing or facilitating
the commission of any criminal offense that is committed with any firearm or
with any other deadly weapon (as defined at Penal Code § 12020); or committing
or facilitating the commission of any criminal offense that includes among the
elements of that offense the use, possession, sale, manufacture, or
transportation of any controlled substance as defined pursuant to the
California Uniform Controlled Substances Act at Health and Safety Code § 11000
et seq.; or committing or facilitating the commission of any crime resulting in
great bodily injury to a victim thereof; or committing or facilitating the
commission of a gang-related offense.
(Ord. 4041, passed - -2008)
§ 33.1017 Remedies.
   (a)   Grounds for Eviction. A landlord may bring an action against the
tenant to recover possession of a rental unit pursuant to the procedures set
forth at Code of Civil Procedure § 1161, subsection 4, if the tenant has been
convicted of an offense listed in §
33.1016 based upon conduct that occurred at or near the property while meeting
the definition of a tenant.
   (b)   Nothing herein is intended, or shall be interpreted, to restrict or
limit the causes of action and remedies otherwise available to a landlord,
including those remedies set forth in the California Code of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 4041, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4463, passed - -2023)
ARTICLE 2: OPERATION OF MOBILEHOME PARKS
(REPEALED BY ORD. 4051, PASSED - -2008)
ARTICLE 3: ORGANIZED CAMPS AND BOARDING SCHOOLS
§ 33.1030   Purpose and Intent.
   It is the purpose and intent of this Article to provide regulation for the
proper operation and maintenance of all organized camps, boarding schools, and
similar facilities within this jurisdiction to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1031   Authority and Enforcement.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code), the provisions of the
Health and Safety Code Division 13, Parts 2 and 3; and the Administrative Code
§§ 30700—30751 and §§ 9.80—9.98, P1001 through P 1118, and T17-7583 through
T17-7594 (except the provisions of Administrative Code § 30720 not applying to
boarding schools), and all other relevant State law adopted and incorporated
into this Article by reference, the Department of Environmental Health Services
(DEHS) of the County of San Bernardino shall enforce the provisions of this
Article within this jurisdiction except as provided herein.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1032   Definitions.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Section, all terms used in this Article
which are defined in the Statutes and Regulations adopted in §
33.1031 are so defined herein unless from the context thereof it clearly
appears that a different meaning is intended. Definitions herein shall include
those in Chapters
1 and
3 of this E.H. Code.
   BOARDING SCHOOL. Any place where more than three minor children are housed,
cared for, provided board, or sleeping facilities, and training or recreation
is provided by persons other than parents or legal guardians.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1033   Permit Required.
   It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of an organized
camp, boarding school, or similar facility without an unexpired, unsuspended,
unrevoked permit from DEHS and having paid fees to DEHS as prescribed by the
San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1034   (Reserved).
§ 33.1035   Sleeping Rooms.
   (a)   No person shall keep any child in any room or dormitory in such school
or camp which provides less than 30 square feet of floor space for each single
tier bed or less than 25 square feet of floor space for each bed for double
tier beds.
   (b)   Tents and tent structures are prohibited from use as sleeping rooms in
a boarding school.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3429, passed - -1991)
§ 33.1036   Isolation Rooms.
   Every boarding school wherein ten or more children are housed must have a
separate room or rooms equipped with separate toilet and bathing facilities for
isolation purposes.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1037   Compliance Required for Establishment and Maintenance.
   It shall be unlawful to establish or maintain any organized camp or boarding
school which does not comply with the requirements of this Article, and all
other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, and regulations pertaining
thereto.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1038   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Article. Except as provided herein, all administrative procedures,
enforcement, remedies, and penalties provisions of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Article, and are in addition to all
others provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
CHAPTER 11: RECREATIONAL HEALTH
Section
Article 1: General Provisions
   
33.1101   Authority.
   
33.1102   Definitions and Scope.
   
33.1103   General Health and Safety Requirements.
   
33.1104   Water Quality.
   
33.1105   DEHS Plan Review/Construction/Operational Permits Required.
   
33.1106   General Construction Requirements of All Water Contact Recreational
Resorts (WCRR).
   
33.1107   Access Devices.
   
33.1108   Domestic Water Supply.
   
33.1109   Sewage Discharge.
   
33.1110   Toilets and Lavatories.
   
33.1111   Showers.
   
33.1112   Dressing Rooms.
   
33.1113   Floors, Walks and Walls.
   
33.1114   Lighting.
   
33.1115   Ventilation.
   
33.1116   Bathing Suits and Towels.
   
33.1117   Health Requirements.
   
33.1118   Refuse Handling, Control of Rodents and Insects.
   
33.1119   Notices for Bather Safety/Protection.
   
33.1120   Temporary Waiver by Director of Environmental Health.
   
33.1121   Violations/Remedies/Penalties.
Article 2: Natural Water Recreational Resort (NWRR)
   
33.1122   Design and Construction of Natural Water Recreation Resort (NWRR).
   
33.1123   Hazard Control.
   
33.1124   The Design and Construction of NWRR Where a Direct Fee is Charged or
With Access Device(s).
   
33.1125   The Design and Construction for NWRR Where No Direct Fee is Charged,
and Without Access Devices.
Article 3: Artificial Water Recreation Resort (AWRR)
   
33.1126   Design and Construction of Artificial Water Recreation Resort (AWRR).
   
33.1127   Domestic Water Supply.
   
33.1128   Ancillary Areas and Facilities.
   
33.1129   Clarity.
   
33.1130   The Design and Construction for All AWRR Less Than 20,000 Square
Feet, or Where There is an Access Device.
   
33.1131   The Design and Construction for AWRR With a Surface Area 20,000
Square Feet or More, and Without Access Devices.
Article 4: Enclosure of Pool Areas
   
33.1132   Enclosure of Pool Areas.
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.1101   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of this Environmental Health Code (EHC), Health and Safety Code (H &
S Code) §§ 115875 et seq. (Public Beaches), §§ 115825 et seq. (Recreational Use
of Reservoirs), §§ 117505 et seq. (Vessel Sanitation), §§ 117510 et seq.
(Pollution by Vessels), §§ 116975 et seq. (Water Supply Provisions), §§ 115975
et seq. (Health and Safety of Bathers), Administrative Code (C.A.C.) Titles 22
and 24, and other applicable State law, this jurisdiction hereby authorizes,
that all laws of the State and of this EHC pertaining to public water-contact
recreation be enforced within this jurisdiction by the Director and Enforcement
Officers of the Department of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of the
County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1102   Definitions and Scope.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions in State law pertaining
to public water-contact recreation, and those of Chapters
1 and
3 of this EHC.
   (a)   Definitions.
      ACCESS DEVICES. Defined at §
33.1107 herein.
      ARTIFICIAL WATER RECREATIONAL RESORT (AWRR). Applies to: any lake,
lagoon, basin, water course or other bathing area primarily designed for water
contact recreation with water transferred from a public water system holding a
permit from the State Department of Health Services or from another approved
source.
      DIRECT FEE. Money or other forms of compensation such as goods, wares,
merchandise or labor for access to the facility.
      NATURAL WATER RECREATIONAL RESORT (NWRR). Applies to: bays, lakes, water
courses or other water contact recreation areas with a natural source of water.
      PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL and related public POOLS.  As defined as per the
State Health and Safety Code and Administrative Code Title 22.
      WATER CONTACT RECREATION. Include all public recreational activities
where there is a high probability of water ingestion and where related
activities create a significant public health and safety risk. Such activities
shall include: wading, swimming, bathing, and diving. Such activities shall not
include: boating, sailing, fishing, and similar activities where bodily contact
with water is insignificant, or unlikely, or for any activity not involving the
public.
      WATER CONTACT RECREATION RESORTS (WCRR). Include all public water contact
recreation facilities for which direct or indirect fee is charged for the use
of the facility. WCRR shall include: water theme parks, swim or wave lagoons,
natural and man-made lakes and water courses, and similar public water contact
recreational places.
   (b)   Scope.
      (1)   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all WCRR as defined
in §
33.1102, including but not limited to:
         (A)   Commercial WCRR+;
         (B)   Real Estate WCRR;
         (C)   Community WCRR;
         (D)   Hotel and Motel WCRR;
         (E)   Resort WCRR;
         (F)   Auto and Trailer Park WCRR;
         (G)   Auto Court WCRR;
         (H)   Apartment and Townhouse WCRR;
         (I)    Club WCRR;
         (J)   Public or Private School WCRR;
         (K)   Health Establishment WCRR;
         (L)   Condominium WCRR;
         (M)   Mobilehome Park WCRR;
         (N)   Campground WCRR;
         (O)   Homeowner Association WCRR;
         (P)   Public Park WCRR.
      (2)   WCRR shall be presumed to be private where there are four or less
dwelling units. Such private facilities and lakes or water courses used solely
for boating, sailing or fishing are exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1103   General Health and Safety Requirements.
   Design, construction, operation and maintenance of facilities of all WCRR
shall be such as to reduce to a minimum the risks of drowning, injury and
transmission of disease.
   (a)   The facilities operation shall be under the close supervision of one
or more experienced operators.
   (b)   Records shall be kept on the premises and readily available for
inspection by DEHS, to show compliance with these regulations.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1104   Water Quality.
   (a)   Chemical Quality of Water. Chemical quality of water shall, at all
times, be such that there is not irritation of eyes or skin of the bathers, nor
other objectionable physiological effects on bathers. Water in the WCR shall
have a pH of not less than six point eight or more than eight point four;
   (b)   Microbiological Quality. WCRR waters shall be routinely sampled and
analyzed, at the operator’s expense, for microbiological contamination. Samples
shall be collected at a frequency, and from representative locations, as
determined by the DEHS. The fecal coliform density from any consecutive sets of
samples collected within any 30 days shall not exceed an arithmetic mean of 200
organisms per 100 ml. When fecal coliform density of any sample collected
exceeds 1,000 per 100 ml., the DEHS shall order the closure of the water
contact area and follow-up daily sampling shall be immediately commenced with
waters analyzed for fecal coliform for at least two consecutive days. If any
follow-up daily sample exceeds 1,000 per 100 ml., the water contact area shall
remain closed, with the appropriate signs posted and maintained by the owner/
operator, and shall not reopen without prior written approval being obtained
from the DEHS. Periodic sampling for specific pathogens shall be required if
ordered by the Health Officer. WCRR which utilize an approved filtration and
disinfection system may, upon approval by the DEHS, maintain a daily log of
disinfectant and pH test readings in lieu of microbiological sampling. Fecal
coliform sampling shall be conducted prior to the commencement of each season’s
use and as requested by the DEHS. Routine water samples shall be obtained from
representative portions of the swim area at a depth of two feet.
Microbiological analysis shall be made in accordance with procedures
recommended by the latest edition of the “Standard Methods for Examination of
Water and Sewage” of the American Public Health Association.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1105   DEHS Plan Review/Construction/Operational Permits Required.
   (a)   No person or entity shall commence any construction activities for any
WCRR without plan review and construction permits first being obtained from the
DEHS and Building and Safety as provided for by the code of this jurisdiction.
Special studies and data prepared by a registered civil engineer shall be
furnished to the DEHS, sufficient to demonstrate due consideration of, and
every reasonable elimination of, threats to the user public’s health and
safety. The requirement for special engineering studies may be waived by the
Director of the DEHS if it is determined that such an omission will not
adversely affect the design, construction, operation and/or maintenance of the
resort in question from the viewpoint of public health and safety. Facilities
shall be built according to approved plans unless changes are approved in
writing by the DEHS. The owner shall notify the DEHS of the completion of a
WCRR at least one week in advance of the anticipated opening or operation of
the facility.
   (b)   No person or entity shall own, operate, or allow the operation of any
public swimming pool, or related public pool, or water contact recreational
resort (WCRR) without first applying for, receiving, and retaining an
unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked operational permit for each facility from the
DEHS. Service and related fees shall be paid to the DEHS in those amounts
specified in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1106   General Construction Requirements of All Water Contact Recreational
Resorts (WCRR).
   WCRR have complex, unique and/or peculiar public health and safety risks
that require special engineering studies and consultation with DEHS prior to
their construction or operation. Each operation is customized and will require
an individual evaluation by DEHS as to the potential public health and safety
threats. Specific construction details or specifications for the facility and
its support operations, as required by DEHS, shall conform to recognized safety
engineering principles.
   (a)   Engineering Studies Required. Every proposed operation shall
adequately consider by means of detailed engineering studies every reasonably
anticipated potential hazard of a mechanical, chemical, microbiological and
other relevant danger.
   (b)   Facilities shall comply with Federal or State standards where more
stringent than those contained herein.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1107   Access Devices.
   Access devices are any artificial means to effect entry into the WCRR, such
as diving boards, slides, water flumes, ropes, cargo nets, and swings.
   (a)   Diving Boards. Diving boards, when used, shall be installed and used
only under conditions safe for both divers and bathers.
      (1)   At least 15 feet of free and unobstructed head room is to be
provided above diving board and towers;
      (2)   No diving board or platform shall be more than ten feet above water
level for unrestricted use by patrons;
      (3)   Where diving boards or platforms are used, they shall be
structurally sound and in good repair;
      (4)   Where a diving board not greater than one meter high is used, the
water depth under the board shall be a minimum of eight feet six inches; this
depth to extend a minimum of ten feet in front of the end of the board; beyond
this point, the slope of the bottom upwards toward shallow water shall not be
steeper than one foot vertical for each three feet horizontal. A side clearance
depth of eight feet six inches shall extend a minimum of ten feet as measured
from the edge(s) of the platform and/or board.
      (5)   For a three meter (ten foot) board, the water depth under the board
shall be at least 12 feet, this depth to extend a minimum of 15 feet in front
of the end of the board; beyond this point, the slope of the bottom upward
toward shallow water shall not be steeper than one foot vertical for each three
feet horizontal. A side clearance depth of 12 feet shall extend a minimum of 15
feet as measured from the edge(s) of the platform and/or board.
   (b)   Slides, Water Flumes, Ropes and Swings. All entry devices including
those cut into the slope of a natural hillside, into an artificially excavated
hill, or supported by a structure, shall be designed and built to provide a
safe entry, support strength and proper angle alignment for the access devices.
      (1)   Materials Selection and Finishing. The selection of all component
and accessory materials shall be such that all parts with external surfaces and
edges that may come in contact with the user are assembled, arranged, and/or
finished (deburred, polished) so that they will not constitute a cutting,
pinching, puncturing, or abrasion hazard under casual contact and intended use.
All components shall be carefully analyzed to ensure that the materials will
not degenerate or decompose with time or exposure to the elements of nature.
      (2)   Structural Design. The owner and a registered civil engineer shall
have the responsibility for the safe design and construction of the entire
facility. The access device’s structural design shall be in accordance with
generally accepted structural engineering practice and provide a sound, durable
structure which will safely sustain all dynamic and static stresses involved.
Flumes and pools shall be watertight. All water contact surfaces shall be of
inert, nontoxic materials, smooth and easily cleanable. All parts and
components shall be accessible for cleaning and safety inspection purposes.
      (3)   Flume Exit System. A flume exit system shall be provided so that
safe entry into the splash area is accomplished for all deceleration distance
(s), and for attitude control prior to entry. Every design shall assure a safe
exit velocity and attitude control of the user under normal use.
      (4)   The splash area shall be designated and separated with safety ropes
and buoys and from the general swimming area.
      (5)   Sufficient numbers of attendants shall be on duty at the entry
areas at all times slides are available for use. Clear, unobstructed vision to
all entry and exit areas occupied by participants shall be provided.
   (c)   All structural elements, including pools, building, access devices or
structures affecting the public shall be inspected for safe operation and
maintenance by a registered civil engineer at least once a year prior to any
use if the facility is seasonal, or at six month intervals for access devices
in continuous operation. A signed inspection report shall be provided to the
owner/operator with a copy to the DEHS.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1108   Domestic Water Supply.
   Where water is available for domestic purposes at water contact recreational
resorts, it shall:
   (a)   Be from an approved water system holding a permit granted by the State
or the DEHS and meet the criteria of the California Health and Safety Code and
the Administrative Code Title 25, with respect to water quality and quantity;
   (b)   Be delivered in sufficient quantity and with sufficient pressure to
assure the satisfactory functioning of all fixtures served by the water supply;
   (c)   Be protected at actual or potential connections with systems
containing water that is not approved as safe and potable for human consumption
with acceptable back flow prevention devices to prevent contamination of the
drinking water system.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1109   Sewage Discharge.
   No person, firm or public agency shall maintain a resort where bathers are
invited or permitted to use any WCRR when the waters thereof are within the
zone of degradation and active decomposition of known sewage discharge.
   (a)   No WCRR shall be located where a sewage discharge is known to exist in
the immediate vicinity of, or immediately upstream from bathing areas.
   (b)   Dilution and time of travel between point(s) of known sewage discharge
and the bathing area shall be sufficient to allow natural purification to occur
so that the presence of harmful organisms of sewage origin is unlikely.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1110   Toilets and Lavatories.
   Adequate sanitary toilet facilities shall be provided:
   (a)   Separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex;
   (b)   Toilets, urinals and lavatories shall be provided as required by the
latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, Appendix C, “Assembly Places for
Public Use.”
   (c)   Urinals and toilets shall be so located that they are easily
accessible to the bathers;
   (d)   Water flush toilets shall be provided wherever possible. Where
chemical toilets are permitted, they shall be from an approved source and
serviced on a regular basis by a permitted operator.
   (e)   All toilets shall be kept clean and in working order, shall be
properly serviced with toilet paper, and shall be maintained in good repair.
   (f)   Lavatories shall be located adjacent to toilets and shall be provided
with running water. Hand washing detergent or soap and sanitary towels in
dispensers or air blowers shall be provided.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1111   Showers.
   Where such facilities are provided they shall be sanitary and adequate.
   (a)   Running water under pressure shall be available;
   (b)   Soap shall be provided in dispensers or containers on indoor showers;
   (c)   Tempered water should be provided at all showers;
   (d)   Showers shall be of such design that a proper mixture of hot and cold
water may be obtained without danger of scalding the bather. Where hot water is
available, its temperature shall not exceed 110°F.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1112   Dressing Rooms.
   Dressing rooms shall be present where indoor showers are provided, and shall
be sanitary and adequate. Dressing rooms shall be constructed and finished in a
safe and sound manner.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1113   Floors, Walks and Walls.
   Floors and walks of shower, locker, dressing and toilet rooms, and walls
adjacent thereto shall be constructed and maintained so that they will, at all
times, be safe and sanitary.
   (a)   Floors and walls of shower, locker, dressing and toilet rooms shall be
of a smooth, washable material capable of withstanding repeated flushing with a
hose;
   (b)   Partitions shall be waterproofed to a height of 12 inches above the
floor or terminate at least eight inches above the floor;
   (c)   Floors and walks shall be hosed down daily;
   (d)   Floors and walks of change rooms, dressing rooms, showers and hallways
which are apt to be wet, shall be constructed of toughened cement, tile or
other impervious material so as to reduce slip hazards; such floors and walks
shall be laid on an even pitch of one-quarter inch to three-eighths inch per
foot; and shall be maintained in good repair;
   (e)   All floors shall drain into covered sanitary drainways or floor
drains;
   (f)   A system of piped water with an adequate number of hose bibbs shall be
provided to enable the flushing of all floors.
   (g)   Walls and ceilings of dressing rooms may be constructed of other
materials approved by the DEHS.
§ 33.1114   Lighting.
   Artificial lighting shall be provided for all bathhouses and dressing rooms
that are to be used at night and for those that do not have adequate natural
lighting.
   (a)   Lighting fixtures shall be of such number and design that all areas of
the WCRR are adequately illuminated.
   (b)   Arrangement and design of the lights shall be such that lifeguards may
see clearly every part of the bathing waters, the beach, all diving boards,
towers, floats and other appurtenances without being blinded by the lights;
underwater lights shall be present and adequate where nighttime swimming
occurs.
   (c)   All lights shall be adequately protected to prevent breakage and
electrical shock hazards.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1115   Ventilation.
   All structures and enclosed patios shall be adequately ventilated.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1116   Bathing Suits and Towels.
   Where bathing suits and towels are furnished by the WCRR management, they
shall be properly laundered and sanitized.
   (a)   Bathing suits and towels shall be thoroughly washed, rinsed and dried
after each use, and when issued, shall be in a condition equal to that produced
by commercial laundries;
   (b)   Bathing suits and towels shall be gathered up promptly after their use
and not allowed to litter the premises;
   (c)   Clean suits and towels shall be kept separate from dirty suits and
towels.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1117   Health Requirements.
   No person having a communicable disease shall be employed in any capacity at
any WCRR. All persons known to be, or suspected by the DEHS or the management
of being afflicted with a communicable disease, shall be excluded from the
WCRR, until clearance is obtained from the Health Officer or a licensed
physician.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1118   Refuse Handling, Control of Rodents and Insects.
   Every WCRR and its environs shall be maintained in a clean condition, free
of refuse. All rodent harborage and insect breeding areas shall be eliminated.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1119   Notices for Bather Safety/Protection.
   Notices shall be posted regulating the conduct and the improper practices of
bathers.
   (a)   Notices shall be posted about the premises requesting bathers to make
use of the toilets, and where available, showers, before entering the water.
The DEHS may require posting of notices regulating public conduct.
   (b)   Notices shall be posted regarding exclusion of persons with a
communicable disease;
   (c)   Where no lifeguard is provided, a warning sign shall be placed in
plain view along beach shorelines at reasonable intervals and shall state
“Warning -- No Lifeguard on Duty, Children Under Age of 14 Should Not Use
Without An Adult in Attendance,” with clearly legible letters at least four
inches high (10.2 cm).
   (d)   At all WCRR, diagrammatic illustrations of approved mouth-to-mouth
artificial respiration procedures shall be posted. Such illustrations shall be
protected against the elements. The emergency telephone number “911" shall be
prominently posted.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1120   Temporary Waiver by Director of Environmental Health.
   Existing WCRR that do not meet current construction standards may be granted
two years from the date of the adoption of this Chapter to comply. The director
of the DEHS may waive certain requirements for noncomplying facilities, on an
individual basis where such waiver would not adversely affect public health and
safety.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1121   Violations/Remedies/Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Chapter. Except as provided herein, all remedies/penalties of Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this EHC shall apply to this Chapter, and are in addition to all others
provided by law.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
ARTICLE 2: NATURAL WATER RECREATIONAL RESORT (NWRR)
§ 33.1122   Design and Construction of Natural Water Recreation Resort (NWRR).
   For bathing beaches along lakes and water courses, or natural settings with
partial artificial construction or development, evaluation of the suitability
shall include:
   (a)   A sanitary survey of the area’s watershed;
   (b)   How water quality is affected by the area’s meteorology;
   (c)   Any epidemiological data linking illnesses to use of the area;
   (d)   The water circulation and dilution patterns;
   (e)   Hazard analysis for the location or submerged objects, sharp drop-
offs, stability of bottom, slopes and depths, dangerous currents, eddies and
deep pools and water clarity;
   (f)   The proposed activities and access devices;
   (g)   Plan review.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1123   Hazard Control.
   (a)   The waters and environs of all NWRR bathing area(s) shall be kept free
of slime, algae, aquatic growths, organic sediments, debris and other offensive
materials to the extent necessary to prevent accidents, drownings and public
nuisances. The breeding of mosquitoes, midges, water snails, and other aquatic
pests shall be properly controlled.
   (b)   Hazards:
      (1)   No person or entity shall allow the use of any NWRR without first
and periodically thereafter carefully sounding the depth of the water in the
bathing area, and locating all eddies, pools, and dangerous currents, sunken
logs, projections and obstructions in the stream, river or lake.
      (2)   No person or entity shall allow use of any NWRR without posting
prominent signs indicating, in conspicuous letters at least four inches high
(or as directed by the DEHS) the depth of the water in the bathing area, the
location of all pools and eddies, and the presence and direction of dangerous
currents, sunken logs, rocks, projections, and obstructions in the water. The
signs shall be placed and permanently maintained adjacent to the bathing area
when bathing and/or swimming is permitted or invited.
      (3)   No person or entity shall maintain a NWRR unless safety ropes and
buoys are so located and permanently maintained wherever necessary to show the
location of eddies, pools, dangerous currents, sunken obstructions, and other
hidden dangers to bathers in the water.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1124   The Design and Construction of NWRR Where a Direct Fee is Charged
or With Access Device(s).
   (a)   Shape. The bathing shorelines shall be formed and maintained in wide
curves, shall avoid sharp angles or narrow confined inlets and shall otherwise
avoid any design likely to impede circulation, obstruct visibility, or create
any public health or safety hazard. A supplemental means of circulation (inflow
and outflow of water) shall be provided as necessary if evidence of present
inadequate circulation is observed by the enforcing agent. Such supplemental
circulation methods shall first be approved by the DEHS.
   (b)   Design and Operation of Swimming/Wading Areas. All swimming/wading and
similar water contact activities shall be restricted to specified areas which
shall be conspicuously marked by buoys located at the four and one-half foot
depth, and at the outer perimeter of said areas. Such buoys shall be placed at
proper intervals, be of such size, and be marked with numerals/colors or signs
sufficient to inform users of the water depth at such buoys, and shall
otherwise be sufficient to warn users and boaters of the deep water swimming
area limits. The bottom slope of the swimming/wading areas from the shoreline
to the four and one-half foot depth shall be not more than one foot vertical in
each 12 feet horizontal.
   (c)   Bottom Composition. The bottom of the swimming and wading area from
the shoreline to the four and one-half feet depth shall be covered with river-
run rounded sand particles or other approved light-colored material, and
sufficiently thick to prevent abrasion of feet by rocks and to contrast a
submerged bather’s body against a light-colored background.
   (d)   Surface Drainage. Except for natural springs and streams all
surrounding surface drainage, such as from streets, gutters, and every other
significant source of polluted water from the land surrounding the body of
water, shall be properly diverted away from the water body and disposed of in
such a manner so as to not create a public nuisance. Minor flows into the body
of water may be permitted by DEHS when water quality standards are not
adversely affected. When run-off and drainage create significant public health
risks, water contact shall be halted immediately and warning signs shall be
conspicuously posted and maintained by the operator. Water contact shall not
resume without written approval from DEHS.
   (e)   Lifeguards. One of the following methods shall be used for determining
the number of lifeguards: 1. At least one lifeguard shall be assigned for each
75 bathers or fraction thereof. Under special circumstances (such as impaired
water clarity beyond a depth of two feet) additional lifeguards shall be
required, with at least one lifeguard per 25 bathers or fraction thereof; 2. or
a lifeguard safety plan shall be submitted which includes stationing and areas
of responsibility. The plan should include and consideration be given to pool
depth, wave action, line of sight, bather loads, training procedures, emergency
procedures, lifeguard rotation, and other special conditions which might affect
the safety of the bathers. The plan must ensure the safety of bathers and be on
file with the enforcing agent.
   Lifeguards shall possess qualifications at least equivalent to those
provided at Health and Safety Code § 116028 and shall additionally possess an
unexpired card showing completion of an approved cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) course, and be in good physical condition. Lifeguard stations shall be
located as close as practicable to the bathing area shoreline and within 30
feet of the shoreline. Lifeguards shall be isolated from the user public by
occupying elevated seats or stands. All lifeguards on duty shall be identified
by distinguishing apparel, emblems or signs. When on duty, lifeguards shall not
perform any other duty, and shall not be in the water except in the line of
duty. Lifeguards shall be provided with adequate safety equipment such that
they may properly perform their duties. Rescue equipment shall be readily
available to each rescue station and include rescue tubes/buoys, swim masks,
life rings with attached rope, and rescue boards or boats, as may be required
by the DEHS. When any lake is of such size that unaided swimming by lifeguards
may not offer sufficient protection to swimmers, the DEHS may require that one
or more square stern boats be provided. Safety equipment shall be accessible,
plainly marked, and kept in good repair. Adequate first aid supplies shall be
present, and include at least one American Red Cross 24 Unit or equivalent
first aid kit. Every NWRR shall at all times have an approved back board,
stretcher, and blankets readily available for emergency use only.
   (f)   Communication. Telephone/radio equipment shall be readily available
and operable at or near the lifeguard stations such that outside emergency aid/
personnel can be quickly summoned. The “911" emergency number shall be posted
at the nearest telephone(s).
   (g)   Clarity. Water clarity should be maintained so that the entire bottom
is visible from the lifeguard stations. For nonrestricted use, a minimum
visibility of four and one-half feet shall be maintained within the entire
designated swim area whenever it is open. Warning signs for impaired water
clarity shall be conspicuously posted whenever the minimum visibility cannot be
maintained. A registered civil engineer should be consulted for remedial
measures to be taken on the bottom composition if the water clarity is
impaired. The bathing area shall be closed when clarity is so impaired that a
six inch black disc on a white background is not clearly visible at a two foot
depth. Appropriate signs indicating the swimming/bathing area closure, and the
reason for said closure, shall be conspicuously posted by the owner/operator.
The swimming/bathing area shall not be placed back into operation without
written permission from the DEHS.
   (h)   Bathing Capacity. A minimum of 25 square feet of water surface area
per bather shall be provided in the shallow water area depths less than four
and one-half feet, and at least 75 square feet per bather shall be provided per
bather in deeper areas.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1125   The Design and Construction for NWRR Where no Direct Fee is
Charged, and Without Access Devices.
   (a)   A designated swimming and/or wading area shall be provided per §
33.1124(b) with bottom composition per §
33.1124(c) and with water clarity per §
33.1124(g).
   (b)   Safety equipment and signs shall be provided and maintained and will
include, but are not limited to: Life Ring or throw buoy and line, Rescue Boat
per Health and Safety Code § 115980; signs: “Warning, No Lifeguard on Duty,
Children Under 14 Should Not Use Without An Adult In Attendance”; an approved
mouth-to-mouth artificial respiration diagram; emergency “911" phone number;
and a minimum ten unit first aid kits. Signs shall be located so as to be
protected from the elements.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
ARTICLE 3: ARTIFICIAL WATER RECREATION RESORT (AWRR)
§ 33.1126   Design and Construction of Artificial Water Recreation Resort
(AWRR).
   For AWRR of less than 20,000 square feet, “The Design, Construction,
Operation and Maintenance of Public Swimming Pools” (excerpts from California
Health and Safety Code, California Administrative Code, and Uniform Building
Code, published by the State Department Health Services) shall apply, with
exceptions as specified in §
33.1130(c), herein. For AWRR of 20,000 square feet or more, the Article 2
standards shall apply except as specified in §
33.1131 herein.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1127   Domestic Water Supply.
   A safe and adequate water supply shall be available for all domestic
purposes at AWRR, meeting
Article 1, §
33.1108 requirements, herein.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1128   Ancillary Areas and Facilities.
   All AWRR shall comply with Administrative Code §§ 2-9021, 2-9022, 2-9023.
§ 33.1129   Clarity.
   AWRR waters shall be maintained in as clear a condition as practical. In
every portion of all artificially constructed swimming/wading areas, the water
shall be sufficiently clear so that during all periods of use, the body of a
person on any part of the bottom shall be readily visible at one or more
lifeguard stations. The DEHS shall order the closure of the water contact areas
for those facilities less than 20,000 square feet, failing to meet
Administrative Code § 65527. For AWRR greater than 20,000 square feet, or in
existing AWRR where natural occurring conditions, i.e., clay bottom, aquatic
plant growths, interfere with ready compliance with the above clarity
standards, the DEHS may allow for temporary substitute safety measures,
including additional lifeguard supervision, if it appears that such additional
temporary safety measures will sufficiently compensate for the turbid water
condition, so as to adequately protect bathers’ safety, until effective and
approved permanent corrective measures are developed. If such additional safety
measures are not deemed effective, the swimming area shall be closed upon order
of the DEHS until such time as the water clarity has improved to an acceptable
level. Acceptable shall mean that a six inch black disk on a white background
is clearly visible at a minimum depth of four and one-half feet.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 33.1130   The Design and Construction for All AWRR Less Than 20,000 Square
Feet, or Where There is an Access Device.
   (a)   The Health and Safety Code §§ 116025—116975 shall apply.
   (b)   Administrative Code Title 22, Chapter 20 shall apply.
   (c)   Administrative Code Title 24, Chapter 2-90 shall apply with the
following exceptions:
      (1)   Basin Construction. Administrative Code § 2-901l(c) shall allow
light (pastel) colors other than white when approved by the DEHS.
      (2)   Basin geometry without access device(s) shall provide a shoreline
which is self-draining and shall be formed in wide curves, avoiding sharp
angles or narrow confined inlets which can impede circulation or obstruct
visibility. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the AWRR and not
allowed to flow into the water, except for minor flows which would not
adversely affect water quality.
      (3)   Decks shall not be required where public access may create a
hazardous condition (access device exit areas). Where a deck is required for
exit from basins provided with access devices, the exit area shall be at least
eight feet wide.
      (4)   Turnover Time. The recirculation and purification system shall have
sufficient capacity to provide a complete turnover of basin water: with access
device(s) in 30 minutes or less, without access device(s) six hours or less (or
as needed to provide adequate turnover).
      (5)   Perimeter overflow systems may be used in combination with surface
skimmers if hydraulically designed in accordance with acceptable engineering
principles.
      (6)   Lifesaving, First Aid, and Control of Bathers. At least one
lifeguard shall be assigned for each 50 occupancy or fraction thereof.
Additionally, Article 2, §§
33.1124(e) and
33.1124(f) shall apply.
      (7)   Signs—Occupant Load. A sign with clearly legible letters not less
than four inches high shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the entrance
to the swimming area which shall include the number of occupants permitted. A
minimum of 25 square feet of water surface area per bather shall be provided in
all water areas with a depth less than four and one-half feet and at least 75
square feet per bather shall be provided in deeper areas.
      (8)   Emergency Shut-Off Switch. A prominently marked emergency shut-off
switch for the control of the mechanical recirculation system shall be
installed adjacent to the primary lifeguard station.
§ 33.1131   The Design and Construction for AWRR With a Surface Area 20,000
Square Feet or More, and Without Access Devices.
   The Article 2 standards shall apply, with the following exceptions: Bottom
composition of the swimming and wading area shall be concrete or other approved
material from the shoreline to at least the four and one-half feet depth
minimum.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
ARTICLE 4: ENCLOSURE OF POOL AREAS
§ 33.1132   Enclosure of Pool Areas.
   Pool enclosure requirements, per the Administrative Code Title 24, shall
apply to all pools under the jurisdiction of DEHS, and shall meet the following
additional requirements:
   (a)   Local Building Department(s) enclosure regulations which are more
stringent than State code shall apply.
   (b)   Any pool constructed/reconstructed/remodeled after the effective date
of this Chapter shall not have any residences or dwelling units which open
directly onto the pool area or deck. Where it is impractical for existing pools
to meet this requirement, such pools may be granted an exemption on a case-by-
case analysis by DEHS. All pool plans hereafter submitted to the DEHS shall
show compliance with this requirement. Final inspection and approval by DEHS of
all such pools shall be withheld until compliance is accomplished.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
CHAPTER 12: VEHICLE ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL PROGRAM
Section
   
33.1201   Authority.
   
33.1205   Definitions.
   
33.1210   Public Nuisances.
   
33.1215   Exceptions.
   
33.1220   Chapter Supplement to Existing Law.
   
33.1225   Prohibited Uses.
   
33.1230   Duty to Abate.
   
33.1235   Emergency Abatement and Other Services.
   
33.1240   Abatement Procedures for Vehicles Which are a Public Nuisance.
   
33.1245   Payment for Abatement of Vehicles Which are a Public Nuisance.
   
33.1250   Appeals of Abatement.
   
33.1255   Appeals of Charges.
   
33.1260   Cancellation of Charges.
   
33.1265   Procedure for Refund of Payment.
   
33.1270   Payment for Abatement of Abandoned Vehicles.
   
33.1275   Disposal of Vehicles Which are a Public Nuisance.
   
33.1280   Abatement Procedures for Vehicles Which are Abandoned.
   
33.1281   Abatement Procedures for Abandoned Vehicles Which are Valued at
Greater than $500.00.
   
33.1285   Procedure for Redemption of Vehicles.
   
33.1290   Authorization to Enforce County Code and Vehicle Code Provisions.
   
33.1295   Determination of Estimated Value of Vehicles.
   
33.1298   Other Remedies.
§ 33.1201   Authority.
   (a)   In accordance with the authority granted by § 25845 of the Government
Code and § 22660 of the Vehicle Code, the Board of Supervisors authorizes the
Chief Executive Officer of the County to delegate enforcement authority of the
provisions of this Chapter within the unincorporated areas of the County, and
to enforce provisions of city ordinances relating to abatement and removal of
vehicles provided such cities contract to have such services performed by the
County of San Bernardino, to County staff deemed appropriate by the Chief
Executive Officer. This authority includes the right to enter private or public
property for the purposes specified in this Chapter, to examine a vehicle or
parts thereof, to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and
remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a
nuisance.
   (b)   Any person interfering with or refusing entry to property to any
County or contracted service employee performing duties under this Chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon arrest and conviction, shall be
punished by a fine not in excess of $500.00, and imprisonment of not more than
90 days, or both. This includes all attempts to retrieve, remove, or relocate
vehicles at the onset of or during the abatement and removal process by the
County and/or its contractors.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1205   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the
context, phrases used in this Chapter are defined as follows:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE means a vehicle which is located on public or private
property without the express or implied consent of the property owner or person
in lawful possession or control of the property.
   ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD means a body appointed by the Director to hear appeals
under this Chapter and shall consist of three persons. A member of the Board
shall not include the issuing officer or employee.
   DIRECTOR means the director or managing authority of the County department
or departments designated by the Chief Executive Officer to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter or those departments that have authority to enforce
the provisions of this Chapter under State or other law.
   DISMANTLED means that integral component parts necessary to operate a
vehicle on a highway, roadway or public street have been removed from the
vehicle.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY means the Land Use Services Department, Code
Enforcement Division; County department or departments subsequently designated
by the Chief Executive Officer to jointly enforce the provisions of this
Chapter; and those departments that have authority to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter under State or other law.
   FEE means any amount of money charged, fined, or paid to the enforcement
authority relating to the administrative and/or enforcement costs incurred for
the purpose of enforcing this Chapter.
   INOPERABLE means the vehicle is absent a motor, transmission, wheels, or any
other part or equipment necessary to operate safely on a highway, roadway, or
public street.
   JUNKED means a vehicle which has been destroyed or damaged to such an extent
that it is unrepairable.
   LICENSED DISMANTLER’S YARD means a premises used for dismantling or wrecking
of vehicles, where there is buying, selling, or dealing in such vehicles, their
integral parts, or component materials thereof, and the sale of dismantled,
partially dismantled, wrecked or inoperative vehicles.
   LIEN SALE means a sale of a vehicle to obtain legal ownership of a vehicle
under title or requiring registration, under the California Vehicle Code.
   OWNER means any person or entity having legal or rightful title in any
personal property or real property subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
   OWNER OF THE VEHICLE means the last registered owner and legal owner of
record.
   PERSON means a natural person, firm, partnership, copartnership,
association, or corporation.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY means property owned by a person other than a public
entity.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY means property owned by a public entity.
   ROADWAY meant that portion of a highway which is improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, including improved shoulders.
   UNATTENDED VEHICLE means a vehicle for which the licensed driver responsible
for the same is not within an audible distance and immediately available for
moving said vehicle.
   VEHICLE means any device by which persons or property may be propelled,
moved, or drawn upon a highway, and shall include all types of motor vehicles,
but shall exclude devices moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
   WRECKED means a vehicle which has been damaged to such an extent that it is
only partially repairable and/or uneconomical to repair.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1210   Public Nuisances.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by the State of California under Vehicle
Code § 22660 to abate and remove abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked,
and wrecked vehicles, and/or parts thereof as public nuisances, and in
accordance with the County’s constitutional police power authority, the Board
of Supervisors makes the following findings and declaration:
   (a)   Findings. The accumulation and storage of dismantled, wrecked,
inoperative, junked, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, on private or public
property (other than streets and highways which are regulated by the Vehicle
Code) is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private and
public property, to promote blight and deterioration, invite plundering, to
create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to
the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects
and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
   (b)   Declaration. The presence of abandoned, dismantled, inoperative,
junked or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property
(other than on streets, public roadways, alleys, rights-of-way and highways) in
the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, except as expressly permitted
in this Chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be
abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1215   Exceptions.
   This Chapter shall not apply to any vehicle or parts thereof which is
completely enclosed within a building consisting of four walls and roof in a
lawful manner, where such vehicle, or parts thereof, is not visible from the
street or other public or private property, or a vehicle, or parts thereof,
which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on property used in connection
with the business of a licensed dismantler, garage, vehicle dealer, or
junkyard. This exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or
private nuisance as defined under the provisions of law other than this
Chapter.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1220   Chapter Supplement to Existing Law.
   This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, dismantled,
inoperative, junked, or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof, or public nuisances
within the County. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other
regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by
the County, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1225   Prohibited Uses.
   Any abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked, or wrecked vehicles or parts
thereof, or fully or partially disassembled vehicle (including vehicles without
hood, fenders, engines, body panels, headlights, trunk lid, wheels, windows or
windshields) when placed or kept for more than 72 hours in residential,
commercial, or industrial sites (except licensed vehicle impound storage yards,
garages, vehicle dealers, junkyards and/or dismantling yards), and visible from
outside the parcel of land upon which such is or are kept, is prohibited and
constitutes a violation of this Chapter.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1230   Duty to Abate.
   No person shall cause, permit, maintain, conduct, or otherwise allow an
abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked, or wrecked vehicle or parts thereof
to be openly stored, within the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County.
It shall be the duty of every owner, and/or occupant, in control of any land
located within the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County to remove,
abate, and prevent the recurrence of open storage of such a vehicle or parts
thereof. Any recurrence of such condition of a specific vehicle on the same
property may be deemed a continuation of the original condition and additional
notification requirements under §§
33.1240 and
33.1290 shall not be required.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1235   Emergency Abatement and Other Services.
   (a)   Emergency Abatement. When a vehicle defined by this Chapter as a
public nuisance constitutes an immediate hazard or threat of harm and the
situation calls for abatement sooner than the abatement procedures herein
allow, the enforcement authority or Sheriff’s Department may take or cause
emergency removal of such nuisance with such notice to parties concerned, or
without notice, as the particular circumstances reasonably allow. Required
notification procedures prior to disposal of such vehicle(s) shall be followed.
   (b)   Request for Service. If any member of the public, except self-storage
operators, requests the enforcement authority in writing to remove abandoned,
dismantled, inoperative, junked, or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof, the
enforcement authority is authorized to provide processing and removal for a fee
which covers all enforcement authority costs. The removed abandoned,
dismantled, inoperative, junked, or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof, through
transfer of title or lien sale process shall become the property of San
Bernardino County and such will be the responsibility of the County to dispose
of according to law.
   (c)   Complaints. The enforcement authority will investigate anonymous
complaints associated with abandoned, dismantled, inoperative, junked, or
wrecked vehicles or parts thereof. The complaint may be phoned in or be in
writing and must have situs address and/or assessor parcel number with a
description of the violation. The process referring to “notice of intent to
abate and remove” will be utilized for abatement if such is determined to be
appropriate.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1240   Abatement Procedures for Vehicles Which are a Public Nuisance.
   (a)   A ten-day “notice of intent to abate and remove” shall be given to the
property owner to remove the vehicle or vehicles, or parts thereof, as a public
nuisance, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed
releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle, or
part thereof. Notification shall be given either by personal delivery or
posting the property, and shall be mailed by registered or certified mail
addressed to the property owner at his or her last known business or residence
address as the same appears in the public records of the last equalized
assessment roll, and to the last registered and/or legal owner of the vehicle
by registered or certified mail to the last address listed with the Department
of Motor Vehicles. If such a vehicle is in such condition that identification
numbers are not available to determine ownership, notice need not be given to
the last registered and/or legal owner of the vehicle.
   (b)   The notice shall be substantially as follows:
      “You are hereby notified to abate this public nuisance by removal of the
vehicle or parts thereof within ten days from the date of mailing of this
notice. If you fail to do so, the public nuisance and such dismantled, wrecked,
junked, inoperative, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, will be abated and
removed by the enforcement authority and/or contract services and all the costs
for abatement and removal, together with administrative costs, may be assessed
to the legal owner of the land on which the public nuisance and such
dismantled, junked, abandoned, inoperative vehicle or parts thereof are
located, and/or assessed to the last registered and/or legal owner of such
dismantled, junked, abandoned, inoperative vehicle or parts.”
   (c)   The notice shall also set forth the procedures and time period for
filing an appeal. The notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of
the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the owner of
the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he
or she may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn statement
denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or
her reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. If the nuisance is not
abated and a request for hearing has not been received within the time period
given in the notice, the enforcement authority is authorized to abate the
nuisance.
   (d)   A “notice of intent to abate and remove” shall not be required for
removal of a vehicle or parts thereof which is inoperable due to the absence of
a motor, transmission, or wheels and incapable of being towed, is valued at
less than $200.00, is determined to be a public nuisance presenting an
immediate threat to public health or safety, and is subject to a release singed
by the property owner authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the
vehicle or parts thereof. Notice of intent to dispose of the vehicle or parts
thereof shall still be provided to the last registered and/or legal owner prior
to final disposition. If the vehicle or parts thereof are not claimed and
removed within 12 days after the notice is mailed, the enforcement authority
may authorize disposal of the vehicle and parts thereof. This Subdivision (d)
shall only apply to inoperable vehicles located upon a parcel that is either
zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure
containing one or more dwelling units.
   (e)   Notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles within five
days after the date of removal of vehicles under this Section, identifying the
vehicle or part thereof and any evidence of registration available, including,
but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership, or
license plates.
   (f)   No vehicle which has been abated or removed as a public nuisance shall
thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which
qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle
license plates.
   (g)   The enforcement authority and/or contract services shall not be liable
for damage caused to a vehicle or part thereof by removal pursuant to this
Section.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1245   Payment for Abatement of Vehicles Which are a Public Nuisance.
   When abatement has been completed, the Director shall render to the San
Bernardino County Auditor-Controller an itemized statement covering work
necessary for the abatement. The Auditor-Controller shall pay the same from the
funds of the agency causing said work to be done, and the Director shall
present to the property owner a demand for payment by mail. If payment is not
made on behalf of the property owner within 60 days after mailing of such bill,
the Director shall file a notice of pendency and certify to the Auditor-
Controller the remaining unpaid cost. The Auditor-Controller shall cause the
amount of the same to be entered upon the next succeeding secured tax roll.
Thereafter, the amounts of the assessment shall be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as County taxes are collected, and are subject to the
same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
provided for ordinary County taxes, except that if any real property to which
such lien would attach has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide
purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has
been created and attached thereon, prior to the date on which the first
installment of such taxes would become delinquent, then the lien which would
otherwise be imposed by this Section shall not attach to such real property and
the costs of abatement, as confirmed, relating to such property shall be
transferred to the unsecured roll for collection from the person who was the
property owner at the time of the abatement.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1250   Appeal of Abatement.
   Upon written request by the legal owner of the vehicle under title or
requiring registration under the California Vehicle Code, received by the
enforcement authority within ten days after mailing of the notice of intent to
abate and remove, or a sworn written statement from the owner of the land,
claiming nonresponsibility for the vehicle, a hearing shall be held by the
Administrative Board on the abatement and removal of such vehicle and parts
thereof as a public nuisance. The sworn written statement shall be construed as
a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner
submitting such request. The Administrative Board shall hear and act on appeals
within 60 days of filing and its determination shall be conclusive. The owner
of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the
hearing, or present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the
presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial.
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land
without the consent of the landowner and that he or she has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, then the local authority shall not assess the costs
of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the
vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such cost from such owner.
Except as provided herein, the provisions of §
33.0209 (Administrative Hearing Procedures) of Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title
3 of this Code are incorporated herein by reference for purposes of conducting
the hearing.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1255   Appeals of Charges.
   Any appeal from charges for the cost of removal and abatement must be filed
within 60 days from the date of billing or mailing of a tax bill which shows
abatement charges. Except as provided herein, the provisions of §
33.0209 (Administrative Hearing Procedures) of Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title
3 of this Code are incorporated here by reference for purposes of conducting
the hearing.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1260   Cancellation of Charges.
   All or any portion of any such special assessment, penalty, or costs
heretofore entered, shall on order of the Administrative Board, be cancelled by
the Auditor-Controller if uncollected, or refunded by the County Treasurer if
collected, if it or they were entered, charged, or paid:
   (a)   More than once;
   (b)   Through clerical error;
   (c)   Through the error or mistake of the Administrative Board, the
Director, or the person designated by them to give notice to abate regarding
any material fact relevant to the determination of a charge;
   (d)   Illegally;
   (e)   The owner of the land was not responsible for the vehicle(s); or
   (f)   On property acquired after the lien date by the State or by any
County, city, school district, or other political subdivision and because of
this public ownership, not subject to sale for delinquent taxes.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1265   Procedure for Refund of Payment.
   No order for a refund under the foregoing section shall be made except on a
claim:
   (a)   Verified by the person who paid the special assessment, their
guardian, executor, or administrator; and
   (b)   Filed within three years after making the payment sought to be
refunded.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1270   Payment for Abatement of Abandoned Vehicles.
   The abandonment of any vehicle on public or private property shall
constitute a prima facie presumption that the last registered owner of record
is responsible for the abandonment and is thereby liable for the cost of
removal and disposition of the vehicle. When the abatement has been completed,
the director shall render to the Auditor-Controller an itemized statement
covering work necessary for abatement. The Auditor-Controller shall pay the
same from the funds of the agency causing said work to be done, and the
Director shall present to the registered owner of the vehicle a demand for
payment of the costs required for removal and disposition of the vehicle, not
to exceed those for towing and seven days of storage. If payment is not made on
behalf of the registered owner of the vehicle within 60 days after mailing of
such bill, the Director may issue an Abandoned Vehicle Citation and/or notify
the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1275   Disposal of Vehicles Which are a Public Nuisance.
   If a vehicle, or parts thereof, are removed from a property as a public
nuisance, the vehicle, or parts thereof, shall be disposed of by removal to a
scrap yard, licensed automobile dismantler’s yard, or any suitable site
determined by the enforcement authority for processing as scrap.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1280   Abatement Procedures for Vehicles Which are Abandoned.
   (a)   If an abandoned vehicle, or parts thereof, are removed from a
property, and the estimated value of the vehicle is $500.00 or less, a notice
which states that the vehicle will be removed by the enforcement authority
shall be securely attached to the vehicle not less than 72 hours before the
vehicle is removed. Immediately after removal of the vehicle, the enforcement
authority and/or contract services shall notify the Stolen Vehicle System of
the Department of Justice in Sacramento of the removal.
   (b)   Within 48 hours of the removal, excluding weekends and holidays, a
notice shall be sent to the registered and legal owners of the vehicle by
registered or certified mail to the last address listed with the Department of
Motor Vehicles, and to any other person known to have an interest in the
vehicle. This notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the enforcement
authority;
      (2)   The location of the place of storage and description of the vehicle
which shall include, if available, make, model, license plate number, vehicle
identification number, and mileage;
      (3)   The authority and purpose for removing the vehicle;
      (4)   A statement that the vehicle will be disposed of 15 days from the
date of the notice; and
      (5)   A statement that the owners and interested persons, or their
agents, have an opportunity for a post-storage hearing if the request is made
in person, in writing, or by telephone within ten days from the date of the
notice.
   (c)   Any requested hearings shall be conducted within 48 hours of the
request, excluding weekends and holidays. Except as provided herein, the
provisions of §
33.0209 (Administrative Hearing Procedures) of Chapter 2 of Division 3 of Title
3 of this Code are incorporated herein by reference for purposes of conducting
the hearing. Failure of either the registered or legal owner, or interested
person or their agent to request or to attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy
due process post-storage hearing requirements.
   (d)   If, after 15 days from the notification date, the vehicle remains
unclaimed and the towing and storage fees have not been paid, and if no request
for a post-storage hearing was made or a post-storage hearing was not attended,
the enforcement authority may authorize disposal of the vehicle. If the names
and addresses of the registered and legal owner of the vehicle are not
available from the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles, the enforcement
authority may authorize disposal of the vehicle at any time after the removal.
   (e)   Disposal of the vehicle may only be to a licensed dismantler or scrap
iron processor. A vehicle disposed of pursuant to this Section shall not be
reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for
either horseless carriage or historical vehicle license plates.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1281   Abatement Procedures for Abandoned Vehicles Which are Valued at
Greater than $500.00.
   After the abatement and removal process described in §
33.1280 has occurred, and the post-storage notification requirements described
in §
33.1280 have been met, a lien sale will be conducted on every removed,
abandoned vehicle with a value of over $500.00, and such sale will be carried
out if all fees and costs for the removal, storage, and application for lien
sale have not been paid and the vehicle has not been redeemed by the registered
or legal owner of the vehicle. Once legal ownership has been transferred to the
County by lien sale, the vehicle(s) or parts thereof will be sold on a regular
scheduled date by an auction or other authorized, legal method permitted for
the County.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1285   Procedure for Redemption of Vehicles.
   (a)   A vehicle which is valued at $500.00 or less, and which has been
removed from a property by the enforcement authority and/or contract services
as an abandoned vehicle, may be redeemed by the registered or legal owner of
the vehicle after payment of reasonable removal and storage costs, excluding
lien sale costs, within 15 days of the mailing date of notification of removal.
   (b)   A vehicle which is valued at $500.00 or less, and which has been
removed from a property by the enforcement authority and/or contract services
as a public nuisance, may be redeemed by the registered or legal owner of the
vehicle after payment of reasonable removal, storage and lien sale costs within
ten days of the date of removal.
   (c)   A vehicle which is valued at greater than $500.00, and which has been
removed from a property by the enforcement authority and/or contract services,
may be redeemed by the registered or legal owner of the vehicle after payment
of reasonable removal, storage and lien sale costs, within 15 days of the
mailing date of notification of removal if abated as an abandoned vehicle, and
within 30 days of removal if abated as a public nuisance.
   (e)   In no case shall the costs charged to the legal or registered owner
for removal and disposition of an abandoned vehicle under this Section exceed
those for towing and seven days of storage.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1290   Authorization to Enforce County Code and Vehicle Code Provisions.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the Director and his or
her regularly employed and salaried employees engaged in the enforcement of
parking laws and regulations are authorized to remove abandoned and parked
vehicles pursuant to, and in accordance with, any applicable provision of
County Code and Chapter 10 (commencing with § 22650) of Division 11 of the
California Vehicle Code. In exercising this authority they shall follow all
procedural and legal requirements applicable to said sections.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1295   Determination of Estimated Value of Vehicles.
   For lien sale purposes, the enforcement authority shall determine the
estimated value of vehicles and maintain proper documentation and give
notifications as required by the California Vehicle Code with respect to
vehicles which are abated and removed under this Chapter. The enforcement
authority shall determine whether the estimated value of a vehicle that has
been ordered removed, towed or stored is $500.00 or less; or over $500.00 but
less than or equal to $4,000.00; or over $4,000.00. All regularly employed and
salaried employees of the enforcement authority (including contract employees)
are authorized to make appraisals to determine the value of vehicles abated or
removed under this ordinance.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
§ 33.1298   Other Remedies.
   In addition to any remedy described in this Chapter, the County may seek any
criminal, civil, or administrative remedy set forth in Chapter 2 of Division 1
of Title 1 of this Code including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and
use of administrative citations.
(Am. Ord. 2996, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3283, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 3349,
passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 4401, passed - -2021)
CHAPTER 13: MEDICAL WASTE
Section
   
33.1301   Authority.
   
33.1302   Definitions.
   
33.1303   Permits Required.
   
33.1304   Enforcement Activities.
   
33.1305   Medical Waste Generators, Transporters, and Treatment Facilities.
   
33.1306   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
§ 33.1301   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in
Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code and Health
and Safety Code §§ 117600 et seq. (Medical Waste Management Act), the
Department of Public Health Division of Environmental Health Services (DEHS) of
the County of San Bernardino shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 33.1302   Definitions.
   Definitions herein shall supplement all definitions in State law pertaining
to the generation, treatment, storage, transport, and disposal of medical
waste, and shall include those of Chapters
1 and
3 of
Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code.
   DIRECTOR. The Chief of the Division of Environmental Health of the
Department of Public Health.
   ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The San Bernardino County Department of Public Health
Division of Environmental Health Services.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any employee or agent so designated by the Chief of the
Division of Environmental Health Services.
   LARGE QUANTITY GENERATOR. The meaning assigned to that term by Health and
Safety Code § 117680.
   SMALL QUANTITY GENERATOR. The meaning assigned to that term by Health and
Safety Code § 117760.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 33.1303   Permits Required.
   Within this jurisdiction, no person or entity shall generate, produce,
treat, transport, store or dispose of medical waste without holding an
unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked permit or registration from DEHS to do so for
each facility, location, and activity, and having paid those fees to DEHS
specified by the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees. Permits and fees,
if any, shall also apply to limited quantity generators.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 33.1304   Enforcement Activities.
   Enforcement activities shall generally proceed as set forth in Chapters
1,
2, and
3, of this E.H. Code and relevant State law pertaining to the generation,
transportation, treatment and storage of medical waste.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 33.1305   Medical Waste Generators, Transporters, and Treatment Facilities.
   Medical waste generators, transporters and treatment facilities shall, in
addition to all other requirements of this Chapter, do the following:
   (a)   Each registered medical waste transporter, and each provider of a
medical waste mail back system, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 118245
(b), shall provide to DEHS a list of all medical waste generators serviced by
that person or firm during the previous 12 months. That list shall include the
(1) business name, (2) business address, (3) mailing address, (4) telephone
number, and (5) other information as required by DEHS to collect annual fees
pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 117825 and Chapter 2 of Division 6 of
Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (b)   When the transportation of medical waste by a medical waste
transporter or the provision of a medical waste mail back system service begins
after March 1, 1995, the initial list shall be provided to DEHS within ten days
of the close of the earliest calendar quarter ending September 30, December 31,
March 31, and June 30, or as otherwise required by DEHS.
   (c)   Subsequent to providing the initial list pursuant to Subdivision (a),
registered medical waste transporters and providers of medical waste mail back
systems shall submit to the local enforcement agency any changes made to the
most recent list every three months, within ten days of the close of the
calendar quarters ending September 30, December 31, March 31, and June 30, or
as otherwise required by DEHS.
   (d)   Each medical waste generator, transporter or treatment facility shall
pay all costs incurred by DEHS in the clean-up and proper disposal of all
improperly disposed medical waste, where such clean-up and proper disposal is
not substantially accomplished within two hours after DEHS has notified the
medical waste generator, transporter or treatment facility of the improper
disposal.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
§ 33.1306   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of
this Chapter. In addition to any other remedy or penalty provided by law, the
remedies and penalties provided by Chapters
1,
2, and
3 of this E.H. Code shall apply to this Chapter.
(Ord. 3846, passed - -2002)
CHAPTER 14: INSPECTION GRADING OF FOOD FACILITIES
Section
   
33.1401   Authority.
   
33.1402   Food Program Official Inspection Report.
   
33.1403   Grading.
   
33.1404   Notice of Closure.
   
33.1405   Routine Inspection.
   
33.1406   Posting Requirements—Penalty for Non-Compliance—Documents Available
for Public Review.
   
33.1407   Letter Grade Card—Period of Validity.
§ 33.1401   Authority.
   Pursuant to the authority cited in Chapter 1 (Authority and Administration)
and Chapter 4 (Food Protection) of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino
County Code (hereinafter referred to as the “Code”), as well as Health and
Safety Code § 113709, food facilities defined as permanent food facilities and
any non-permanent non-prepackaged food facility shall be subject to a grading
system as provided in this Chapter. All provisions of Chapters 1, 2, and 3 of
this Division shall apply to this Chapter except as otherwise provided herein.
(Ord. 3930, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4137, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4172,
passed - -2012)
§ 33.1402   Food Program Official Inspection Report.
   Food Program Official Inspection Report (“OIR”) means the written report
prepared and copy issued to a food facility by the Director of Environmental
Health, as defined in §
33.0102, or his or her designee, (“Health Official”) after conducting a routine
inspection of a food facility to determine compliance with all applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations relating to the protection of
public health. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the Health Official
from immediately closing any food facility if, at his or her discretion,
immediate closure is necessary to protect the public health.
(Ord. 3930, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4137, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4172,
passed - -2012)
§ 33.1403   Grading.
   (a)   GRADE. The letter grade issued by the Health Official at the
conclusion of the routine inspection of a food facility. The grade shall be
based upon the scoring method set forth in this Section resulting from the OIR
and shall reflect the food facility’s degree of compliance with all applicable
Federal, State, and local laws and regulations relating to the protection of
public health.
   (b)   LETTER GRADE. The letter grade shall be based upon the final numerical
percentage score set forth in the OIR as follows:
      (1)   A grade of “A” shall indicate a final score of 90 percent or
higher, as determined by the Health Official;
      (2)   A grade of “B” shall indicate a final score between 80 and 89
percent, as determined by the Health Official;
      (3)   A grade of “C” shall indicate a final score between 70 and 79
percent, as determined by the Health Official.
   (c)   LETTER GRADE CARD.  A card that shall be posted by the Health Official
at a food facility upon completion of a routine inspection that indicates the
letter grade of the food facility as determined by the Health Official using
the scoring method set forth in this Section and includes an inspection summary
report. An inspection summary report is a summary of the OIR as defined in §
33.1402.
   (d)   MINIMUM SCORE REQUIREMENT. Any food facility that fails to attain at
least a “B” grade, as defined herein, shall be issued written notice, through
an OIR, by the Health Official. The food facility must correct the deficiencies
listed in the OIR and must file a written request for a re-score inspection
with the Health Official within 30 days of the OIR. A re-score inspection shall
be conducted by the Health Official and be subject to a re-score inspection fee
as provided in the San Bernardino County Code, Schedule of Fees. The Health
Official will complete the re-score inspection. A food facility failing to
comply with the OIR, or failing to attain at least a “B” grade on the re-score
inspection may be immediately closed by the Health Official and remain closed
until at least a “B” grade is achieved on a re-score inspection.
(Ord. 3930, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 3976, passed - -; Am. Ord. 4137, passed -
-2011; Am. Ord. 4172, passed - -2012)
§ 33.1404   Notice of Closure.
   NOTICE OF CLOSURE means a public notice that shall be posted by the Health
Official at a food facility upon suspension or revocation of the food
facility’s public health permit and that results in the closure of the food
facility and the discontinuance of all operations of the food facility, by
order of the Health Official, because of violations of applicable Federal,
State, and local laws and regulations relating to the protection of public
health. The notice of closure shall remain posted until removed by the Health
Official. Removal or relocation of the notice of closure by any person other
than the Health Official or the refusal of a food facility to close upon
issuance of the written notice of suspension of the permit to operate is a
violation of this Chapter and may result in the revocation of the food
facility’s permit to operate and shall be punishable as specified in §
33.0112 of this Code.
(Ord. 3930, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4137, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4172,
passed - -2012)
§ 33.1405   Routine Inspection.
   (a)   ROUTINE INSPECTION means an unannounced inspection of any food
facility to determine compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local
laws and regulations relating to the protection of public health. A routine
inspection shall not mean an inspection conducted by the Health Official to
determine compliance with a previously issued OIR or any interim inspection
conducted to determine compliance with specific regulations or legal
requirements.
   (b)   RE-SCORE INSPECTION means a complete routine inspection that may be
required of (as provided in §
33.1403(d)), or requested by, the food facility.
      (1)   A re-score inspection shall be conducted by the Health Official
following the filing of a re-score inspection request form. In accordance with
the County Code Schedule of Fees, the re-score inspection fee must be paid by
the food facility upon demand by the Health Official.
      (2)   At the conclusion of the re-score inspection of the food facility,
the letter grade card shall be issued based upon the scoring method set forth
in this Chapter resulting from the OIR.
(Ord. 3930, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4137, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4172,
passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4172, passed - -2012)
§ 33.1406   Posting Requirements—Penalty for Non-Compliance—Documents Available
for Public Review.
   (a)   Upon completion of a routine inspection, the Health Official shall
post at every food facility the letter grade card, so as to be clearly visible
to the general public and to patrons entering the food facility. CLEARLY
VISIBLE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC AND TO PATRONS shall mean:
      (1)   Posted in the front window of the food facility within five feet of
the front door; or
      (2)   Posted in a display case mounted on the outside front wall of the
food facility within five feet of the front door; or
      (3)   Posted in a location approved by the Health Official to ensure
proper notice to the general public and to patrons.
   (b)   In the event that a food facility is operated in the same building or
space as a separately licensed or permitted business, or in the event that a
food facility shares a common patron entrance with a separately licensed or
permitted business, or in the event of both, the Health Official shall post the
letter grade card, in the initial patron contact area, or in a location
approved by the Health Official.
   (c)   The letter grade card shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged,
hidden, relocated or removed. It shall be unlawful to operate a food facility
unless the letter grade card is posted. Defacing, marring, camouflaging,
hiding, relocating or removing the letter grade card may result in the
suspension or revocation of the permit to operate and shall be punishable as
specified in §
33.0112 of this Code.
   (d)   The OIR upon which the letter grade card is based shall be maintained
at the food facility and shall be available to the general public and to
patrons for review upon request. The food facility shall keep the OIR until
such time as the Health Official completes the next routine inspection of the
food facility and issues a new OIR.
(Ord. 3930, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4137, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4172,
passed - -2012)
§ 33.1407   Letter Grade Card—Period of Validity.
   A letter grade card shall remain valid until the Health Official completes
the next routine inspection of the food facility.
(Ord. 3930, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4137, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4172,
passed - -2012)
CHAPTER 15: FOOD RECOVERY
Section
   
33.1501   Intent and Enforcement Authority.
   
33.1502   Scope of Authority.
   
33.1503   Definitions.
   
33.1504   Tier One and Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generators.
   
33.1505   Food Recovery organizations and Food Recovery services.
   
33.1506   Edible Food Recovery capacity planning.
   
33.1507   Inspections and investigations.
   
33.1508   Enforcement.
§ 33.1501 Intent and Enforcement Authority.
   On September 19, 2016, Governor Brown signed into law Senate Bill No. 1383
(SB 1383), the Short-lived Climate Pollutant Reduction Act, which places
requirements on multiple entities including the San Bernardino County, other
jurisdictions, residential households, commercial businesses and business
owners, commercial edible food generators, solid waste haulers, self-haulers,
food recovery organizations, and food recovery services to support achievement
of statewide organic waste disposal reduction targets, reduce greenhouse gas
emissions generated from the production of methane from the landfilling of
organics and also help reduce food insecurity by requiring commercial edible
food generators arrange to have the maximum amount of their edible food, that
would otherwise be disposed, be recovered for human consumption.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1502 Scope of Authority.
   Pursuant to Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12, § 18791.2 of CCR, San
Bernardino County has found that the public's interest in achieving the organic
waste disposal targets set by the State will be best served by Department of
Public Health, Division of Environmental Health Services ("DEHS"). The
Director, each Inspector, other designated employees of DEHS and Enforcement
Officers as defined in this Chapter are hereby authorized to enforce and
administer all State law pertaining to environmental health and all provisions
of this Environmental Health Code (E.H. Code) within this jurisdiction, the
unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County and any contracted cities
therein. This authority is granted to the Director, each Inspector, other
designated employees of DEHS and Enforcement Officers as defined in this
Chapter. DEHS may charge reasonable fees for their services, including fees as
are prescribed by the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1503 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms have the following
meanings. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory or permissive.
   CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS or CCR. The State of California Code of
Regulations. CCR references in this Chapter are preceded with a number that
refers to the relevant Title of the CCR (e.g., "14 CCR" refers to Title 14 of
CCR).
   CALRECYCLE. California's Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery,
which is the Department designated with responsibility for developing,
implementing, and enforcing SB 1383 Regulations on Jurisdictions (and others).
   COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. Includes a tier one or a tier two
commercial edible food generator as defined in § 33.1503 or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73) and (a)(74). For the purposes of this
definition, food recovery organizations and food recovery services are not
commercial edible food generators pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   COMPOSTABLE PLASTICS. Plastic materials that meet the ASTM D6400 standard
for compostability, or as otherwise described in 14 CCR § 18984.1(a)(1)(A) or §
18984.2(a)(1)(C).
   EDIBLE FOOD. Food intended for human consumption and collected or received
from a tier one or tier two commercial edible food generator. For the purposes
of this Chapter or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(18), "edible food"
is not solid waste if it is recovered and not discarded. Nothing in this
Chapter or in 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 requires or authorizes the
recovery of edible food that does not meet the food safety requirements of the
California Retail Food Code.
   EDIBLE FOOD RECOVERY. Actions to collect, receive, and/or redistribute
edible food for human consumption from tier one and tier two commercial edible
food generators that otherwise would be disposed.
   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. An action of DEHS or its Enforcement Officer to address
non-compliance with this Chapter including, but not limited to, issuing
administrative citations, fines, penalties, or using other remedies.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An entity that DEHS contracts with or otherwise
arranges to carry out any of the DEHS's responsibilities of this Chapter as
authorized in 14 CCR § 18981.2. An Enforcement Officer may be a government
entity, a hauler, a private entity, or a combination of those entities,
specifically:
      (1)   The Division Chief, each Code Enforcement Supervisor, and each Code
Enforcement Officer or other designated employee of the Code Enforcement
Division of the Land Use Services Department;
      (2)   The Building Official, each Regional Building and Safety
Supervisor, each Building Inspector, and other designated employees of the
Building and Safety Division of the Land Use Services Department;
      (3)   The Fire Chief/Fire Warden, Fire Marshal, and other designated
employees of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District;
      (4)   The Division Chief, each Animal Control Supervisor/Officer, and
other designated employees of the Animal Care and Control Program of the
Department of Public Health;
      (5)   The Sheriff-Coroner, each Deputy Sheriff (all ranks), and other
designated employees of the Department of the Sheriff-Coroner;
      (6)   The Director and other designated employees of the Public Works
Department; and
      (7)   Any other Director and other designated employees of a County
Department or Special District as designated by DEHS Administrative Officer or
the Board of Supervisors.
   FOOD DISTRIBUTOR. A company that distributes food to entities including, but
not limited to, Supermarkets and Grocery Stores.
   FOOD FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in § 113789 of the Health and Safety
Code.
   FOOD RECOVERY. Actions to Collect and distribute food for human consumption
that otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(24).
   FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION. An entity that engages in the collection or
receipt of edible food from commercial edible food generators and distributes
that edible food to the public for food recovery either directly or through
other entities, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   A food bank as defined in § 113783 of the Health and Safety Code;
      (2)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in § 113841 of the
Health and Safety code; and,
      (3)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in §
113842 of the Health and Safety Code.
      A food recovery organization is not a commercial edible food generator
for the purposes of this Chapter and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7,
Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE. A person or entity that collects and transports
edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food recovery
organization or other entities for food recovery. A food recovery service is
not a commercial edible food generator for the purposes of this Chapter and
implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(7).
   FOOD SCRAPS. Non-wholesome or inedible food such as, but not limited to,
fruits, vegetables, meat, poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones, rice, beans,
pasta, bread, cheese, and eggshells. Food scraps excludes fats, oils, and
grease when such materials are source separated from other food scraps.
   FOOD SERVICE PROVIDER. An entity primarily engaged in providing food
services to institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations of
others based on contractual arrangements with these types of organizations.
   FOOD-SOILED PAPER. Compostable paper material that has come in contact with
food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper plates, paper
coffee cups, napkins, pizza boxes, and milk cartons.
   FOOD WASTE. Food scraps, food-soiled paper, and compostable plastics.
   GROCERY STORE. A store primarily engaged in the retail sale of canned food;
dry goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and poultry; and any
area that is not separately owned within the store where the food is prepared
and served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood departments.
   HEALTH FACILITY. A health facility as defined in § 1250 of the Health and
Safety Code.
   HOTEL. A hotel as defined in § 17210 of the Business and Professions Code.
   INSPECTION. For the purposes of edible food recovery, actions to review
contracts and other records related to the recovery of edible food and may
occur off-site via email and other forms of electronic communication, as well
as the on-site review of an entity's records and collection, handling, and
other procedures for the recovery of edible food to determine if the entity is
complying with the requirements of this Chapter.
   LARGE EVENT means an event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event
or a flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a local
agency, and serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals per day of
operation of the event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a
public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street
system, or other open space when being used for an event. If the definition in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(38) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(38) shall apply to this Chapter.
   LARGE VENUE. A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an
average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the facility per
day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this Chapter and
implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a venue facility includes,
but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or operated
stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or civic center,
zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts center,
fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For purposes
of this Chapter and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a site
under common ownership or control that includes more than one large venue that
is contiguous with other large venues in the site, is a single large venue. If
the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) differs from this definition, the
definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) shall apply to this Chapter.
   LOCAL EDUCATION AGENCY. A school district, charter school, or county office
of education that is not subject to the control of city or county regulations
related to solid waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(40).
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV). A notice that a violation has occurred that
includes a compliance date to avoid an action to seek penalties, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(45) or further explained in 14 CCR §
18995.4.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
and drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(64).
   SELF-HAULER. For the purposes of edible food recovery, a commercial edible
food generator which holds a contract with and hauls edible food to a food
recovery organization or other site for redistribution according to the
requirements of this Chapter.
   STATE AGENCY. State office, officer, department, division, bureau, board,
and commission.
   SUPERMARKET. A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales
of two million dollars ($2,000,000), or more, and which sells a line of dry
grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(71).
   TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following:
      (1)   Supermarket.
      (2)   Grocery store with a total facility size equal to or greater than
10,000 square feet.
      (3)   Food service provider.
      (4)   Food distributor.
      (5)   Wholesale food vendor.
      If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73) of tier one commercial edible
food generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982
(a)(73) shall supersede and apply to this Chapter.
   TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following:
      (1)   Restaurant with 250 or more seats, or a total facility size equal
to or greater than 5,000 square feet.
      (2)   Hotel with an on-site food facility and 200 or more rooms.
      (3)   Health facility with an on-site food facility and 100 or more beds.
      (4)   Large venue.
      (5)   Large event.
      (6)   A state agency with a cafeteria with 250 or more seats or total
cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet.
      (7)   A local education agency facility with an on-site food facility.
      If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(74) of tier two commercial edible
food generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982
(a)(74) shall supersede and apply to this Chapter.
   WHOLESALE FOOD VENDOR. A business or establishment engaged in the merchant
wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits and vegetables) is
received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a retailer, warehouse,
distributor, or other destination, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 189852
(a)(76).
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1504 Tier One and Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generators.
   (a)   Tier one commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this Section commencing January 1, 2022, and tier two
commercial edible food generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024,
pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3.
   (b)   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this Section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   (c)   Tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators shall comply
with the following requirements:
      (1)   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed.
      (2)   Use the CalRecycle Model Food Recovery Agreement or the contractual
elements contained in the requirements for food recovery organizations and food
recovery services section of this Chapter to contract with, or otherwise enter
into a written agreement with food recovery organizations or food recovery
services for:
         (A)   The collection of edible food for edible food recovery from the
tier one or tier two commercial edible food generator's premises; or
         (B)   The acceptance of edible food that the tier one or tier two
commercial edible food generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization.
      (3)   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service.
      (4)   Allow DEHS or its Enforcement Officer to access the premises and
review records related to edible food recovery and/or provide them
electronically if requested by DEHS.
      (5)   Keep records that include the following information:
         (A)   A list of each food recovery organization or a food recovery
service that collects or receives edible food from the tier one or tier two
commercial edible food generator pursuant to a contract or written agreement as
required by this Chapter.
         (B)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
the provisions of this Chapter.
         (C)   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            (I)   The name, address and contact information of the food
recovery service or food recovery organization.
            (II)   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled
to the food recovery service or food recovery organization.
            (III)   The established schedule or frequency that food will be
collected or self-hauled.
            (IV)   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per
month, collected or Self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
      (6)   Commencing no later than July 1, 2022 for tier one commercial
edible food generators and July 1, 2024 for tier two commercial edible food
generators, and July 1 each year therein after, they shall provide an annual
edible food recovery report to County that includes, but is not limited to, the
information collected in records per § 33.1504(c)(5) in addition to the
following information: a list of all types of edible food categories they
generate, such as "baked goods," that are not accepted by the food recovery
organizations and food recovery services with whom they contract, and
certification that all staff responsible for edible food recovery have obtained
a valid and unexpired San Bernardino County food handler card. With the
exception of the food safety and handling training certification, tier one and
tier two commercial edible food generators may coordinate with their edible
food recovery contractors to supply this information.
      (7)   Tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators who self-
haul. Edible food shall require those transporting edible food for recovery to
obtain a valid and unexpired San Bernardino County food handler card and follow
the best practices and standards for proper temperature control, methods, and
procedures for the safe handling and transport of food.
      (8)   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to limit or conflict
with the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation
Act of 2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food
donation guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1505 Food Recovery Organizations and Food Recovery Services.
   (a)   Food Recovery Services operating in the County and collecting or
receiving Edible Food directly from Tier One and/or Tier Two Commercial Edible
Food Generators via a contract or written agreement established under the
requirements of this Chapter, shall maintain the following records:
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each Tier One and
Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generator from which the service Collects
Edible Food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of Edible Food by type collected from each
Tier One and Tier Two Commercial Edible Food Generator per month.
      (3)   The quantity in pounds of Edible Food by type transported to each
Food Recovery Organization or redistribution site per month.
      (4)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
organization or redistribution site that the food recovery service transports
edible food to for edible food recovery.
   (b)   Commencing no later than July 1, 2022, food recovery organizations and
food recovery services operating in the county and collecting or receiving
edible food from tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators or any
other source shall report to County the following: a detailed Edible Food
activity report of the information collected as required under this Chapter,
including information collected in records per § 33.1505(a) in addition to a
brief analysis of any necessary process improvements or additional
infrastructure needed to support edible food recovery efforts, such as
training, staffing, refrigeration, vehicles, etc., and an up to date list of
tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators with whom they have
contracts or agreements established as required under this Chapter. This edible
food activity report shall be submitted quarterly, or at the discretion of DEHS
or its Enforcement Officer, and shall cover the activity that occurred since
the period of the last submission.
   (c)   In order to provide the required records to the State, the County, and
tier one or tier two commercial edible food generators, contracts between food
recovery organizations and food recovery services and tier one and tier two
commercial edible food generators shall include the following elements:
      (1)   List/description of allowable foods the food recovery organization/
food recovery service will receive.
      (2)   List/description of foods not accepted by the food recovery
organization/food recovery service.
      (3)   Conditions for refusal of food.
      (4)   Food safety requirements, training, and protocols.
      (5)   Transportation and storage requirements and training.
      (6)   A protocol for informing the tier one or tier two commercial edible
food generators of a missed or delayed pickup.
      (7)   Notice that donation dumping is prohibited.
      (8)   Provisions to collect sufficient information to meet the record-
keeping requirements of this Chapter.
      (9)   Fees/financial contributions/acknowledgment of terms for the pickup
and redistribution of edible food.
      (10)   Terms and conditions consistent with the CalRecycle Model Food
Recovery Agreement.
      (11)   Information supplying the tier one or tier two commercial edible
food generators with the annual amount of edible food recovered.
      (12)   Contact name, address, phone number, and email for both
responsible parties, including the current on-site staff responsible for edible
food recovery.
      (13)   Food recovery organizations accepting self-hauling of edible food
from tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators must provide a
schedule, including days of the week and acceptable times for drop-offs, and
information about any limitation on the amount of food accepted, and/or the
packaging requirements or other conditions of transport, such as, but not
limited to, maintaining proper temperature control, and other requirements for
the safe handling and transport of food, the self- hauler must follow for the
edible food to be accepted.
   (d)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services operating in
the County shall use the appropriate temperature control equipment and methods
and maintain the required temperatures for the safe handling of edible food
recovered from tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators for the
duration of the transportation of the edible food for redistribution, including
edible food transported by private vehicles.
   (e)   In order to ensure recovered edible food is eaten and to prevent
donation dumping, food recovery organizations and food recovery services
operating in the County shall provide documentation that all redistribution
sites which are not themselves food recovery organizations to which they
deliver edible food have a feeding or redistribution program in place to
distribute, within a reasonable time, all the edible food they receive. Such
documentation may include a website address which explains the program or
pamphlets/brochures prepared by the redistribution site.
   (f)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services operating in
the county shall visually inspect all edible food recovered or received from a
tier one and tier two commercial edible food generator. If significant spoilage
is found, or if the food is otherwise found to be unfit for redistribution for
human consumption, food recovery organizations and food recovery services shall
immediately notify the County using the process found on the San Bernardino
County's DEHS website. The notice shall include:
      (1)   The type and amount, in pounds, of spoiled food or food unfit for
redistribution for human consumption, or provide a photographic record of the
food, or both.
      (2)   The date and time such food was identified.
      (3)   The name, address and contact information for the tier one or tier
two commercial edible food generator which provided the food.
      (4)   The date and time the food was picked up or received.
      (5)   A brief explanation of why the food was rejected or refused.
   (g)   Contracts between tier one or tier two commercial edible food
generators and food recovery organizations or food recovery services shall not
include any language prohibiting tier one or tier two commercial edible food
generators from contracting or holding agreements with multiple food recovery
organizations or food recovery services.
   (h)   Allow DEHS or its Enforcement Officer for edible food recovery to
access the premises and inspect procedures and review records related to edible
food recovery and/or provide them electronically if requested by the County.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1506 Edible Food Recovery capacity Planning.
   In order to support edible food recovery capacity planning assessments or
other such studies, food recovery services and food recovery organizations
operating in the County shall provide information and consultation to the
County upon request, regarding existing, or proposed new or expanded, edible
food recovery capacity that could be accessed by the County and its tier one
and tier two commercial edible food generators. A food recovery service or food
recovery organization contacted by the County shall respond to such requests
for information within 60 days.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1507 Inspections and Investigations.
   (a)   DEHS or its Enforcement Officer are authorized to conduct inspections
and investigations, at random or otherwise, to confirm compliance with this
Chapter by tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators, food
recovery services, and food recovery organizations, subject to applicable laws.
   (b)   Regulated entities shall provide or arrange for access during all
inspections and shall cooperate with the County's representative during such
inspections and investigations. Such inspections and investigations may include
confirmation of proper placement of materials in containers, edible food
recovery activities, records, or any other requirement of this Chapter
described herein. Failure to provide or arrange for: (i) access to an entity's
premises; (ii) access to records for any inspection or investigation is a
violation of this Chapter and may result in penalties described.
   (c)   Any records obtained by the County during its inspections or other
reviews shall be subject to the requirements and applicable disclosure
exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in Government Code §§ 6250 et
seq.
   (d)   DEHS or its Enforcement Officer are authorized to conduct any
inspections, or other investigations as reasonably necessary to further the
goals of this Chapter, subject to applicable laws.
   (e)   DEHS or its Enforcement Officer shall receive complaints from Persons
regarding an entity that may be potentially non-compliant with this Chapter or
SB 1383 Edible Food Recovery Regulations, including receipt of anonymous
complaints.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1508 Enforcement.
   (a)   Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall constitute grounds
for issuance of a Notice of Violation and assessment of a fine by DEHS or its
Enforcement Officer. DEHS may commence Enforcement Actions under this Chapter
by issuing an administrative citation and assessing a fine. County's procedures
on imposition of administrative fines are hereby incorporated in their
entirety, as modified from time to time, and shall govern the imposition,
enforcement, Collection, and review of administrative citations issued to
enforce this Chapter and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this
Chapter, except as otherwise indicated in this Chapter.
   (b)   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as an infraction. DEHS may pursue civil actions in the California
courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations. DEHS may elect to
delay court action until such time as a sufficiently large number of
violations, or cumulative size of violations exist such that court action is a
reasonable use of County staff and resources.
   (c)   Responsible entity for enforcement.
      (1)   Enforcement pursuant to this Chapter may be undertaken by DEHS
Enforcement Official or county manager or representative who will interpret the
Ordinance; determine the applicability of waivers, if violation(s) have
occurred; implement enforcement actions; and, determine if compliance standards
are met.
   (d)   Process for enforcement.
      (1)   DEHS will monitor compliance with the Ordinance randomly and
through investigation of complaints, and an inspection program.
      (2)   DEHS may issue an official notification to notify regulated
entities of its obligations under the Ordinance.
      (3)   DEHS will issue a Notice of Violation to any tier one or tier two
commercial edible food generator found to have edible food in any waste
collection container, or to any food recovery organization or food recovery
service found to have edible food recovered from a tier one or tier two edible
food generator in a waste collection container which has not been documented by
a notice of significant spoilage as required in this Chapter. Such notice will
be provided by written communication immediately upon identification of the
violation or within three calendar days after determining that a violation has
occurred. If DEHS observes edible food in a tier one or tier two commercial
edible food generator, or food recovery organization, or food recovery service
waste container on more than two consecutive occasion(s), DEHS may assess an
administrative citation and fine, pursuant to the edible food recovery
penalties provisions contained in this Chapter, on the tier one or tier two
commercial edible food generator, food recovery organization, or food recovery
service.
      (4)   DEHS shall issue a Notice of Violation requiring compliance within
60 days of issuance of the notice.
      (5)   Absent compliance by the entity within the deadline set forth in
the Notice of Violation, DEHS shall commence an action to impose penalties, via
an administrative citation and fine, pursuant to the Edible Food Recovery
penalties provisions contained in this Chapter.
   (e)   Penalty amounts for types of violations. The penalty levels are as
follows:
      (1)   For a first violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be $100
per violation.
      (2)   For a second violation, the amount of the base penalty shall be
$200 per violation.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, the amount of the base penalty
$500 per violation.
   (f)   Compliance deadline extension considerations. DEHS may extend the
compliance deadlines set forth in a Notice of Violation issued when such
failure or delay in compliance is caused by or results from causes beyond the
reasonable control of the entity such as:
      (1)   Acts of God such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
      (2)   Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government
agency approvals; or,
      (3)   Deficiencies in Organic Waste Recycling infrastructure or edible
food recovery capacity and DEHS is under a corrective action plan with
CalRecycle pursuant to 14 CCR § 18996.2 due to those deficiencies.
   (g)   Appeals process.
      (1)   Persons receiving an administrative citation containing a penalty
for an uncorrected violation may request a hearing to appeal the citation. A
hearing will be held only if it is requested within the time prescribed and
consistent with County's procedures in DEHS's codes for appeals of
administrative citations. Evidence may be presented at the hearing. DEHS will
appoint a hearing officer who shall conduct the hearing and issue a final
written order.
   (h)   Education period for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2022 and
through December 31, 2023, DEHS will conduct inspections to determine
compliance, and if DEHS determines that a tier one commercial edible food
generator, food recovery organization, or food recovery service is not in
compliance, it shall provide educational materials and training to the entity
describing its obligations under this Chapter and a notice that compliance is
required by January 1, 2022, and that violations may be subject to
administrative civil penalties starting on January 1, 2024.
   (i)   Civil penalties for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2024, if DEHS
determines that tier one or tier two commercial edible food generator, food
recovery organization, or food recovery service is not in compliance with this
Chapter, it shall document the noncompliance or violation, issue a Notice of
Violation, and take enforcement action pursuant to this Chapter, as needed.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 16: INDUSTRIAL HEMP AGRICULTURAL REGISTRATION AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
33.1601   Purpose.
   
33.1602   Definitions.
   
33.1603   County Agricultural Commissioner Registration.
   
33.1604   Cultivation Requirements.
   
33.1605   Inspection and Sampling Program.
   
33.1606   Registration Revocation or Non-Renewal.
   
33.1607   Registration Revocation Appeal.
   
33.1608   Destruction of Non-Compliant Industrial Hemp Crops.
   
33.1609   Abatement Costs and Bond.
   
33.1610   Fees.
   
33.1611   Administration and Enforcement.
   
33.1612   Registered Hemp Entity Responsible for Violations.
   
33.1613   Limitations on County Liability.
§ 33.1601 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate industrial hemp cultivation
within the unincorporated area of the County to promote agricultural
diversification while protecting the environment, public safety, welfare of the
County, and preventing the unlawful cultivation of cannabis under the guise of
industrial hemp. Provisions of this Chapter are in addition to any other
permits, licenses and/or approvals which may be required to conduct business in
the County, including those found in Title 8 (the Development Code), and are in
addition to any permits, licenses, registrations and/or approvals required
under Federal, State or other law. All registered hemp entities must comply
with the provisions of this Chapter and all applicable provisions of Federal
and State law and all associated regulations, as may be amended.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1602 Definitions.
   The definitions in this Section are intended to apply to this Chapter only.
Any term which is not specifically defined herein shall have the definition as
provided by
Chapter 2, Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code.
   COUNTY. Refers to San Bernardino County, as a political subdivision or
entity of the State of California and/or, as it relates to the land or
jurisdiction to which this Chapter applies, refers to the unincorporated area
of San Bernardino County.
   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the propagation, planting, growing,
breeding, harvesting, drying, curing, or other development of industrial hemp
plants or propagative material. CULTIVATION shall not include the manufacture
or retail sale of industrial hemp or industrial hemp products.
   CULTIVATION SITE. Contiguous land area on which the applicant plans to
engage in industrial hemp cultivation, storage, or both.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Shall have the same meaning as defined in §
11.0202 of the County Code.
   INDUSTRIAL HEMP. Shall have the same meaning as defined in Food and
Agricultural Code § 81000, and as hereafter amended.
   INDUSTRIAL HEMP ACTIVITY or ACTIVITIES. Includes, but is not limited to the
cultivation, possession, distribution, manufacture, storage, laboratory
testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, dispensing or wholesale
of industrial hemp. INDUSTRIAL HEMP ACTIVITIES do not include the retail sale
of industrial hemp or industrial hemp products to the public.
   PERSON. Means without limitation, any natural person, firm, association,
club, organization, corporation, partnership, business, trust, company or other
entity.
   REGISTERED HEMP ENTITY. Any person who has properly registered an industrial
hemp activity with the County. This includes any individual, firm, partnership,
joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate,
trust, business, business trust, receiver, syndicate, collective, cooperative,
institution, or any other group or entity, or combination acting as a unit.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1603 County Agricultural Commissioner Registration.
   (a)   Before cultivating industrial hemp within the County, a person must
register with the County Agricultural Commissioner and comply with the
registration requirements of Food and Agricultural Code §§ 81003 through 81005.
   (b)   The County Agricultural Commissioner may refuse to accept a
registration, including a renewal registration, for any premises upon which an
industrial hemp activity is being conducted, or is proposed to be conducted, in
violation of this Chapter.
   (c)   Every applicant for an industrial hemp registration must show proof of
ownership or a notarized lease agreement to show they have the present ability
to cultivate or manufacture on the property subject to the applicable
entitlements. In addition to the notarized lease agreement, an applicant that
does not own the property where industrial hemp is to be grown must submit a
notarized form from the owner with their registration application acknowledging
that industrial hemp is to be grown on the property and that the owner
understands that any violations of this Chapter may result in all applications
to cultivate industrial hemp on their property being denied pursuant to §
33.1611 (Administration and Enforcement).
   (d)   The person who registers to cultivate industrial hemp pursuant to this
Chapter must provide photographic identification, in a form acceptable to the
County Agricultural Commissioner, with their registration for copying and
keeping by the County Agricultural Commissioner. If the person is a sole
proprietor, a partnership, a limited liability corporation, or any other type
of corporate form, photographic identification for all key participants, as
defined by Code of Regulations Title 3, § 4902, shall be required.
   (e)   No registration or renewal shall be granted without the proper
entitlements first being issued for the property as required by Title 8 of the
County Code (the Development Code).
   (f)   The acceptance of a registration pursuant to this Chapter shall not be
deemed or construed to be a permit for or approval of any violation of this
Chapter.
   (g)   Every applicant required to submit a bond pursuant to §
33.1609 shall submit a bond or other form of security acceptable to the County
Agricultural Commissioner in the amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost to
fully abate all industrial hemp that will be grown on the site in the event
that it does not meet requirements for legal harvest under applicable laws and
regulations. The financial security provided shall be released to the applicant
after the County Agricultural Commissioner determines that the security is no
longer needed or once the registration is no longer valid.
   (h)   The acceptance of a registration shall not prevent an enforcement
officer from thereafter requiring correction of a violation or from preventing
the industrial hemp activity being carried out when in violation of this
Chapter.
   (i)   A registration issued by the County Agricultural Commissioner under
this Chapter does not grant any entitlement or interest in real property, nor
does it create any interest of value, and it does not run with the land. A
person that has obtained a registration from the County Agricultural
Commissioner shall not transfer ownership or control of the registration to
another person as the registration is non-transferable and automatically
terminates upon transfer of ownership. Any attempt to transfer ownership shall
cause the registration to be automatically revoked.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1604 Cultivation Requirements.
   The following standards shall apply to the cultivation of industrial hemp:
   (a)   A registered hemp entity shall comply with all provisions of Federal
law, California law, associated regulations applicable to the cultivation of
industrial hemp, including, but not limited to, requirements for cultivation,
sampling, laboratory testing, harvesting, and crop destruction.
   (b)   A registered hemp entity shall submit all reports required by
California law and associated regulations, including, but not limited to a
planting report, pre-harvest report, harvest report, and destruction report.
All reports must be submitted to the County Agricultural Commissioner within
the timeframes required by the Food and Agricultural Code and associated
regulations.
   (c)   All sites used for the cultivation of industrial hemp shall have
onsite signage indicating that hemp is being cultivated on site. The signs
shall:
      (1)   Be of a size so that the wording on the sign is clearly visible and
readable from a distance of 25 feet; and
      (2)   Use letters and symbols, that are of a color that sharply contrasts
with their immediate background; and
      (3)   Have the name and contact information for the responsible party for
the grow site; and
      (4)   Be posted at the corners of the parcel and at all usual points of
entry to the parcel.
   (d)   The registered hemp entity shall be actively registered with the
County Agricultural Commissioner.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1605 Inspection and Sampling Program.
   (a)   All cultivation sites are subject to inspection and sampling by the
County Agricultural Commissioner and the Sheriff, or their designees, to verify
compliance with all laws including that the delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol
concentration of the hemp planted on site does not exceed 0.3 percent on a dry
weight basis. The County Agricultural Commissioner or Sheriff may select any
and all registered hemp entities for inspection.
   (b)   The County Agricultural Commissioner and/or Sheriff may inspect and
take samples from any site during normal business hours without advance notice.
The County Agricultural Commissioner and/or Sheriff may also conduct such
additional inspection and sampling to verify compliance with this Chapter and
all Federal and State laws and regulations. Testing shall be in conformance
with State requirements.
   (c)   A sample test result with a delta-9 concentration on a dry weight
basis greater than 0.3 percent shall constitute evidence that at least one hemp
plant or part of a plant on the cultivation site contains a delta-
9 concentration on a dry weight basis of more than 0.3 percent and that the
registered hemp entity is not in compliance with this Chapter or State or
Federal law. Sample test results with a delta-9 concentration on a dry weight
basis greater than 0.3 percent shall be provided to the appropriate law
enforcement agencies.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1606 Registration Revocation or Non-Renewal.
   An industrial hemp cultivation registration may be revoked or not renewed by
the County Agricultural Commissioner in the following situations:
   (a)   If the County Agricultural Commissioner determines, after conducting
State approved testing, that industrial hemp is being grown with a delta-
9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of three percent or greater on a dry
weight basis;
   (b)   If, after first confirming that an industrial hemp crop has been
planted, it is discovered by the County Agricultural Commissioner that the
industrial hemp crop has been harvested, destroyed, or in any way removed from
a cultivation site without submitting a pre-harvest report and harvest report
as required by Code of Regulations Title 3, §§ 4940 and 4946 or a destruction
report as required by Code of Regulations Title 3, § 4950;
   (c)   Industrial hemp crops being removed from a property while an
enforcement officer is in the process of testing samples for delta-
9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration pursuant to §
33.1611(b);
   (d)   If a registered hemp entity fails to provide an enforcement officer
with complete and unrestricted access during business hours to all industrial
hemp and other cannabis plants, whether growing or harvested, and all land,
buildings, and other structures used for the cultivation, handling, and storage
of all industrial hemp and other cannabis plants, and all locations registered
as a cultivation site;
   (e)   Falsifying a criminal history report required by Code of Regulations
Title 3, § 4902(b);
   (f)   Failing to pay all abatement costs required by §
33.1610;
   (g)   Where a registered hemp entity commits a negligent violation three
times in a five-year period. For purposes of this Section, a NEGLIGENT
VIOLATION includes:
      (1)   Growing an industrial hemp crop with a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol
concentration greater than one percent, but less than three percent, on a dry
weight basis;
      (2)   Failing to provide a legal description of the land on which
industrial hemp is grown;
      (3)   Failing to register as required by §
33.1603; or
      (4)   Failing to provide signage at the grow site identifying it as
industrial hemp cultivation.
   (h)   For purposes of subdivision (g), the County Agricultural Commissioner
will provide the registered hemp entity a corrective action plan with a
reasonable date by which the registered hemp entity shall correct the negligent
violation. Failing to comply with the corrective action plan and applicable
deadlines will be presumed an intentional violation of this Chapter and subject
the registered hemp entity to revocation of their registration.
   (i)   If a registration is revoked pursuant to this Section, a registered
hemp entity shall not be permitted to reapply or renew their application for
three years.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1607 Registration Revocation Appeal.
   Notwithstanding any other administrative procedure of this jurisdiction, and
unless otherwise specified by State law or within this Code, the following
administrative procedure shall be applied for all County Agricultural
Commissioner hearings pertaining to the revocation or non-renewal of an
industrial hemp cultivation registration issued pursuant to §
33.1603.
   (a)   An appeal made under this Section shall be made in writing, addressed
to the County Agricultural Commissioner, within 30 calendar days of notice of
the denial, suspension, or revocation of the industrial hemp cultivation
registration.
   (b)   The hearing officer shall be appointed by the County Agricultural
Commissioner to hear such appeals. Any such appointee shall be a person who has
no knowledge of the facts of the particular case at the outset of the hearing,
and a person not immediately involved with enforcement activities pertaining to
industrial hemp cultivation. As an alternative to the preceding, the County
Agricultural Commissioner may instead contract with the Office of
Administrative Hearings of the State of California pursuant to Government Code
§ 27727.
   (c)   The hearing shall be held within 45 calendar days after receipt of a
request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permit holder, the hearing
officer may postpone the hearing date or it may be postponed or continued by
stipulation of the parties. If the party notified does not respond or appear,
no further hearing procedure shall be required.
   (d)   At the hearing, the registered hemp entity shall be given an
opportunity to review the County Agricultural Commissioner’s evidence and to
present evidence on its own behalf. Any witness shall swear or affirm to tell
the truth. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules
relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if
it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely
in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common
law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of the evidence
over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose
of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but shall not be sufficient in
itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in
civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that
they are otherwise required by statute to be recognized at the hearing and
irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
   (e)   If an administrative hearing is requested, a proposed decision and
order shall be made by a hearing officer within 60 calendar days of the
conclusion of the hearing. The final decision and order shall be made by the
County Agricultural Commissioner. This order shall be mailed to the appealing
party and is effective as of the date on the notice.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1608 Destruction of Non-Compliant Industrial Hemp Crops.
   (a)   Industrial hemp that does not comply with all provisions of Federal
law, State law, this Chapter and the associated regulations applicable to the
cultivation of industrial hemp, including, but not limited to, requirements for
cultivation, laboratory testing, harvesting, destructions, and reporting, shall
be destroyed.
   (b)   Destruction shall proceed as provided for in all applicable laws and
regulations, including, but not limited to, Food and Agricultural Code § 81006
and Code of Regulations Title 3, §§ 4950 and 4950.1, as may be amended.
   (c)   A registered hemp entity that fails to destroy industrial hemp as
described in the approved destruction plan shall forfeit the bond required by
this Chapter up to the amount that is necessary to reimburse all actual costs
of County initiated abatement and the County Agricultural Commissioner shall
proceed to destroy the non-compliant hemp.
   (d)   Industrial hemp that is non-compliant or has been abandoned by the
registered hemp entity shall be abated in a manner approved by the County
Agricultural Commissioner. The registered hemp entity and the property owner
shall be liable for all costs incurred by the County to abate the non-compliant
hemp beyond the amount of the forfeited bond. In the event that no bond was
required for issuance or renewal of the registration pursuant to §
33.1609(c), the registered hemp entity and property owner shall be liable for
all costs incurred by the County.
   (e)   Once an industrial hemp crop is harvested, destroyed or removed, the
registered hemp entity and the property owner, if different, are jointly
responsible for abating all regrowth from the harvested or destroyed crop.
Failure to comply will result in the County abating the property and the
registered hemp entity and property owner, if different, will be severally
liable for applicable costs.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1609 Abatement Costs and Bond.
   (a)   County staff shall be reimbursed for all time, services, and materials
required to implement, administer, and enforce this Chapter, Federal law, State
law, and all applicable regulations associated with the cultivation, testing,
etc. of hemp.
   (b)   An applicant’s or registered hemp entity’s failure to pay all fees
attributable to County costs incurred pursuant to this Chapter shall be cause
for denial or non-renewal of a registration until all outstanding obligations
have been paid in full.
   (c)   A bond in the amount of $1,250.00 per acre shall be submitted upon
issuance or renewal of the registration to reimburse the County for the cost of
destruction in the event that the applicant or registered hemp entity does not
adequately destroy the hemp in a manner approved by the County Agricultural
Commissioner and consistent with the provisions of this Chapter, Federal law,
State law and all applicable regulations, and any other costs incurred by the
County Agricultural Commissioner as a result of this Chapter. Existing
registered hemp entities with a valid registration at the time of the effective
date of this ordinance may continue cultivation of industrial hemp, at the
existing cultivation site identified on the registration, without payment of
this bond provided the registered hemp entity timely renews and continues to
maintain a valid hemp registration. Should a registration expire, be suspended,
not be renewed or be revoked pursuant to §
33.1606, any subsequent registration will require payment of this bond.
   (d)   The registered hemp entity will be charged for the Commissioner to
witness destruction, mileage, and direct and indirect labors costs and
materials associated with the destruction.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1610 Fees.
   Pursuant to Food and Agriculture Code § 81005, the Board of Supervisors may
establish a schedule of fees, in an amount necessary to cover the costs of the
County Agricultural Commissioner and the County in implementing, administering,
and enforcing the provisions of Federal, State, and local laws, regulations and
ordinances pertaining to industrial hemp. Such fees may include, but are not
limited to, costs for licensing, inspections, monitoring, sampling, testing,
enforcement, and abatement/destruction. Said fees may be updated from time to
time by the Board of Supervisors. Failure to pay all fees attributable to
County costs incurred as a result of the cultivation or manufacturing of
industrial hemp shall serve as a basis for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal
of the registration with the County Agricultural Commissioner until all
outstanding fees are paid in full.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1611 Administration and Enforcement.
   (a)   Administration. The County Agricultural Commissioner, Sheriff, or
their respective designees, are charged with the responsibility of
administering and exercising the authority conferred under this Chapter, as
applicable. The County Agricultural Commissioner, or their respective
designees, are authorized to establish additional rules, regulations, or
standards governing the issuance or denial of industrial hemp cultivation
registrations, the ongoing operation of industrial hemp cultivation, and the
County’s monitoring and inspection activities if the rule, regulation, or
standard is necessary to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.
   (b)   Consent to Entry, Inspection and Additional Testing. Registered hemp
entities consent, as a condition of the issuance of any industrial hemp
registration, to the entry by enforcement officers to make such inspections and
to take such actions as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter. To the extent reasonably necessary to verify that the industrial hemp
contains less than 0.3 percent tetrahydrocannabinol concentration, registered
hemp entities consent to additional testing by enforcement officers, which
shall be at the cost and expense of the registered hemp entity. If samples are
taken for testing, the County Agricultural Commissioner and/or Sheriff, or
their designees, may issue an order to the registered hemp entity requiring
that no industrial hemp be removed or harvested from the property until testing
results are returned or 10 days, whichever occurs first.
   (c)   Violations. Every violation of this Chapter shall constitute a
separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement
measures authorized by
Chapter 2, Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code.
   (d)   Compliance with Federal, State and Local Laws. It shall be the
responsibility of the owners and employees of the registered hemp entity to
ensure that it is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all
applicable Federal, State and local laws and/or regulatory, licensing or
certification requirements, and any specific, additional operating procedures
or requirements which may be imposed by the County.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1612 Registered Hemp Entity Responsible for Violations.
   The registered hemp entity shall be responsible for any and all violations
of Federal, State and/or local laws, as well as any regulations promulgated
under this Chapter, whether committed by the registered hemp entity, any
employee or agent of the registered hemp entity.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
§ 33.1613 Limitations on County Liability.
   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the County shall not assume any
liability whatsoever with respect to having registered any industrial hemp
entity pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 4445, passed - -2022)
DIVISION 4: FOOD AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1: REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986
CHAPTER 2: REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986
CHAPTER 3: HOSPITALS—REST HOMES
Section
   
34.0301   Definitions.
   
34.0302   Sleeping Quarters.
   
34.0303   Isolation Room.
   
34.0304   Patients’ Utensils.
   
34.0305   Toilets.
   
34.0306   Sanitation of Rooms.
   
34.0307   Protection or Heaters.
   
34.0308   Screens.
   
34.0309   Linen and Bedding.
   
34.0310   Kitchens.
   
34.0311   Employees’ Quarters.
§ 34.0301   Definitions.
   HOSPITAL, as used in this Chapter, shall mean any institution, place,
building, or agency which maintains and operates facilities for one or more
persons for the diagnosis, care and treatment of human illness, to which
persons may be admitted for overnight stay or longer. HOSPITAL includes
sanitarium, nursing home, convalescent home, or mental institution.
   REST HOME, as used in this Chapter, shall mean any institution, place,
building, or agency maintaining facilities for the board and care of one or
more ambulatory persons who do not require nursing service or medical
supervision. A REST HOME does not include a hotel, boarding house, guest ranch
or other similar type establishments which are licensed under this Code as
public eating places.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0302   Sleeping Quarters.
   No person shall be kept, cared for, or maintained as a patient in any room
or ward of any hospital or rest home which provides less than 100 square feet
for single rooms or 70 square feet per person for multipatient rooms. All beds
shall be spaced not less than three feet apart except that beds used by
tuberculosis patients shall be not less than four feet apart. Where a solid
barrier at least six feet high is provided between beds, the distance between
beds outlined herein shall not be required.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0303   Isolation Room.
   Every such hospital, sanitarium, rest home or asylum wherein ten or more
patients are housed shall be equipped with a separate room or space for
isolation purposes, which shall be equipped with a separate toilet and bath.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0304   Patients’ Utensils.
   All bed pans, urinals, and other utensils used for patients or inmates shall
be free from cracks or chips. They shall be properly cleansed and sterilized
immediately after use.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0305   Toilets.
   Toilet and utility rooms shall be provided for all bed patients. Where ten
or more ambulatory patients or inmates are cared for or housed there shall be
provided at least one toilet, two lavatories, and two baths or showers for each
ten, or fractional part thereof, patients of each sex. All toilet rooms,
lavatories, baths and showers shall be maintained free from any accumulation of
dirt, filth, or corrosion.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0306   Sanitation of Rooms.
   All walls, floors, ceilings, woodwork, curtains and furnishings shall be
maintained in a good, clean, sanitary condition, free from the accumulation of
dirt and filth, and every room shall be provided with adequate ventilation,
lighting, and heat.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0307   Protection of Heaters.
   A barrier or other protection shall be placed around each stove or
fireplace, and gas space heaters shall be connected to the supply line with a
continuous metal pipe, and shall be properly and effectively vented to the
outside air.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0308   Screens.
   All windows and doors shall be screened and maintained in good conditions so
as to exclude flies and other insects.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0309   Linen and Bedding.
   There shall be maintained an adequate amount of bedding, linen, hand and
bath towels, in good clean condition, and each bed shall be supplied with good
springs and a clean, comfortable mattress, and all beds and mattresses shall be
kept in a sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned before being used
by another person.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0310   Kitchens.
   Every kitchen shall comply with the provisions of the California Restaurant
Act and the provisions of §§ 34.0201, 34.0203, 34.0204, 34.0208, 34.0212 and
34.0213 hereof, and for the purpose of such provisions shall be a public eating
place.
   (a)   Toilets for Kitchen Workers. Every kitchen shall have a convenient
toilet or toilet rooms in connection therewith but separate and apart
therefrom. Lavatories and wash rooms shall be adjacent to toilet room and shall
be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. All operators, employees and
all persons who handle food, before beginning work shall be provided with clean
garments, and immediately after visiting a toilet shall wash their hands and
arms thoroughly with soap and water.
   (b)   Drugs in Kitchen. No drugs, medicines, or poisonous insecticides shall
be kept in the kitchen.
   (c)   Kitchen Workers. No owner or employer shall require, permit or suffer
any person to work nor shall any person work in a kitchen where food is
prepared, served, kept, handled or stored, who is afflicted with any infectious
or contagious disease.
   (d)   Garbage. All garbage and kitchen wastes must be kept in a tight,
flyproof, metal container, and removed from the premises and disposed of in a
sanitary manner at reasonably frequent intervals.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0311   Employees’ Quarters.
   Employees’ quarters, where provided, shall be constructed and maintained in
compliance with the Labor Code of the State of California.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
CHAPTER 4: REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986
CHAPTER 5: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
34.0501   Penalty.
   
34.0502   Enforcement by Health Department.
§ 34.0501   Penalty.
   Any person, firm, association, society, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this Division shall be guilty or a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $300.00, or by
imprisonment in the County Jail not exceeding three months, or by both such
fine or imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
§ 34.0502   Enforcement by Health Department.
   All provisions of
Division 1 and
Division 2 of this Code shall be enforced by the Health Department unless
otherwise provided.
(Ord. 527, passed - -1958; Am. Ord. 3105, passed - -1986)
CHAPTER 6: REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986
DIVISION 5: MONITORING, CONTROL AND ELIMINATION OF POLLUTANTS INTO THE STORM
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
CHAPTER 1: POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM REGULATIONS
Section
   
35.0101   Authority.
   
35.0102   Purpose.
   
35.0103   Definitions.
   
35.0104   Severability.
   
35.0105   Conflict.
   
35.0106   County’s Right to Revision.
   
35.0107   Administration.
   
35.0108   Notice.
   
35.0109   Storm Drain System Connections.
   
35.0110   Prohibited and Illicit Discharges.
   
35.0111   Exemptions from Discharge Prohibitions.
   
35.0112   Reduction of Pollutants in Legal Connections.
   
35.0113   Notification of Intent and Compliance with General Permits.
   
35.0114   Spill Containment.
   
35.0115   Prevention of Accidental Discharges.
   
35.0116   Notification and Abatement of Discharge.
   
35.0117   Authority to Inspect.
   
35.0118   Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP).
   
35.0119   Maintenance and Transfer of Properties Subject to BMP Maintenance
Requirements.
   
35.0120   Construction Activity Requirements.
   
35.0121   Inspection Requirements Mandated by Regional Water Quality Control
Board, Santa Ana Region, Order No. R8-2010-0036 (NPDES Permit No. CAS618036)
and the California State Water Resources Control Board, Order No. 2013-001-DWQ
(NPDES Permit No. CAS000004).
   
35.0122   Notice of Violation.
   
35.0123   Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance.
   
35.0124   Falsifying Information.
   
35.0125   Administrative Hearing.
   
35.0126   Administrative Orders.
   
35.0127   Legal Action.
   
35.0128   Civil Penalties.
   
35.0129   Criminal Penalties.
   
35.0130   Compensation for Damages.
   
35.0131   Appeals.
   
35.0132   Notice to Remediate.
§ 35.0101   Authority.
   This Chapter is enacted pursuant to authority conferred to the County under
its police powers and by the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq.).
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0102   Purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the health and safety of,
and promote the welfare of, the inhabitants of the County by controlling non-
storm water discharges to the storm water conveyance system, and by reducing
pollutants in storm water discharges, including those pollutants taken up by
storm water as it flows over urban areas, to the maximum extent practicable in
order to achieve applicable receiving water quality objectives.
   (b)   The purpose of this Chapter is to also protect and enhance the quality
of receiving waters in a manner pursuant to and consistent with applicable
federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and permits.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0103   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean
the County of San Bernardino Director of Public Works, or his/her designee(s),
or a County Code Enforcement Officer.
   (b)   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs shall mean, as defined in Title 40
of the Code of Federal Regulations, schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the pollution of Waters of the United States. BMPs also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
material storage. BMPs may be structural or non-structural, and include site
design, source control, treatment control, and natural design methods.
   (c)   CALIFORNIA REGIONAL WATER QUALITY CONTROL BOARD or RWQCB shall also
mean the Board members, its Executive Officer, and their staff.
   (d)   CLEAN WATER ACT shall mean the federal statute (Title 33 of the United
States Code, §§ 1251 et seq., as amended, including § 402(p) of the Clean Water
Act) requiring municipal and industrial dischargers to obtain NPDES permits for
their discharges of storm water.
   (e)   CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS or CFR shall mean the codification of the
general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive
departments and agencies of the Federal government of the United States.
   (f)   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY shall mean any activity as
defined by the State Water Resources Control Board or the Regional Water
Quality Control Board, whichever is more restrictive, that necessitates
securing a NPDES general permit or NOI.
   (g)   CONSTRUCTION/INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES STORM WATER GENERAL PERMIT or NPDES
GENERAL PERMIT shall mean the NPDES general permits adopted by the State Water
Resources Control Board, which authorize the discharge of storm water
associated with construction or industrial activities under certain conditions.
   (h)   COUNTY shall mean the County of San Bernardino, California.
   (i)   COUNTY CODE shall mean the official governmental record of all
codified ordinances of the County of San Bernardino, California, as may be
amended.
   (j)   COUNTY DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS shall mean the County of
San Bernardino Director of Public Works or his/her designee(s).
   (k)   COUNTY PERMIT shall mean any permit issued by the County of San
Bernardino.
   (l)   DEVELOPMENT shall mean NEW DEVELOPMENT or REDEVELOPMENT.
   (m)   DISCHARGE shall mean, when used without qualification, the “discharge
of a pollutant”.
   (n)   GOVERNMENTAL shall mean pertaining to a municipal corporation, County,
State, Federal, or governmental body, agency or entity.
   (o)   HAZARDOUS WASTE shall mean any material and/or waste defined as
hazardous by Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code or any
substance designated hazardous pursuant to Title 40 of the CFR, § 302. This
term also includes any unlisted hazardous substance which is a solid waste, as
defined in Title 40 of the CFR, § 261.2, which is not excluded from regulation
as a hazardous waste under Title 40 of the CFR, § 261.4(b), or is a hazardous
substance under § 101(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), if it exhibits any of the
characteristics identified in Title 40 of the CFR, §§ 261.20 through 261.24.
   (p)   IC/ID shall mean illicit connection/illicit discharge.
   (q)   ILLICIT CONNECTION shall mean any connection to the MS4 that is
prohibited under local, State, or Federal statutes, ordinances, codes,
regulations or permits.
   (r)   ILLICIT DISCHARGE shall mean any discharge to a municipal separate
storm sewer system that is prohibited under local, State, or Federal statutes,
ordinances, codes, regulations or permits. The term illicit discharge includes
all non-storm water discharges except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit,
discharges that are identified in Section V, Effluent Limitations and Discharge
Specifications of the Regional Water Quality Control Board Order No. R8-2010-
0036 (NPDES Permit No. CAS618036), and discharges authorized by the RWQCB.
   (s)   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA shall mean a constructed or modified surface
that cannot effectively be infiltrated by rainfall. The term includes, but is
not limited to, building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, and driveways.
   (t)   LITTER shall mean all improperly discarded waste material, including,
but not limited to, convenience food, beverage, and other product packages or
containers constructed of steel, aluminum, glass, paper, plastic, and other
natural and synthetic materials, thrown or deposited on the lands and Waters of
the United States, but not including the properly discarded waste of the
primary processing of agriculture, mining, logging, sawmilling, or
manufacturing, in accordance with Government Code § 68055.1(g).
   (u)   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE or MEP shall mean the acceptability
standard for BMPs established by Congress in the Clean Water Act, § 402(p)(3)
(B)(iii), that operators of MS4 systems and dischargers of storm water must
meet. MEP refers to management practices, control techniques, and system design
and engineering methods for the control of pollutants, taking into account
considerations of synergistic, additive, and competing factors, including, but
not limited to, pollutant removal effectiveness, regulatory compliance, gravity
of the problem, public acceptance, social benefits, cost and technological
feasibility.
   (v)   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or MS4 shall mean an acronym for
municipal separate storm sewer system. A municipal separate storm sewer system
is a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, natural
drainage features or channels, modified natural channels, man-made channels, or
storm drains): (i) owned or operated by the State, or a city, town, borough,
county, parish, district,  association, or other public body (created by or
pursuant to State law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial
wastes, storm water, or other wastes; (ii) designated or used for collecting or
conveying storm water; (iii) which is not a combined sewer; and (iv) which is
not part of the publicly owned treatment works as defined in Title 40 of the
CFR, § 122.2.
   (w)   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES shall mean a
national program under § 402 of the Clean Water Act for regulation of
discharges of pollutants from point sources to Waters of the United States.
   (x)   NEW DEVELOPMENT shall mean land disturbing activities, structural
development, including construction or installation of a building or structure,
creation of impervious surface area, and land subdivision for which either a
discretionary land use approval, grading, or building permit is required.
   (y)   NON-STORM WATER shall mean all discharges to and from a storm water
conveyance system that do not originate from precipitation events (that is all
discharges from a conveyance system other than storm water). Non-storm water
includes illicit discharges, non-prohibited discharges, and NPDES permitted
discharges.
   (z)   NOTICE OF INTENT or NOI shall mean a notice of intent for coverage
under the construction/industrial activities storm water general permit.
   (aa)   NPDES PERMIT shall mean any permit issued pursuant to the NPDES
program under the Federal Clean Water Act.
   (bb)   MS4 PERMIT shall mean the waste discharge requirement for storm water
discharges from a municipal separate storm sewer system issued by the State
Water Resources Control Board or Regional Water Quality Control Board.
   (cc)   OWNER(S) shall mean a person or persons shown by the most current
legal document that has been recorded by the County of San Bernardino Assessor-
Recorder-County Clerk that transfers, grants or imports total or partial
ownership of a parcel.
   (dd)   PERSON shall mean any individual, association, partnership,
corporation, municipality, state or federal agency, or an agent or employee
thereof.
   (ee)   POLLUTANT(S) shall mean any agent that may cause or contribute to the
degradation of water quality such that a condition of pollution or
contamination is created or aggravated. This term includes any type of
industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term
“pollutant” also means the definition of pollutant in § 502(6) of the Clean
Water Act, as amended. Section 502(6) currently defines “pollutant” as: “The
term ‘Pollutant’ means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.”
This term has also been interpreted to include water characteristics such as
toxicity or acidity.
   (ff)   RECEIVING WATER(S) shall mean Waters of the United States and
tributaries of Waters of the United States.
   (gg)   REDEVELOPMENT shall mean the creation, addition, and or replacement
of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Examples include the
expansion of a building footprint, road widening, the addition to or
replacement of a structure, and creation or addition of impervious surface
area. Replacement of impervious surface area includes any activity that is not
part of a routine maintenance activity where impervious material(s) are
removed, exposing underlying soil during construction. Redevelopment does not
include trenching and resurfacing associated with utility work;  resurfacing
and reconfiguring surface parking lots and existing roadways; new sidewalk
construction, pedestrian ramps, or bike lane on existing roads; and routine
replacement of damaged pavement, such as pothole repair.
   (hh)   SITE DESIGN BMP or SITE DESIGN BMPs shall mean any project design
feature that reduces the creation or severity of potential pollutant sources or
reduces the alteration of the project site’s hydrology. Redevelopment projects
that are undertaken to remove pollutant sources (such as existing surface
parking lots and other impervious surface area) or to reduce the need for new
roads and other impervious surface area (as compared to conventional or low-
density new development) by incorporating higher densities and/or mixed land
uses into the project design are also considered site design BMPs.
   (ii)   SOURCE CONTROL BMP or SOURCE CONTROL BMPs shall mean activities or
programs to educate the public or provide low cost non-physical solutions, as
well as facility design or practices aimed to limit the contact between
pollutant sources and storm water or authorized non-storm water. Examples
include: activity schedules, prohibitions of practices, street sweeping,
facility maintenance, detection and elimination of IC/IDs, and other non-
structural measures. Facility design (structural) examples include: providing
attached lids to trash containers, canopies for fueling islands, secondary
containment, or roof or awning over material and trash storage areas to prevent
direct contact between water and pollutants.
   (jj)   STATE WATER RESOURCES CONTROL BOARD, STATE WATER BOARD, or SWRCB
shall also mean the Board members, its Executive Director, and their staff.
   (kk)   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM or STORM WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM shall mean all of
the property interests owned or leased by the County and used directly or
indirectly in the collection, conveyance, transport, storage or disposal of
storm water and including but not limited to street gutters, conduits, natural
or artificial drains, storm drains, channels, lined diversion structures,
basins and watercourses, together with appurtenances, pumping stations, and
equipment.
   (ll)   STORM WATER shall mean storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff and
surface runoff and drainage pursuant to Title 40 of the CFR, § 122.26(b)(13).
   (mm)   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN or SWPPP shall mean a plan to
minimize and manage pollutants to minimize pollution from entering the MS4,
identifying all potential sources of pollution and describing planned practices
to reduce pollutants from discharging off the site.
   (nn)   STRUCTURAL BMP or STRUCTURAL BMPs shall mean any structural facility
designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of storm water and
urban runoff pollution, including site design, source control and treatment
control BMPs.
   (oo)   SWIMMING POOL is any body of water created by artificial means
designed or used for swimming, immersion, or therapeutic purposes.
   (pp)   TREATMENT CONTROL BMP or TREATMENT CONTROL BMPs shall mean any
engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of
particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any
other physical, biological or chemical process.
   (qq)   URBAN RUNOFF shall mean all flows in a storm water conveyance system
and consists of the following components: (1) storm water (wet weather flows)
and (2) authorized non-storm water discharges (dry weather flows).
   (rr)   USER(S) shall mean any person or entity who discharges into the Storm
Drain System.
   (ss)   WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN or WQMP shall mean a plan developed to
mitigate the impacts of urban runoff from development projects.
   (tt)   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES shall mean the waters defined in Title 40
of the CFR, § 122.2.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0104   Severability.
   If any provision, paragraph, word, or section of this
Division 5 is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provision, paragraphs, words, or sections shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0105   Conflict.
   All other provisions of the San Bernardino County Code inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this Chapter are hereby superseded for the
purposes of this Chapter to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0106   County’s Right of Revision.
   The San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors may establish by ordinance
more stringent limitations and requirements related to discharges into the
Storm Drain System if deemed necessary.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0107   Administration.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the authorized representative for the
County of San Bernardino shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this Chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized
representative may be delegated in writing by the authorized representative to
persons acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the County of
San Bernardino.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0108   Notice.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, any notice required to be given by or to
the authorized representative under this Chapter shall be in writing and served
in person or by first class or registered or certified mail. Notice shall be
deemed to have been given at the time of deposit, postage prepaid, in a
facility regularly serviced by the United States Postal Service.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0109   Storm Drain System Connections.
   (a)   Without prior written approval of the authorized representative, no
person shall construct or modify or cause to be constructed or modified any
structure, facility or appurtenant items which may alter the normal functioning
of the Storm Drain System, including any action that may alter the capacity,
fall, or structural integrity of the storm drain, channel or related structure.
   (b)   Permits are required for the construction or modification of any storm
drain, or conveyor of storm water or non-storm water, or appurtenant items
within:
      (1)   Dedicated public easements, right-of-way, or public place and/or
facility; and
      (2)   Private property so as the property may directly or indirectly
discharge into the Storm Drain System. Indirect discharges include, but are not
limited to, under sidewalk drains, driveway approaches, and unrestricted sheet
flow.
   (c)   It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain, and/or continue any
illicit connections to the Storm Drain System. This prohibition applies to
connections made in the past, regardless whether made under a permit or other
authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of the connection.
   (d)   The discharge or diversion of non-storm water is permissible only when
connection to the Storm Drain System is made in accordance with a valid County
permit, approved construction plan, or a NPDES permit and/or an NOI, and the
discharge conforms to the standards of §§
35.0110 and
35.0111 of the County Code.
   (e)   Any industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction
activity, or other discharger subject to a construction/industrial activities
storm water general permit or any other NPDES permit issued by any Federal,
State, municipal or other government entity or agency shall comply with all
requirements of such permit. Upon demand by the County Director, such
discharger shall provide the County proof of coverage under such NPDES permit.
Proof of coverage under such NPDES permit may also be required prior to
issuance of any County permit, including, but not limited to, grading,
building, or occupancy permits. Proof of coverage shall be in a form acceptable
to the County Director.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0110   Prohibited and Illicit Discharges.
   (a)   It is prohibited to:
      (1)   Throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be
thrown, deposited, placed, left, maintained or kept, any refuse, rubbish,
garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and
accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet,
catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business, place, or upon any
public or private lot of land in the unincorporated area of the County, in a
manner and place where they may result in an illicit discharge;
      (2)   Throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any
other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the unincorporated area of
the County;
      (3)   Discharge directly or indirectly into the Storm Drain System any
solid, liquid, or gaseous matter, or storm water containing such matter, in
violation of any law, rule, regulation, permit, order or other requirement of
any Federal, State, county, municipal or other governmental entity or agency.
These discharges include, but are not limited to:
         (I)   Any sediment, settleable, or suspended solid;
         (II)   Any living or dead animal or the biological waste product of
domestic animals;
         (III)   Any food or food processing waste;
         (IV)   Any thermal, color, conductive, oxygen demanding or growth
inducing waste;
         (V)   Any medical, radioactive, or radiological, chemical or
biological warfare agent waste;
         (VI)   Any chemical, salt, organic compound, pesticide or metal waste;
         (VII)   Any hydrocarbon based fuel, oil, lubricant, fluid or additive
waste; and
         (VIII)   Any substance designated as a pollutant by State or Federal
law or regulation.
      (4)   Discharge non-storm water directly or indirectly into the Storm
Drain System or any street or lined or unlined drainage ditch which leads to a
public storm drain, unless such discharge is permitted by a NPDES permit, a
County permit, or is exempted in §
35.0111 of the County Code. If such discharge is permitted by a NPDES permit,
but causes the County to violate any portions of its MS4 permit, such discharge
is also prohibited.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0111   Exemptions from Discharge Prohibitions.
   (a)   Except as described in § 35.0111(b), herein, the following categories
of non-storm water discharges are exempt from the discharge prohibitions in §
35.0110 of the County Code, if the discharge does not degrade the Storm Drain
System:
      (1)   Discharges composed entirely of storm water;
      (2)   Air conditioning condensate;
      (3)   Irrigation water;
      (4)   Uncontaminated waters from passive foundation drains, passive
footing drains, or from crawl space pumps;
      (5)   Non-commercial vehicle washing, for example, residential car
washing (excluding engine degreasing) and car washing for fundraisers by non-
profit organizations;
      (6)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges (cleaning wastewater and
filter backwash shall not be discharged into the Storm Drain System or to
Waters of the U.S.);
      (7)   Diverted stream flows, provided required permits are obtained;
      (8)   Rising groundwaters and natural springs, if the groundwater is
uncontaminated;
      (9)   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in Title 40 of
the CFR, § 35.2005 (20) and uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
      (10)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (11)   Emergency fire fighting flows;
      (12)   Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in Water Code §
13050(d);
      (13)   Non-storm water agricultural discharges that the SWRCB or RWQCB
explicitly allows pursuant to a written waiver, waste discharge requirement, or
formal policy, provided that the discharger can demonstrate compliance with all
relevant permits, waiver or policy conditions to the satisfaction of the SWRCB
or RWQCB; and
      (14)   Discharge of trauma scene post-cleanup residues and other
discharges provided that it is in conformance with the RWQCB’s conditional
waiver of waste discharge requirement.
   (b)   Any discharge category described in §
35.0111(a) that the Authorized Enforcement Officer determines is a significant
source of pollutants to Waters of the United States shall be prohibited from
entering the Storm Water Conveyance System or receiving waters, or the
discharger shall implement BMPs to reduce pollutants in that discharge to the
MEP, using the best available technology.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0112   Reduction of Pollutants in Legal Connections.
   (a)   Owner(s)/user(s), occupant(s) or other person(s) responsible for the
daily operation and/or maintenance of each parcel in the unincorporated County
shall implement and adhere to good housekeeping BMPs (as presented in the
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) standard construction site
BMP fact sheets, or equivalent), to reduce the mobilization of pollutants from
their property to the MEP.
   (b)   If the County Director determines that water quality criteria may be
compromised by discharges from a parcel or development, the County Director
shall have the authority to require BMP implementation until the discharge of
storm water and/or non-storm water runoff, or pollutants contained therein, to
the Storm Drain System, or the receiving water, has been reduced to the MEP.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0113   Notification of Intent and Compliance with General Permits.
   Any user required to obtain a construction/industrial activities storm water
general permit or any other any other NPDES general permit shall file a NOI and
comply with all conditions set forth therein.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0114   Spill Containment.
   Spill containment systems, as may be required, shall conform to requirements
established by the authorized representative. No person shall operate a spill
containment system that allows incompatible liquid to mix, thereby creating
hazardous or toxic substances in the event of failure of one or more
containers.
   Spill containment systems shall consist of a system of dikes, walls,
barriers, berms, or other devices designed to contain spillage of the liquid
contents of containers. Spill containment systems shall be constructed of
impermeable and non-reactive materials to the liquids being contained.
   Spilled or leaked waste and accumulated precipitation shall be removed from
the spill containment system in a timely a manner as is necessary to prevent
overflow of the collection system. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the
authorized representative, all chemicals or wastes discharged within the
collection area shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable Federal,
State and local laws and regulations and not discharged to the public sewer,
the storm drain system, or the ground.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0115   Prevention of Accidental Discharges.
   Protection of the storm drain system from accidental discharge of prohibited
material is the responsibility of the person or persons in charge of such
material. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection shall be submitted to the County for review, and shall be
approved by the authorized representative prior to any construction. All users
shall complete such a plan. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the
user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0116   Notification and Abatement of Discharge.
   (a)   In the event of a discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to
immediately telephone and notify the County Department of Public Works,
Environmental Management Division, and applicable Federal and State offices.
   (b)   The user shall promptly cease and desist, abate and clean up its
discharges, spills, or pollutant releases. User shall also abate and clean up
its release within 72 hours of notification from an authorized representative
of the County. High risk spills shall be cleaned up immediately after the
spill. Users shall abate uncontrolled sources of pollutants that could pose an
environmental threat within 30 days of notification from an authorized
representative of the County.
   (c)   Within five working days following a discharge to the storm drain
system, the person or persons in charge of the material discharged shall submit
a written report to the authorized representative. The report shall describe in
detail the type, volume and cause of the discharge, corrective actions taken or
to be taken, and measures to be taken to prevent future occurrences.
   (d)   A user’s compliance with Subdivisions (a), (b), and (c) shall not
relieve the user of any fines or civil penalties incurred as a result of such
discharge, or any other liability which may be imposed by this Chapter or other
applicable laws.
   (e)   Each user shall permanently post a notice in a conspicuous place where
notices to employees of the user are customarily posted, advising employees
whom to contact in the event of a discharge. Each user shall ensure that all
employees are advised of these emergency notification procedures.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4364, passed - -2019)
§ 35.0117   Authority to Inspect.
   The authorized representative shall be authorized, with consent of the
owner/occupant or with a warrant obtained pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure
§§ 1822.50 et seq., to enter and inspect the premises of any user of the storm
drain system to determine compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
   If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained, the authorized
representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure
lawful entry and inspection of the premises, including a search warrant
obtained pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1822.50 et seq.
   Such inspections may include:
   (a)   Conduct inspection, sampling, monitoring, and/or other authorized
duties to enforce the provisions of this Chapter;
   (b)   Review any records, reports, test results or other information
required to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. Such review may include the
necessity to photograph, videotape, or copy any applicable information; and
   (c)   Inspect any wastes, chemicals, storage areas, storage containers,
waste generating processes, treatment facilities, and discharge locations. Such
inspection may include the necessity to photograph or videotape any applicable
wastes, chemicals, storage areas, storage containers, waste generating
processes, treatment facilities, and discharge locations.
   Adequate identification shall be provided by the authorized representative
or designated representative, when entering the premises of any user.
   If the authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that non-
storm water discharge conditions on or emanating from the premises are so
hazardous, unsafe, or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard
the public health or safety, the authorized representative shall have the right
to immediately enter and inspect the property, and may use any reasonable means
required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether the property is
occupied or unoccupied and whether or not formal permission to inspect has been
obtained.
   Where a user has instituted security measures requiring proper
identification and clearance before entry onto the premises, the user shall
make all necessary arrangements with its security guards in order that, upon
presentation of such identification, duly designated County personnel shall be
permitted to enter the premises without delay for the purpose of performing
their authorized duties. For facilities which require special clearances to
conduct inspections, it shall be the responsibility of the user to obtain all
necessary clearances on behalf of the County so that County inspections are not
impaired.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0118   Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP).
   (a)   A WQMP shall be prepared and submitted to the authorized
representative for all projects subject to this requirement under the
applicable MS4 permit.
   (b)   The WQMP shall include proposed structural BMPs as required in the
applicable MS4 permit. The WQMP shall be prepared in conformance with the most
recently approved SWRCB and/or RWQCB Model WQMP Guidance and template documents
and other related guidance documents.
   (c)   In developing a WQMP, the owner(s)/user(s) shall demonstrate that the
proposed structural BMPs will infiltrate, and/or adequately treat, the
projected storm water and urban runoff for the development project using the
design standards for structural BMPs as specified in the applicable MS4 permit.
   (d)   All WQMPs shall include a maintenance schedule for all source control
and treatment control BMPs, the owner(s)/user(s), or owner(s) and user(s) (if
different), signed statement of responsibility for continued BMP maintenance,
and a plan for continued maintenance responsibilities.
   (e)   The owner(s)/user(s), or owner(s) and user(s) (if different), shall
remain responsible for such maintenance activities until responsibility is
legally transferred in accordance with §
35.0119. Owner(s) shall provide notice of the transfer, sale, deed, or lease to
the County Director.
   (f)   The owner(s)/user(s), or owner(s) and user(s) (if different), shall
enter into a legally enforceable agreement with County, in which in
consideration of project approval and/or connection to the Storm Drain System,
the owner(s)/user(s), or owner(s) and user(s) (if different), agree to maintain
post-construction source control or treatment control BMPs and other related
features. A standard agreement form may be approved by the Board of
Supervisors. Individual agreements, using the Board-approved standard agreement
form, may be executed by the Chief Executive Officer, the Director of Public
Works or other Board designee. This agreement shall be recorded with the County
of San Bernardino Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0119   Maintenance and Transfer of Properties Subject to BMP Maintenance
Requirements.
   The transfer, sale, deed, or lease of a parcel that is subject to a
requirement for maintenance of structural BMP features, shall include
conditions requiring transferee, and transferee’s successors and assigns, to:
   (a)   Assume responsibility for maintenance and operation of any existing
structural BMP feature to at least the MEP standard;
   (b)   Replace any degraded structural BMP feature with new control measures,
or BMP features, meeting the then current standards of the County;
   (c)   Conduct BMP maintenance and inspections as required in the approved
WQMP;
   (d)   Ensure that all structural BMP features are inspected at least yearly,
and retain proof of such inspections for at least three years;
   (e)   For conditions, covenants, and restrictions for properties which
include structural BMP features that are to be maintained by a homeowner’s
association, such conditions, covenants and restrictions shall provide for
maintenance of the BMP features by the association;
   (f)   Any deed transferring title to said property shall include a reference
to owner(s) agreement with County under §
35.0118, which is applicable to owner(s) successors and assigns and the BMP
features that are to be maintained by the successor owner; and
   (g)   If property, on which structural BMP features are located, is to be
dedicated to a governmental agency, the transferor shall remain responsible for
the BMP features until the agency provides a signed assumption of
responsibility and conformation that structural BMP features meet agency design
standards.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0120   Construction Activity Requirements.
   (a)   Any discharger associated with construction activity subject to any
NPDES permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the
SWRCB, or RWQCB, shall comply with all requirements of such permit. Upon demand
by County Director, such discharger shall provide County proof of coverage
under such permit. Proof of coverage under such permit may also be required
prior to issuance of any County permit, including, but not limited to, grading,
building, or occupancy permits. Proof of coverage shall be in a form acceptable
to the County Director.
   (b)   Any person engaged in construction activity requiring coverage under a
NPDES general permit shall retain at the construction site the following
documents:
      (1)   A copy of the NOI to comply with the requirements of the NPDES
general permit for storm water discharges associated with construction
activity;
      (2)   A waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB; and
      (3)   A storm water pollution prevention plan for the construction
activity requiring a construction NPDES permit.
   (c)   Prior to the issuance of any building or grading permit for the
construction of a new development or redevelopment, including those projects
for which coverage under the NPDES general permit is not required, the
applicant shall evaluate the proposed project to determine its potential to
generate an illicit discharge into the Storm Drain System during construction
and provide said evaluation to County. The County reserves the right to require
conditions be placed upon the issuance of the building or grading permit to
minimize the risk of discharge of pollutants into the Storm Drain System. These
conditions may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Runoff containing sediment, construction waste and other pollutants
from construction activity and equipment parking areas shall be reduced to the
MEP;
      (2)   Any sediment or other materials tracked off the site by vehicles
and equipment shall be removed the same day as they are tracked off site.
      (3)   For painting removal, paint preparation, or sandblasting activities
that will result in paint particles entering the air or landing on the ground,
BMPs shall be implemented to prevent or minimize to the MEP such particle
releases to the environment;
      (4)   Excavated soils shall be located on the site in a manner that
minimizes the amount of soil transported into the public right-of-way and/or
onto adjoining properties. Soil stockpile BMPs shall be implemented to prevent
or minimize to the MEP soil releases to the environment;
      (5)   Drainage controls and BMPs shall be utilized as needed to prevent
non-storm water discharges from the site. Depending on the extent of proposed
grading and topography of the site, the following features may be required:
         (I)   Detention ponds, sediment ponds, infiltration pits;
         (II)   Dikes, filter berms, ditches; or
         (III)   Downdrains, chutes or flumes.
   (d)   The County may, as a condition of granting a building or grading
permit, set forth reasonable limits on the clearing of vegetation from
construction sites, including, but not limited to, regulating the length of
time during construction activities that grubbed and/or graded areas may be
bare and/or unprotected.
   (e)   No person shall wash construction equipment or vehicles that results
in a prohibited discharge to the Storm Drain System or County right-of-way
under County Code §
35.0110. No person shall allow non-storm water from a construction site to
runoff into the County’s Storm Drain System or right-of-way.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0121   Inspection Requirements Mandated by Regional Water Quality Control
Board, Santa Ana Region, Order No. R8-2010-0036 (NPDES Permit No. CAS618036)
and the California State Water Resources Control Board, Order No. 2013-001-DWG
(NPDES Permit No. CAS000004).
   (a)   The requirements of Subdivisions (a)(1) through (a)(4) are mandated by
Regional Water Quality Control Board Order No. R8-2010-0036 (NPDES Permit No.
CAS618036), Sections X and XI, and are applicable to all pertinent activities
within the unincorporated geographical area denoted within said permit.
      (1)   Section X of NPDES Permit No. CAS618036 mandates the regular
inspection of all commercial, industrial and municipal facilities. All
commercial, industrial and municipal facilities within the unincorporated
region of the County shall be inspected as provided in Section X of NPDES
Permit No. CAS618036. As these inspections are performed by the County, and as
set forth in §
16.0101 of the County Code, the County has established a schedule of fees for
these services. The schedule of fees for these services is found in § 16.0225
(d) of the County Code.
         (A)   The owner(s) and/or user(s) shall submit the applicable fees to
the County for the regular periodic site inspection as listed in §
16.0225(d)(1)(A) of the County Code.
         (B)   Should follow-up site inspections by County representatives be
required, the owner(s) and/or user(s) shall submit the applicable fees to the
County as listed in §
16.0225(d)(1)(B) of the County Code. This fee shall apply for each and every
follow-up site inspection event.
         (C)   Facilities which require inspection will be categorized based on
the latest requirements of NPDES Permit No. CAS618036. All high-priority
facilities shall be inspected at least once per year; all medium-priority
facilities shall be inspected at least once every two years; and all low-
priority facilities shall be inspected at least once during the term of NPDES
Permit No. CAS618036.
      (2)   Section XI of NPDES Permit No. CAS618036 mandates that WQMP post-
construction BMPs be inspected, prior to the rainy season, within three years
after project completion and every three years thereafter. All projects that
are within the unincorporated region of the County and are subject to the
requirements of Section XI of NPDES Permit No. CAS618036 shall be inspected as
provided in NPDES Permit No. CAS618036.
         (A)   The owner(s) and/or user(s) shall submit any applicable fees to
the County for the regular periodic site inspection of the WQMP post-
construction BMPs.
         (B)   Should follow-up site inspections by County representatives of
WQMP post-construction BMPs be required, the owner(s) and/or user(s) shall
submit any applicable fees to the County.
      (3)   For inspections required by NPDES Permit No. CAS618036, the
authorized representative (with consent of the owner/user or occupant, or a
warrant if required) may inspect a property or facility pursuant to §
35.0117. Such inspections may include the elements identified in §
35.0117, as well as:
         (A)   Investigating the source of any discharge to any public street,
inlet, gutter, storm drain or the Storm Drain System located within the
jurisdiction of the County;
         (B)   Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals
and materials used, stored or maintained on the subject premises;
         (C)   Identifying points of discharge of all storm water, waste water,
non-storm water, processed water systems and pollutants;
         (D)   Investigating the natural slope of the premises, including
drainage patterns and manmade conveyance systems;
         (E)   Locating any illicit connection or illicit discharge;
         (F)   Investigating and inspecting a vehicle, truck, trailer, tank
truck or other mobile equipment;
         (G)   Reviewing and inspecting all records of the owner(s) and/or user
(s) and/or occupant(s) of public or private property relating to chemicals or
processes presently or previously stored or occurring on the property,
including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics
and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business
plans, pollution prevention plans, construction/industrial activities storm
water general permit or any other NPDES general permit, storm water pollution
prevention plans, monitoring program plans, and any and all records relating to
illicit connections, illicit discharges, or any other source of contribution or
potential contribution of pollutants to the Storm Drain System;
         (H)   Inspecting, sampling, and testing any area runoff, soils area
(including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste
storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system
discharges for the purpose of determining the potential for contributions of
pollutants to the Storm Drain System;
         (I)   Inspecting the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer
systems, any connections to other pipelines on the property using appropriate
tests, including, but not limited to, smoke and dye tests or video surveys;
taking photographs or videotapes, and making measurements, drawings or any
other records reasonably necessary to document conditions as they exist on the
premises;
         (J)   Installing and maintaining surveillance and monitoring systems
for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to
the Storm Drain System;
         (K)   Reviewing any records, reports, test results or other
information required to enforce the provisions of this chapter; such review may
include the necessity to photograph, videotape, or copy any applicable
information;
         (L)   Evaluating compliance with this Chapter and/or the Clean Water
Act and applicable State law, and all regulations thereto; and
         (M)   Field verification of post-construction BMPs as provided in
Section XI of NPDES Permit No. CAS618036.
      (4)   The Authorized Enforcement Officer shall provide to the owner(s)
and/or user(s) a written summary of the inspection denoting compliance or
issues of non-compliance with this Chapter, a NPDES permit, applicable MS4
permit, or County permit. Should the Authorized Enforcement Officer denote
issues of non-compliance, the Authorized Enforcement Officer shall also provide
a written listing of corrective actions to be taken by the owner(s) and/or user
(s) to bring the facility into compliance with this Chapter, a NPDES permit,
applicable MS4 permit, or County permit, and a date by which such corrective
actions shall be completed.
   (b)   The requirements of Subdivisions (b)(1) and (b)(2) are mandated by
California State Water Resources Control Board Water Quality Order No. 2013-
001-DWQ (NPDES Permit No. CAS000004), Section E.12, and are applicable to all
pertinent activities within the unincorporated geographical area denoted within
said permit.
      (1)   Section E.12 of NPDES Permit No. CAS000004 mandates that WQMP post-
construction BMPs be inspected and self-certified by the owner(s) and/or user
(s) and the results of said inspections and certification reported to the
County on an annual basis. The County is mandated to then perform an assessment
of each annual self-certification report. All projects that are within the
unincorporated region of the County and are subject to the requirements of
Section E.12 of NPDES Permit No. CAS000004 shall be inspected, certified and
assessed as provided in NPDES Permit No. CAS000004. Should the County’s
assessment determine that the annual report of the owner(s) and/or user(s) is
insufficient, or if the owner(s) and/or user(s) fails to submit a report to the
County, the County may, at its discretion, perform the required inspection and
certification tasks. If the County determines that additional inspections are
required to verify compliance with the requirements of Section E.12 of the
NPDES Permit No. CAS000004, the County may, at its discretion, perform
additional follow-up site inspections to verify compliance. The owner(s) and/or
user(s) shall be responsible for the payment of any applicable fees for these
services.
         (A)   The owner(s) and/or user(s) shall submit any applicable fees to
the County for site inspection of WQMP post-construction BMPs performed by the
County.
         (B)   Should follow-up site inspections by County representatives of
WQMP post-construction BMPs be required, the owner(s) and/or user(s) shall
submit any applicable fees to the County.
      (2)   For inspections required by NPDES Permit No. CAS000004, the
authorized representative (with consent of the owner(s) and/or user(s) and/or
occupant(s), or a warrant if required) may inspect a property or facility
pursuant to §
35.0117. Such inspections may include the elements identified in §
35.0117, as well as:
         (A)   Investigating the source of any discharge to any public street,
inlet, gutter, storm drain or the Storm Drain System located within the
jurisdiction of the County;
         (B)   Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals
and materials used, stored or maintained on the subject premises;
         (C)   Identifying points of discharge of all storm water, waste water,
non-storm water, processed water systems and pollutants;
         (D)   Investigating the natural slope of the premises, including
drainage patterns and manmade conveyance systems;
         (E)   Locating any illicit connection or illicit discharge;
         (F)   Investigating and inspecting a vehicle, truck, trailer, tank
truck or other mobile equipment;
         (G)   Reviewing and inspecting all records of the owner(s) and/or user
(s) and/or occupant(s) of public or private property relating to chemicals or
processes presently or previously stored or occurring on the property,
including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics
and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business
plans, pollution prevention plans, construction/industrial activities storm
water general permit or any other NPDES general permit, storm water pollution
prevention plans, monitoring program plans, and any and all records relating to
illicit connections, illicit discharges, or any other source of contribution or
potential contribution of pollutants to the Storm Drain System;
         (H)   Inspecting, sampling, and testing any area runoff, soils area
(including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste
storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system
discharges for the purpose of determining the potential for contributions of
pollutants to the Storm Drain System;
         (I)   Inspecting the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer
systems, any connections to other pipelines on the property using appropriate
tests, including, but not limited to, smoke and dye tests or video surveys;
taking photographs or videotapes, and making measurements, drawings or any
other records reasonably necessary to document conditions as they exist on the
premises;
         (J)   Reviewing any records, reports, test results or other
information required to enforce the provisions of this Chapter; such review may
include the necessity to photograph, videotape, or copy any applicable
information;
         (K)   Evaluating compliance with this Chapter and/or the Clean Water
Act and applicable State law, and all regulations thereto; and
         (L)   Field verification of post-construction BMPs as provided in
Section E.12 of NPDES Permit No. CAS000004.
      (3)   The authorized representative shall provide to the owner(s) and/or
user(s) a written summary of the inspection denoting compliance or issues of
non-compliance with this Chapter, a NPDES permit, applicable MS4 permit, or
County permit. Should the authorized representative denote issues of non-
compliance, the authorized representative shall also provide a written listing
of corrective actions to be taken by the owner(s) and/or user(s) to bring the
facility into compliance with this Chapter, a NPDES permit, applicable MS4
permit, or a County permit, and a date by which such corrective actions shall
be completed.
   (c)   In the event of a conflict between the requirements identified in
other sections of this Chapter and this Section, the terms of this Section
control.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4364, passed - -2019)
§ 35.0122   Notice of Violation.
   Whenever the authorized representative finds that any user has violated or
is violating any provision of this Chapter, a NPDES permit or County permit,
the authorized representative may serve upon such person a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and stating the penalties for continued
non-compliance.
   If required in the notice, the user shall submit to the authorized
representative, within a prescribed period specified in the notice, which
period shall not be less than ten working days unless an emergency situation
dictates a shorter period, a plan indicating the cause of the violation,
corrective actions which will be taken to prevent recurrence and, if required,
a proposed compliance schedule indicating the dates those corrective actions
will be completed.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0123   Violations Deeded a Public Nuisance.
   Any violation of this Chapter which results in a threat to public health,
safety and welfare is a public nuisance. Such public nuisance may be summarily
abated and/or remediated by the authorized representative in any manner
permitted by law.
   The cost of such abatement or remediation shall be borne by the owner of the
property or user causing the violation.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0124   Falsifying Information.
   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record,
report, plan, or other document filed with the County or who falsifies, tampers
with, or knowingly renders inaccurate monitoring devices or methods required
under this Chapter, shall have violated this Chapter.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0125   Administrative Hearing.
   (a)   Any user may request in writing from the Authorized Enforcement
Officer within ten days from the issuance of a notice of violation pursuant to
§
35.0122 or an administrative order pursuant to §
35.0126, or the Authorized Enforcement Officer may order, an administrative
hearing, at which a user who causes or allows or who has caused or allowed a
violation of this Chapter to occur shall show cause why a proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The administrative hearing shall be held within 60
days of the request or order and shall be before the County Director or his or
her designee. The hearing officer shall not be the Authorized Enforcement
Officer who issued the notice of violation pursuant to §
35.0122 or the administrative order pursuant to §
35.0126 or their immediate supervisor. In the alternative, the County, through
the County’s contracting process, may contract with a qualified provider for
administrative processing and collection services to provide hearing officers
to conduct administrative hearings. At the administrative hearing, user and the
Authorized Enforcement Officer shall have the right to present evidence.
   (b)   A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of
the hearing regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken
and proposed enforcement action, directing the user to show cause before the
hearing officer why proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of hearing shall be served in the manner provided in §
35.0108, at least ten working days before the hearing. Service may be made on
any agent or officer of the user.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0126   Administrative Orders.
   The authorized representative may require compliance with this Chapter or
NPDES permit or County permit by issuing written administrative orders.
Administrative orders may include stop work orders, cease and desist orders,
termination of service orders and immediate termination of service orders.
   (a)   Stop Work Order. The authorized representative may serve a written
stop work order on any person engaged in doing or causing to be done new
construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions, if:
      (1)   A County permit is required and no permit has been granted by the
County;
      (2)   Work has begun without necessary prior written approval by the
authorized representative; or
      (3)   Violations of this Chapter are found at the site of the new
construction, tenant improvements, alterations or additions.
   Any person served a stop work order shall stop such work forthwith until
written authorization to continue is received from the authorized
representative.
   (b)   Cease and Desist Order. When the authorized representative finds that
any industrial/commercial user has violated or threatens to violate any
provisions of this Chapter or NPDES permit or County permit the authorized
representative may issue a cease and desist order directing the user to:
      (1)   Comply immediately; or
      (2)   Comply in accordance with a time schedule specified in the cease
and desist order.
   A cease and desist order may include modifications in the frequency of
monitoring, testing or submission of self-monitoring reports.
   (c)   Termination of Service. When the authorized representative finds any
industrial/commercial user has violated an administrative order, the authorized
representative may terminate storm drain service to the user. The user shall be
liable for all costs for termination of storm drain service incurred by the
user and the County. Storm drain service shall be re-instituted by the
authorized representative after the user has complied with all the provisions
of the administrative order. The user shall also be liable for all costs for
re-instituting storm drain service.
   (d)   Immediate Termination of Service. The authorized representative may
immediately suspend storm drain service and any County permit when such
suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the authorized representative, to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent and substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or
the environment, or which significantly causes pollution to the receiving
waters, ground water and natural water courses of the County. Any industrial/
commercial user notified that storm drain service NPDES permit or County permit
has been suspended shall immediately stop and eliminate the applicable
discharges to the storm drain system.
   In the event of failure to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
authorized representative shall take steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of storm drain connections. The industrial/commercial user
shall be liable for all costs incurred by the County in terminating storm drain
service. Storm drain service may be re-instituted by the authorized
representative after the actual or threatened discharge has been eliminated. A
detailed written statement, submitted by the industrial/commercial user,
describing the cause of the harmful discharge and the measures to prevent any
future occurrence shall be submitted to the authorized representative within 15
working days of the date of storm drain service termination.
   The authorized representative may adopt a proposed compliance schedule
submitted by the user, or may adopt a revised compliance schedule if, in the
judgment of the authorized representative, the compliance schedule submitted by
the user would allow the user to cause harm to the receiving waters and/or
County storm drain system.
   The authorized representative will notify the user of the adopted compliance
schedule in a timely manner. The authorized representative shall not adopt a
compliance schedule which does not comply with the applicable Federal
guidelines.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0127   Legal Action.
   (a)   If any person violates the provisions of this Chapter, Federal or
State NPDES permit, MS4 permit, or County permit or any order of the County,
the County may commence an action for appropriate legal, equitable or
injunctive relief in the courts of the County or other appropriate court.
   (b)   In any civil action brought by the County, including, but not limited
to, a proceeding to abate a public nuisance, whether by seeking injunctive
relief and/or an abatement order, or other order, attorney’s fees and costs of
enforcement may be recovered by the prevailing party. Such recovered attorney’s
fees shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the
County in that action or proceeding (Government Code § 25845). Costs of
enforcement shall include, but not be limited to, administrative costs and any
and all costs incurred in the physical abatement of any nuisance and any and
all costs incurred by the County in the correction or remedying of a violation
of this Code, and including any related appeal to an administrative body or
court or an appellate court. Notwithstanding the above language, no attorney’s
fees shall be recovered in any administrative proceeding held pursuant to §
11.0208 of the County Code or any related appeal to a court or appellate court.
   (c)   As an alternative to the criminal or civil enforcement of this
Chapter, all violations of this Chapter may be subject to enforcement through
the use of administrative citations in accordance with Government Code §
53069.4 and this Section, and in the same manner and under the same authority
as provided in § 11.0208 of the County Code.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994; Am. Ord.
4176, passed - -2012)
§ 35.0128   Civil Penalties.
   The industrial/commercial user may be fined a sum not to exceed $2,500.00
for each offense.
   Each violation shall be considered a separate and distinct offense, and each
day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this Article, the
County may recover all reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, court
reporters’ fee and other expenses of litigation against the person found to
have violated this Chapter, NPDES permit, County permit, or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued under this Chapter.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0129   Criminal Penalties.
   (a)   Any person who willfully violates any provision of this Chapter or any
permit condition; who knowingly violates any stop work order, cease and desist
order, termination or immediate termination order, prohibition or effluent
limitation; who knowingly makes false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this Chapter or NPDES permit; or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly causes inaccuracy in any monitoring device
or method required or authorized under this Chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified.
   (b)   Each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a
new and separate offense.
   (c)   Any person so convicted shall be:
      (1)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $100.00 and not less than $50.00 for a first offense;
      (2)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $200.00 and not less than $100.00 for a second offense.
      (3)   Guilty of a misdemeanor for the third and any additional offenses
and punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and not less than $500.00 or six
months in jail, or both.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged
and prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
   (e)   Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence shall not relieve a
person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity from the responsibility
of correcting the condition resulting from the violation.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0130   Compensation for Damages.
   Any person, entity, or user who, by violation of this Chapter, causes any
damage to the storm drain system, including the imposition of fines or
penalties on the County by Federal, State or local regulatory agencies, shall
be liable to the County for all such damages, costs, fines, and penalties
incurred by the County.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0131   Appeals.
   Any decision of the authorized representative or the administrative hearing
officer may be appealed to the Board of Supervisors by giving notice, in the
manner provided by §
35.0108, to the authorized representative within ten days of receipt of said
decision.
   The Board of Supervisors may, at its discretion, appoint a county hearing
officer pursuant to
Chapter 27 of Division 2 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code
(commencing with §
12.2700) to conduct the hearing.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
§ 35.0132   Notice to Remediate.
   Whenever the authorized representative finds any nonpermitted or prohibited
discharge, in or upon any parcel of land, which may result in illegal
discharges to the storm drain system, the authorized representative may give
notice to remediate such discharge. Any user who receives such a notice shall
undertake the remediation activities as described in the notice.
(Ord. 3105, passed - -1986; Readopted by Ord. 3587, passed - -1994)
DIVISION 6: (REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986)
DIVISION 7: PUBLIC NUISANCES
CHAPTER 1: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
   
37.0101   Purpose.
   
37.0102   Definitions.
   
37.0103   Notice of Violation.
   
37.0104   Authority to Enter Upon Land.
   
37.0105   Public Hearing on Notice of Abatement.
   
37.0106   Abatement by the Public Officer.
   
37.0107   Account and Itemized Report.
   
37.0108   Notice of Account and Itemized Report.
   
37.0109   Hearing.
   
37.0110   Modification or Confirmation of Report.
   
37.0111   Special Assessment and Lien.
   
37.0112   Collection of Expense.
   
37.0113   Cancellation.
§ 37.0101   Purpose.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, whenever there is a
condition or use existing on private land and such use or condition is a public
nuisance and is a violation of any provision of this Code, the following
proceedings may be used as an alternative to any other proceeding or manner of
getting abatement set forth in this Code.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0102   Definitions.
   FENCED or WALLED ENCLOSURE. An area completely enclosed by a structure, at
least five feet in height, and at which area a person is present at regular
business hours as manager or employee.
   PUBLIC OFFICER. The Administrator of the Environmental Improvement Agency,
the County Health Officer, the County Agricultural Commissioner, all of the
County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1979, passed - -1975)
§ 37.0103   Notice of Violation.
   Any party who is the owner or possessor of land upon which is located a
public nuisance which is a violation of a provision of this Code may be served
with a written notice by the Public Officer to abate such public nuisance and
violation. The notice shall demand that such person remedy or abate the public
nuisance which is a violation within a period of time that may not require
results in less than ten days. The notice thereof shall be served personally on
such person, or, if he or she cannot be readily found, shall be served by
registered mail (return receipt requested) or, if he or she cannot be served by
mail, then service shall be accomplished by posting such notice on a
conspicuous place on the land specified.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0104   Authority to Enter Upon Land.
   The Public Officer, or his or her assistants, deputies, employees or
contracting agents may enter upon the land for posting or serving notice, or,
also, for abating any such public nuisance and violation as herein provided.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0105   Public Hearing on Notice of Abatement.
   Any party served, constructively or personally, may have a public hearing
before the Board of Supervisors within eight days of said service, at the next
regular meeting of the Board falling within such eight day period. Such hearing
shall be to determine if such public nuisance and violation in fact exists. If
the Board finds that such public nuisance and violation does not exist, no
further proceedings under this Chapter shall take place. If the Board finds
that such public nuisance and violation does in fact exist, further proceedings
shall be followed as provided herein. This hearing and determination by the
Board of Supervisors shall be had only if demanded within the eight-day period
by a party having some interest in the land.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0106   Abatement by the Public Officer.
   If the public nuisance and violation is not abated after ten days after the
notice thereof, or after any further period of time as may be allowed by the
Board of Supervisors, the Public Officer shall have the same abated.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0107   Account and Itemized Report.
   The Public Officer, in the event that he or she has the abatement
accomplished as provided herein, shall prepare an account of the cost or
abatement and shall render an itemized report in writing to the Board of
Supervisors showing the total cost of the abatement, including administrative
costs necessarily incurred.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0108   Notice of Account and Itemized Report.
   Before the account and itemized report are submitted to the Board of
Supervisors, a copy shall be served on the same parties and in the same manner
as the notice as provided in §
37.0103.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0109   Hearing.
   Within 22 days after the service thereof, any person so served may have a
public hearing before the Board of Supervisors at a regular meeting of the
Board falling within such period, at which time the Board shall hear any
objections to such accounting and report.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0110   Modification or Confirmation of Report.
   The Board of Supervisors, at a public hearing if one is requested, or at any
other regular meeting if no public hearing is requested, shall make any
modifications in the account and report as it deems necessary, after which, by
order or resolution, the account and report shall be confirmed.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0111   Special Assessment and Lien.
   The amounts of the cost for abating the public nuisance and violation from
the land, as confirmed, shall constitute a special assessment against that land
and a lien.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0112   Collection of Expense.
   A copy of the report as confirmed shall be turned over to the Auditor, who
shall enter the amount of the assessment against the parcel of land as it
appears on the current assessment roll. The Tax Collector shall include the
amount of the assessment on bills for taxes levied against the lots and parcels
or land. Thereafter the amount of the assessment shall be collected at the same
time and in the same manner as County taxes are collected, and be subject to
the same penalties. On land for which no property tax is due, the lien shall be
collected at the same time taxes on the land are collected, and in a similar
manner.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
§ 37.0113   Cancellation.
   All or any portion of any such special assessment, penalty, or cost entered
pursuant hereto, shall on order of the Board of Supervisors be cancelled by the
Auditor if uncollected, or, except in the case provided for in Subdivision (e)
hereof refunded by the County Treasurer if collected, if it or they were
entered, charged or paid:
   (a)   More than once;
   (b)   Through clerical error;
   (c)   Through the error or mistake of the Board of Supervisors or the Public
Officer in respect to any material fact;
   (d)   Illegally;
   (e)   On land acquired after the lien date by the State or by any county,
city, school district, or other political subdivision and because of this
public ownership not subject to sale for delinquent taxes.
(Ord. 1497, passed - -1969)
CHAPTER 2: (REPEALED BY ORD. 4367, PASSED - -2019)
DIVISION 8: (REPEALED BY ORD. 3105, PASSED - -1986)
DIVISION 9: VALIDITY OF TITLE 3
Section
   
39.0100   Validity of Title 3
§ 39.0100   Validity of Title 3.
   This Title and the various parts, divisions, chapters, sections and clauses
thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of
this Title shall not be affected thereby. The County Board of Supervisors
hereby declares that it would have passed this Title and each part thereof,
regardless of the fact that one or more parts hereof be declared
unconstitutional or invalid.
TITLE 4: BUSINESS AND SPECIAL LICENSES, REGULATIONS
Chapters
DIVISION 1: BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
   
1.   Fertilizer Sales
   
2.   (Repealed by 4284, passed - - 2015)
   
3.   Hog Ranches
   
4.   Private Patrol License
   
5.   Peddling and Soliciting and Hawking
   
6.   Soliciting Motor Repairs
   
7.   Soliciting on Trains
   
8.   Pool and Billiard Halls (Repealed by Ord. 4272, passed - -2015)
   
9.   (Repealed by Ord. 3726, passed - -1998)
   
10.   Theaters (Repealed by Ord. 4272, passed - -2015)
   
11.   (Repealed by Ord. 3484, passed - -1992)
   
12.   (Repealed by Ord. 3726, passed - -1998)
   
13.   Adult-Oriented Business Licenses (Repealed by Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
   
14.   Fortune-Telling (Repealed by Ord. 4272, passed - -2015)
   
15.   Temporary Special Event Permit (Repealed by Ord. 3654, passed - -1996)
   
16.   Automatic Telephonic Dialing Systems
   
17.   Bingo Games
   
18.   Taxicab Service
   
19.   Massage Clinics
   
20.   Massage Technicians
   
21.   Hotels and Motels
   
22.   Consumer Protection Business Permit
   
23.   Issuance of Still Photography Permits and Fees
   
24.   Issuance of Filming Permits and Fees
   
25.   Rental Dwelling Units
   
26.   Rental Dwelling Units-License Application Fee Waiver
   
27.   Adult Business Regulatory Permit
   
28.   Adult Business Performer License
   
29.   Adult Business Non-Performer License
   
30.   Commercial Activity at the Hall of Records Campus Prohibited
DIVISION 2: SPECIAL LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
   
1.   Carnivals
   
2.   Circulation of Papers
   
3.   Distress Sales
   
4.   Sale or Trade of Personal Property (Swap Meet)
   
5.   Cable Television Systems
   
6.   Airports and Helistops
DIVISION 3: GENERAL
   
1.   Administration
   
2.   Ampitheater Business License Tax
   
3.   Validity of Title 4
DIVISION 4: RESERVED
DIVISION 5: PERMIT REGULATIONS FOR EXPLOSIVES
   
1.   Definitions
   
2.   Prohibitions
   
3.   Permit
   
4.   General Provisions
DIVISION 6: SOLID WASTE HANDLING FRANCHISES
   
1.   Purposes and Required Authorizations
   
2.   Definitions
   
3.   Franchise
   
4.   Grantee Compensation
   
5.   Uniform Handling Service
   
6.   Reserved
   
7.   Reserved
   
8.   Grantee Reporting Requirements, Financial Information and Audit Rights
   
9.   Grantee Indemnification, Insurance and Bonding
   
10.   Franchise Administration, Enforcement and Remedies
   
11.   Grantee SB 1383 Organic Waste Collection Services Implementation
   
12.   Commercial Businesses SB 1383 Organic Waste Collection Services
Implementation
   
13.   Single-Family Generators SB 1383 Organic Waste Collection Services
Implementation
   
14.   SB 1383 Waivers For Generators
   
15.   Requirements for Facility Operators and Community Composting Operations
   
16.   Penalties For Violation
   
17.   Amendment
 
Editor's Note:
   Ordinance 4046, passed April 8, 2008, repealed and reenacted Title 4.
DIVISION 1: BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: FERTILIZER SALES
Section
   
41.0101   Certificate of Cubical Capacity.
   
41.0102   Construction or Transporting Vehicles.
   
41.0103   Application for Certificate of Cubical Capacity.
   
41.0104   Violations.
§ 41.0101   Certificate of Cubical Capacity.
   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the buying, selling,
transporting or delivering, as agent or principal, of bulk fertilizer for hire
or sale, within the County of San Bernardino shall first secure from the County
Sealer of Weights and Measures a certificate as to the cubic-foot capacity of
any vehicle, cart, wagon or other means of conveyance for hauling fertilizer.
(Ord. 969, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1007, passed - -1962)
§ 41.0102   Construction of Transporting Vehicles.
   Such vehicle, cart, wagon, or other means of conveyance, shall be
constructed in the following manner:
   (a)   All floor and side boards shall be securely permanently attached to
such vehicle, cart, wagon, or other means of conveyance.
   (b)   On the front left hand corner of the bed of such vehicle, cart, wagon
or other means of conveyance, there shall be permanently attached an iron or
steel metal strip running from the bottom or floor to the top of the top side
board or to the top of the top head board, which iron or steel metal strip
shall be no less than one inch in width and riveted to each and every separate
board or cross piece making up the body of such truck, vehicle, cart, wagon or
other means of conveyance and at the top of such iron or steel metal strip
there shall be a hole not less than one-fourth inch in diameter running through
said iron or steel metal strip, and also through the side board or head board
or panel to which said iron or steel metal strip is attached, which hole shall
be for the purpose of convenience of the County Sealer of Weights and Measures
in attaching a seal upon the granting of a certificate, as hereinafter
provided.
   (c)   On each side of the body of said vehicle, cart, wagon, or other means
of conveyance, commencing two inches from the top of said body there shall be
painted in printing, with a durable paint, in white letters not less than four
inches in height, the letters: “Cap. Cu. Ft.” and following said letters there
shall be also printed in white numerals not less than four inches in height,
and not less than one-half inch in width of stroke the cubic-foot capacity to
the nearest unit as determined by the County Sealer of Weights and Measures,
which shall conform to the certificate hereinafter provided.
   (d)   In the event the top side board is not in place or use, then the side
board in use at the time which is at the top shall be marked and subject to
Subdivision (b) and (c) hereof.
(Ord. 969, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1007, passed - -1962)
§ 41.0103   Application for Certificate of Cubical Capacity.
   Before any certificate of cubical capacity of vehicle shall be issued by the
County Sealer of Weights and Measures to any person, firm or corporation
hereinabove provided, an application shall be made therefor to said County
Sealer of Weights and Measures in writing which application shall provide:
   (a)   The name and residence address of applicant;
   (b)   The registered and legal owner of said vehicle, cart, wagon, or other
means of transportation;
   (c)   The place of business or said applicant;
   (d)   Whether such vehicle, cart, wagon or other means of conveyance is used
exclusively in buying, selling, transporting or delivering of fertilizer, and
if not, for what other commodities it is proposed to be used.
   Thereupon, the County Sealer of Weights and Measures shall make his or her
measurements of the body and capacity of said vehicle, cart, wagon or other
means of conveyance, and shall also inspect said body as to its permanent
construction before issuance of such certificate, and shall compute the
capacity load by cubic feet, and shall permanently seal said body at the place
provided for, as herein specified, and shall thereupon issue to said applicant
his certificate, which certificate shall designate the name, the residence and
business addresses of the person to whom such certificate shall have been
issued; the exact measurements of the body of such vehicle, cart, wagon, or
other means of conveyance, and the computation of the cubic feet to within the
nearest unit when fully loaded, which certificate shall conform in cubic feet
to the figure placed on the body thereof by said County Sealer of Weights and
Measures.
(Ord. 969, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1007, passed - -1962)
§ 41.0104   Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to buy, sell,
transport, or deliver, or otherwise engage in the dealing in bulk fertilizer,
and use in connection therewith, a vehicle, cart, wagon, or other means of
conveyance, without first having applied for and secured a certificate as to
its capacity, as herein provided, or use such vehicle, cart, wagon or other
means of conveyance, in the buying, selling, transporting, or delivering of
such fertilizer without having attached to the body thereof a seal by the
County Sealer of Weights and Measures specifying the capacity load, or to use
such vehicle, cart, wagon, or other means of conveyance in such manner without
having printed on the sides thereof the words: “Capacity,” or the letters:
“Cap. Cu. Ft.” and also the actual full cubic-foot capacity in the manner and
form as hereinabove provided, or to use said vehicle, cart, wagon, or other
means of conveyance in the buying, selling, transporting, or delivering of bulk
fertilizer without the certificate of the County Sealer of Weights and Measures
permanently attached to the inside of the cab thereof, in a conspicuous place.
(Ord. 969, passed - -1961; Am. Ord. 1007, passed - -1962)
CHAPTER 2: (REPEALED BY 4284, PASSED - -2015)
 
CHAPTER 3: HOG RANCHES
Section
   
41.0301   Definitions.
   
41.0302   Permit.
   
41.0303   Permit Application; Fee.
   
41.0304   Verification of Application, Investigation and Hearing Required.
   
41.0305   Findings of Board of Supervisors; Issuance of Permit.
   
41.0306   Fee Regulations; Expiration Date of Permits.
   
41.0307   Renewal of Permits.
   
41.0308   Application for Revision of Permit.
   
41.0309   Public Nuisance.
   
41.0310   Veterinarian Inspection.
   
41.0311   Exemptions to Application of This Chapter.
   
41.0312   Prohibited Areas to Establishment of Hog Ranches.
   
41.0313   Intent of Chapter.
   
41.0314   Persons Excluded from Obtaining a License as Described in §
41.0312.
   
41.0315   Violation.
   
41.0316   Penalty.
§ 41.0301   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases are defined
and shall be construed as having the following meaning:
   COMMERCIAL HOG RANCH. Any premises where more than 300 head of swine are
maintained, raised, fed or fattened, or where more than two head of swine are
maintained, raised, fed or fattened on garbage.
   GARBAGE. All animal or vegetable refuse or residue from kitchens, canneries,
bakeries, restaurants, lunch stands, distilleries, wineries, meat, fish, fruit
or vegetable markets, and other food handling places, and all household waste
or residue that shall result from the preparation or care for, or treatment of,
food stuffs intended to be used as food, or shall have resulted from the
preparation or handling of food for human consumption, or any decayed or
unsound meat, fish, fruit or vegetables.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0302   Permit.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in,
conduct, manage or carry on a commercial hog ranch, without first having
procured the permits required under this Chapter.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0303   Permit Application; Fee.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring or proposing to engage in the
commercial hog ranch business shall make written application to the Board of
Supervisors of San Bernardino County for a permit so to do. Each application
fee shall be $50.00 for hog ranches of 400 head or less and $75.00 for hog
ranches having more than 400 head; provided, however, that no permit shall be
granted for a commercial hog ranch for maintaining, raising, feeding or
fattening more than 750 head of swine on garbage within the area hereinafter
described in §
41.0312, except existing commercial hog ranches exceeding that figure. Each
application shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner or principal
officer of the property showing:
   (a)   The name and address of the owner of the property;
   (b)   The acreage of the property;
   (c)   The location of the property as recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder;
   (d)   The name and address of the proposed operator or operators of the
commercial hog ranch, and if a corporation, the names and addresses of the
directors thereof.
   Each application shall also be accompanied by an affidavit of the operator
of the commercial hog ranch, which affidavit shall set forth:
   (a)   The approximate maximum number of swine to be maintained, raised, fed
or fattened on said ranch;
   (b)   The type of feed to be used;
   (c)   The source or sources and estimated quantity or garbage and offal to
be fed daily, if such feed is to be used;
   (d)   Designation of the specific portion of the premises which will be used
in the operation of the commercial hog ranch;
   (e)   That the specific portions of the premises described therein, which
are to be used for the operation of the commercial hog ranch, are not within
two miles of any public school, public park, the boundaries of any municipality
in San Bernardino County or within one-half mile of any occupied dwelling house
not on said premises; or within 750 feet of any public highway, unless an
exception is granted by the Board upon proper application in cases of unusual
hardship.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0304   Verification of Application, Investigation and Hearing Required.
   Upon receipt of any application for the maintenance and operation of a
commercial hog ranch and the two affidavits required by this Chapter, the Board
of Supervisors shall cause said application, together with the two accompanying
affidavits, to be referred immediately to the County Health Department. The
applicant shall forthwith upon the request of the County Health Department, if
he or she has not previously done so, furnish to the said Health Department a
plot plan drawn to scale of the premises proposed to be occupied by said
commercial hog ranch, showing the location or the proposed location, the nature
and construction character of all buildings, structures, pens, food containers,
feeding devices, fences and other information required by the said Department.
The County Health Officer shall visit and inspect the site of the proposed
commercial hog ranch. The soil character and the final movements and drainage
of any effluents or waste from within the area shall be determined. If the
County Health Officer is satisfied that the maintenance and operation of a
commercial hog ranch as proposed in said application, affidavits and plot plan
would not be a menace to public health, safety and general welfare, or animal
health, or constitute a potential nuisance in the neighborhood, or constitute a
potential water pollution problem, he or she shall, by written report to the
Board of Supervisors, recommend that a permit be granted, while if he or she is
not so satisfied he or she shall recommend to the Board of Supervisors that a
permit not be granted.
   Upon receipt of the County Health Officer’s report and recommendation, the
Board shall then set a date for a public hearing thereon, which date shall not
be less than 15 days from the receipt of the report, and not less than ten days
prior to the date of said hearing the Board shall cause notice of said hearing
to be given in the community or district in which such commercial hog ranch is
proposed by causing to be published not less than one publication stating all
essential facts regarding the application and the date of hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the community or district in which the
proposed commercial hog ranch is to be located, and posting not less than two
signs headed by the words “Proposed Commercial Hog Ranch” in letters not less
than two inches in height along or upon and visible from the State or County
highway nearest the premises to which the application refers, specifying the
location of the proposed commercial hog ranch and the date of hearing upon the
permit application.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0305   Findings of Board of Supervisors; Issuance of Permit.
   Upon the date set for hearing or the date to which said hearing may have
been continued, the Board of Supervisors, after having afforded to all persons
interested an opportunity to be heard, shall review all findings and evidence
in the matter and if said Board of Supervisors is then satisfied that the
maintenance of a commercial hog ranch as proposed in said application would not
be a menace to public health, safety and the general welfare, or animal health,
or be a potential nuisance in the neighborhood, or constitute a potential water
pollution problem, said Board may, in the case of a commercial hog ranch where
garbage is not to be fed, issue a permit which may be revocable for cause; and
in the case of a commercial hog ranch where garbage is to be fed, the Board of
Supervisors may issue a construction permit for a period of 60 days, pending
the installation of feeding and other equipment. When equipment shall have been
installed within said 60 day period such fact shall be transmitted in writing
to the County Health Officer, who shall cause an inspection to be made of said
equipment and a general re-inspection of the premises. If such inspection shows
that satisfactory equipment conditions exist, the Health Officer shall so
report in writing to the Board of Supervisors and said Board shall then issue a
permit, which shall be revocable for cause. Violation of any provision of this
Chapter or the operation of a licensed premise in such a manner as to
constitute a nuisance, shall be and constitute sufficient cause for the
revocation of any permit issued hereunder. All permits shall specify the
maximum number of swine to be allowed thereunder. A permit granted under this
Chapter shall not be transferable.
   Special pasturing permits for pasturing hogs or swine on premises not
included in any commercial hog ranch, may be granted by the Board of
Supervisors for a period of not to exceed six months, during any calendar year,
provided no garbage shall be fed to such swine while being so pastured. The
application for such permit shall be filed with the Board of Supervisors
showing the name and address of the owner of the swine to be pastured; the
owner of the property upon which said swine are to be pastured; the number of
swine; and the location and acreage to be pastured. The fee for issuing a
special pasturing permit shall be $1.00.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0306   Fee Regulations; Expiration Date of Permits.
   The fees herein provided for and which must accompany the application shall
be and constitute the annual fee for the permit applied for and shall not be
pro-rated or refunded except in the single instance where an application for a
permit is not granted. All permits issued under and by virtue of the provisions
of this Chapter shall expire on December 30 of each year.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0307   Renewal of Permits.
   Upon the expiration of any permit on December 30 of each year, the permittee
may apply for a renewal thereof. Such application for renewal shall set forth
that the applicant is applying for a permit upon the same premises set forth in
the original application and shall designate the maximum number of hogs to be
maintained on the land at any one time during the ensuing permit year.
   Upon the filing of such application for renewal accompanied by the fee as
provided for in §
41.0303 hereof, the County Clerk shall refer the application to the County
Health Officer for his or her recommendation. The County Health Officer shall
make his or her recommendation as to whether or not the continued operation of
such ranch would be a menace or potential menace to public health, safety and
general welfare of the neighborhood.
   Upon receipt of a favorable recommendation from the County Health Officer,
the County Clerk shall forthwith issue a renewal of the annual permit to the
applicant. Upon receipt of an unfavorable report from the County Health
Officer, the Board of Supervisors shall set the matter for hearing within 30
days from the receipt of the report of the County Health Officer and the matter
of the renewal of such permit shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors.
The minutes of the Board of Supervisors shall constitute the notice of said
hearing.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0308   Application for Revision of Permit.
   An application for a change in the permit during the permit year to increase
the number of hogs to be maintained on such commercial hog ranch to a number in
excess of that which had been granted may be made by a permittee, such
application to be accompanied by the fee payable for the permit year for the
number of hogs in excess of the amount which had been granted, according to the
schedule as set forth in §
41.0303 herein. Upon receipt of an application to increase the number of hogs
to be maintained by the applicant on the premises, such permit may be granted
in the same manner and way as is provided for in the granting or denial of
renewals of permits in §
41.0307 hereof.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0309   Public Nuisance.
   Any buildings or structures erected, set up, built, moved or maintained and
any use of land or property established or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. Nothing herein contained shall grant or be construed to grant
a license or permit to maintain a public nuisance or a private nuisance.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0310   Veterinarian Inspection.
   Any and all commercial hog ranches existing and operating within the County
of San Bernardino under and pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall be
subject to inspection at any and all reasonable times by the County Public
Health Veterinarian. Said Veterinarian shall file with the Board of Supervisors
a written report on each commercial hog ranch in the County of San Bernardino.
Said report shall be filed quarterly, that is, during the months of January,
April, July and October of each calendar year, on standard forms approved by
the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0311   Exemptions to Application of This Chapter.
   The provisions of §
41.0302 of this Chapter stating distances from any public school, public park,
municipal corporation, occupied dwelling house, public highway, within which
distances a commercial hog ranch shall not be maintained or operated, shall not
apply to commercial hog ranches in existence in the County of San Bernardino
prior to the effective date of this Chapter.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0312   Prohibited Areas to Establishment of Hog Ranches.
   Three years after the effective date or this Chapter, no commercial hog
ranch shall keep, maintain, feed or fatten more than 750 garbage fed hogs
within the following area:
   Beginning at the intersection of the County boundary line between Los
Angeles and San Bernardino Counties with the north line of Section 31, T4N, P,
7W, S.B.B.&M.; thence east to the northeast corner of said Section 31; thence
south to the northwest corner of the south one-half of Section 32, same
township and range; thence east to the northeast corner of the south one-half
of said Section 32; thence south to the southwest corner of Section 33, same
township and range; thence east along township lines to the northeast corner of
Section 6, T3N, R3W; thence south along section lines to the southeast corner
of Section 7, same township and range; thence east along section lines to the
northeast corner of Section 13, same township and range; thence north along the
range line to the northwest corner of Section 18, T3N, R2W; thence east along
sections lines to the southwest corner of Section 9, same township and range;
thence north to the northwest corner of said Section 9; thence east along
sections lines to the northeast corner of Section 12, T3N, R2W; thence south
along the range line to the northwest corner of Section 7, T3N, R1W; thence
east along section lines to the northeast corner of Section 10; thence east
along section lines to the northeast corner of Section 17, T3N. R2L S.B.B.&M.;
thence south to the southeast corner of said Section 17; thence east to the
northeast corner of Section 21, same township and range; thence south to the
southeast corner of said Section 21; thence east along section lines to the
northeast corner of Section 26, same township and range; thence south to the
southeast corner of said Section 26; thence east to the northeast corner of
Section 36, same township and range; thence south along the range line to the
southeast corner of aforesaid T3N, R2E; thence east along the township line to
the northeast corner of Section 5, T2N, R3E; thence south to the southeast
corner of said Section 5; thence east to the northeast corner of Section 9,
same township and range; thence south along section lines to the northwest
corner of Section 27, same township and range; thence east to the northeast
corner of said Section 27; thence south along the section lines to the
southeast corner of Section 10, T1N, R3E; thence west along section lines to
the southwest corner of Section 9, same township and range; thence south along
section lines to the southeast corner of Section 20, same township and range;
thence west to the southwest corner of Section 20; thence south to the
southeast corner of Section 30, same township and range; thence west to the
southwest corner of said Section 30; thence South along the range line to the
southwest corner of aforesaid T1N, R3E; thence west along the township line to
the northeast corner of T1S, R2E; thence south along the range line to the
southeast corner of said township, and being on the County boundary line
between Riverside and San Bernardino Counties; thence following the boundary
line between Riverside and San Bernardino Counties and the boundary line
between Orange and San Bernardino Counties, and the boundary line between Los
Angeles and San Bernardino Counties to the intersection of said boundary line
between Los Angeles and San Bernardino Counties with the north line of Section
31, T4N, R7W, the point of beginning, excepting therefrom a portion of said
area described as follows: Beginning at the northwest corner of Section 12,
T2S, R7W, S.B.B.&M., County of San Bernardino, State of California, said corner
being at the intersection of Riverside Drive and Haven Avenue; thence southerly
along the west line of Section 12 and of Section 13, same township and range,
being also along Haven Avenue, to the southwest corner of the north one-half of
said Section 13, said corner being at the intersection of Haven Avenue and
Edison Avenue; thence easterly along the south line of the north one-half of
said Section 13 to the southeast corner thereof; thence northerly along the
range line between Ranges 7 and 6 West, being also along Adams Street to the
northeast corner of said Section 12; thence westerly along the north line of
said Section 12, being also along Riverside Drive, to the point of beginning.
Within the excepted area no more than 750 brooder sows shall be maintained at
any one time.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0313   Intent of Chapter.
   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to repeal, modify or
affect any of the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0314   Persons Excluded from Obtaining a License as Described in §
41.0312.
   No permit shall be granted for a commercial hog ranch at a location not
previously licensed under this Chapter, within the area described in §
41.0312 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0315   Violation.
   The failure of any person, firm or corporation to cease the use of land or
property, or to remove any buildings or structures which are maintained and
used in violation of the terms of this Chapter within 20 days after service of
notice upon him or her by registered mail addressed to the address of the owner
or operator as listed in the application, of a written demand from the Board of
Supervisors of San Bernardino County to cease such use of land or property and
to remove such buildings or structures, shall be deemed a violation of this
Chapter, and each day during which he or they or it shall fail to remove said
buildings or structures or cease to use said premises for any purpose herein
prohibited after the expiration of 20 days from the service of said demand
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
§ 41.0316   Penalty.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable by fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County
Jail for a term not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this
Chapter is committed, constituted or permitted by such person, firm or
corporation and shall be punishable as herein provided.
(Ord. 457, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 661, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 678, passed -
-1951; Am. Ord. 732, passed - -1954; Am. Ord. 978, passed - -1962; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969)
CHAPTER 4: PRIVATE PATROL LICENSE
Section
   
41.0401   Definitions.
   
41.0402   License Required.
   
41.0403   Registered Private Patroler.
   
41.0404   Licenses.
   
41.0405   Suspension or Revocation of License.
   
41.0406   Disciplinary Action—Grounds.
   
41.0407   Procedure.
   
41.0408   Pending Revocation or Suspension, Hearings—Effect on Licensee.
   
41.0409   Fictitious Name.
   
41.0410   Exceptions to the Application of This Chapter.
   
41.0411   Information to be Furnished to Sheriffs Office.
   
41.0412   Distinguishing Insignia.
   
41.0413   Promulgation of Rules and Regulations.
   
41.0414   Persons Excluded from Obtaining a License.
   
41.0415   Arms and Equipment.
   
41.0416   Conduct and Duty Performance.
§ 41.0401   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino.
   PERSON. Individuals, partnerships, corporations, and associations.
   PRIVATE PATROL SERVICE. Any person, as hereinabove defined, who furnishes
another person the service of patrolling private property within the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, for any purpose whatsoever. Any
exceptions to the above will be stated specifically in this Chapter.
   PRIVATE PATROLER. Any person who not only is employed by or is an agent of a
private patrol service, but who also performs the service hereinabove defined
in the definition of PRIVATE PATROL SERVICE, above, in this Section. Each
member of a copartnership licensed hereinunder to conduct a private patrol
service shall be deemed to be a PRIVATE PATROLER.
   SHERIFF. The Sheriff of the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0402   License Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a private patrol service in
the unincorporated area of the County unless a license therefor has been
secured in the manner provided for in this Chapter.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0403   Registered Private Patroler.
   It shall be unlawful for any private patrol service to employ or have
associated with it in the conduct of its business any private patroler who is
not currently registered pursuant to Business and Professions Code §§ 7589 et
seq.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0404   Licenses.
   (a)   Application. Application for private patrol license shall be made in
writing and filed with the Clerk of the Board. Each application shall be
accompanied by a $25.00 fee. Said fee shall be credited as part of the first
annual license fee.
   Each applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Clerk of the Board
that he or she possesses a valid license under the Private Investigator and
Adjuster Act of the State of California and has in force the bond required by
that Act. The application shall require the following information:
      (1)   The full name and business address of the applicant;
      (2)   The name under which the applicant intends to do business;
      (3)   A statement as to the general matter of the business in which the
applicant intends to engage;
      (4)   If the applicant is a partnership, the full name and residence of
each of its partners. If the applicant is a corporation, the full names and
residences of its president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, and its
manager;
      (5)   Two recent photographs of the applicant. Two classifiable sets of
his or her fingerprints;
      (6)   A verified statement of his or her experience qualifications.
   (b)   Duration and Transferability. All licenses issued pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter shall be for a term of one year from the date of
issuance thereof, and shall not be transferable.
   (c)   Renewals. Upon expiration of any license issued pursuant to this
Chapter, the holder thereof shall upon the payment of the required license fee
be entitled to a new license for the ensuing year without making a new
application therefor, provided the required license fee is paid before the
expiration of the license.
   (d)   Fees. License and modification of license fees shall be as set forth
in § 16.0205 of the County Code.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0405   Suspension or Revocation of License.
   The Board may, upon its own motion or upon the verified complaint in writing
of any person, investigate the actions of any licensee and may temporarily
suspend for a period not exceeding one year or revoke the license of any
licensee who commits any one or more of the acts or omissions constituting
grounds for disciplinary action under this Chapter.
   If said suspension or revocation is appealed pursuant to §
41.0407, the suspension or revocation shall take effect in accordance with the
provisions of §
41.0408.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0406   Disciplinary Action—Grounds.
   It shall be a ground for denial, suspension, revocation, or other
disciplinary action if any applicant, licensee, his or her agent, or employee,
or any person connected or associated with the applicant or licensee as
partner, director, officer, stockholder, general manager, or person who is
exercising managerial authority, or on behalf of the licensee, has:
   (a)   Knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent misstatement of a
fact in an application for a license; or
   (b)   Violated any provision of this Chapter or any statute relating to his
permitted activity, or illegally used, carried or possessed a dangerous weapon;
or
   (c)   Been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude; or
   (d)   Committed any unlawful, fraudulent or dangerous act while conducting
the permitted business; or
   (e)   Violated any rule or regulation adopted by the Board relating to the
licensee’s business; or
   (f)   Conducted the permitted business in a manner contrary to the peace,
health, safety, or general welfare of the public; or
   (g)   Impersonated, or permitted, aided or abetted an employee to
impersonate a law enforcement officer or any employee of the United States or
any State or political subdivision thereof; or
   (h)   Committed or permitted any employee to commit any act while the
license was expired which would be cause for the suspension or revocation of a
license or grounds for a denial of an application for a license; or
   (i)   Willfully failed or refused to render to a client services or to
report as agreed between the parties and for which compensation has been paid
or tendered in accordance with the agreement of the parties; or
   (j)   Committed assault, battery or kidnapping or used force without proper
justification; or
   (k)   Knowingly violated, or advised, encouraged or assisted the violation
of any court order or injunction in the course of the business as a licensee;
or
   (l)   Committed a violation of Penal Code § 148.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0407   Procedure.
   An applicant or licensee may, within ten days of service upon him or her of
a written notice of denial of license or suspension or revocation of his or her
license under §
41.0405, file a request for hearing to appeal the suspension, revocation or
denial with the Board. The request for hearing shall be in writing and filed by
or on behalf of the applicant or licensee. It need not be verified or follow
any particular form. Failure to file such a request for hearing shall
constitute a waiver of the applicant’s or licensee’s right to a hearing.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0408   Pending Revocation or Suspension, Hearings—Effect on Licensee.
   (a)   Continuing Business. Upon appeal of a suspension or revocation,
pursuant to §
41.0405, pending the final determination of such appeal, a licensee may
continue to engage in the business for the period of his or her license or
until the Board makes such final determination.
   (b)   Renewal—Application. A licensee may file an application for a renewal
of a license pursuant to §
41.0404(c) accompanied by the required fee during the pendency of a proceeding
to suspend or revoke his or her license. Such filing shall continue such
license in full force and effect until the entry of the final order of the
Board terminating the proceedings. Failure of the Board to revoke, suspend,
limit or condition the license shall have the effect of granting said renewal.
The application for renewal shall become a part of the pending proceeding and
be subject to all evidence which has been or has thereafter been presented. No
further notice to the applicant is required and the Board or hearing examiner
is authorized to consider and make findings upon such application in accordance
with this Chapter.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0409   Fictitious Name.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to sign a fictitious name or
fictitious address in connection with the application for a license or in
connection with operating the business.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0410   Exceptions to the Application of this Chapter.
   The licensing provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   A person performing any of the services listed in §
41.0401 hereof for a single owner whose property is not open to the public,
provided that such person’s entire compensation for a customary day’s work for
that owner is paid for by that owner or a patrol service providing guard
service performed on private property where the public is not admitted and does
not include mobile services using marked vehicles on public streets.
   (b)   Qualified members of the Sheriff’s Office of the County who are
performing services under a contract entered into by the Sheriff’s Office and
who are being compensated for such service by the County.
   (c)   Qualified members of any legally constituted law enforcement agency of
a political subdivision, while engaged in an activity required to be done in
carrying out the lawful duties of that agency, and for which service said
member will receive compensation from said political subdivision.
   (d)   Qualified members of the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Reserve while
such members are engaged in the lawful services provided for such Reserves,
upon order of the Sheriff.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0411   Information to be Furnished to Sheriff’s Office.
   Each licensed private patrol service shall maintain records with the
following information, and furnish them to the Sheriff’s Office upon request:
   (a)   The address of each parcel of property patrolled;
   (b)   The name of the owner or client requesting patrol service for said
parcel;
   (c)   The home or business address and telephone number of each said owner
or client as furnished to the private patrol service for use in an emergency;
   (d)   A schedule showing the frequency and the time at which various areas
were patrolled;
   (e)   A list, with descriptions and license numbers, of all vehicles owned
or used by the patrol service.
   Failure to maintain said information on file and to comply with the
requirements to furnish information shall be cause for the Board to suspend the
private patrol service license in the manner provided for in §
41.0405 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0412   Distinguishing Insignia.
   (a)   Availability of Official Insignia for Inspection. There is available
for public inspection at all reasonable office hours, at the Office of the
Sheriff in the Courthouse at San Bernardino, California, the official badge,
the official distinguishing shoulder “patches,” the official collar insignia
and the official hat insignia, which are prescribed by the Sheriff as being
regulation insignia and attire for qualified members of the Sheriff’s Office of
the County of San Bernardino. These bear, among other distinguishing features,
the words “County of San Bernardino,’ and they are hereby referred to, and by
this reference are deemed to be described as fully as though more completely
pictured herein.
   (b)   Purpose to Preserve Distinctiveness of Official Insignia. By this
provision, the Board declares it is its intention to preserve the
distinctiveness and the distinguishing features of the badge, the shoulder
patch, and the accompanying collar and hat insignia which have been prescribed
by said Sheriff as official for qualified members of the Sheriff’s Office and
its Reserve, to the end that the public will not be subjected to confusion or
deceit by persons who may seek to give the false impression that they are such
officers, when they are not, in fact, so qualified and appointed.
   (c)   Private Patroler Patch Insignia Requirement. Any badge or cap insignia
worn by a person who is a licensee, officer, director, partner, employee, or
private patroler of a licensee shall be of a design approved by the Director of
Consumer Affairs for the State of California and shall bear on its face a
distinctive word indicating the name of the licensee and an employee number by
which such person may be identified by the licensee. Every licensed private
patroler shall, while furnishing the service described in §
41.0401 hereof, or while en route to or from any place for the furnishing of
such service, wear upon the right breast part of his or her outer garment a
rectangular patch insignia not less than four and one-fourth inches long and
one inch high, bearing the words “Private Patrol” in legible letters at least
one-half inch high. Said identification may be either a cloth patch or a
plastic pin.
   (d)   A private patroler or private patrol licensee vehicle may bear an
insignia or other markings denoting private patrol services. These insignias or
markings will be limited to the following:
   If an insignia is used, it must not be in the form of a star or other
similar shape. The name of the private patrol company must be plainly worded on
the insignia. In addition, either across the face or below the insignia and in
equal view, a rectangular sign must be placed with the words “Private Patrol”
in contrasting color to the background and with letter size equal to or larger
than the largest letter on the insignia.
   A rectangular sign, without separate insignia, may be used. The words
“Private Patrol” must be included in any wording, be of contrasting color to
the background and to any other words used on the sign and must be equal to or
larger than the largest letters on the rectangular sign.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0413   Promulgation of Rules and Regulations.
   The Board may promulgate rules and regulations by resolution duly adopted,
not inconsistent with this Chapter, relating to private patrol services and
private patrolers.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0414   Persons Excluded from Obtaining a License.
   No license shall be issued to a corporation unless it shall have complied
with Corporation Code § 102, with respect to its filing of a certificate to do
business in the County nor to a copartnership or individual operating under a
fictitious firm name, until compliance has been had with Business and
Professions Code § 17910 to the identity of such firm.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0415   Arms and Equipment.
   The only arms and equipment authorized by the County for private patrolers
or private patrol licensees on duty are side arms with open holsters, night
sticks no longer than 24 inches in length, handcuffs and flashlight.
   Individual patrolmen and private patrol licensees may be authorized shotguns
while on duty only upon satisfactory completion of training in their use, as
approved by the Sheriff.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
§ 41.0416   Conduct and Duty Performance.
   (a)   Trespass. An operator, partner, agent or patroler shall not, either by
himself or herself or through the action of another, harass, annoy, or commit a
nuisance against, or injure the property of, or unnecessarily enter or
otherwise trespass upon the property of, any person whose property the patrol
service is not employed to protect.
   (b)   Reporting Violations. Upon receiving a report of any violation of any
State law or County Code, any operator, partner, agent or patroler shall not
perform official police or investigation activities, but shall immediately
report every violation of the law and every unlawful occurrence to the nearest
Sheriff’s Office or Deputy Sheriff’s patrol car. A full report of such
violation shall be made to the Sheriff without delay.
   (c)   Complaints. All complaints regarding the activities of operators,
partners, agents or patrolmen shall be investigated by the Sheriff. Reports of
such complaints shall be held in the Sheriff’s Office.
   (d)   Customer List. Each patrol service shall keep a list of all customers
and the patroler who is assigned to guard the premises of such customers each
day of the year. These lists must be kept on file for three years.
(Ord. 683, passed - -1951; Am. Ord. 892, passed - -1959; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1137, passed - -1964; Am. Ord. 1176, passed - -1964; Am. Ord.
1522, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2039, passed - -1975)
CHAPTER 5: PEDDLING AND SOLICITING AND HAWKING
Section
   
41.0501   Definitions.
   
41.0502   License Required and Enforcement Penalty.
   
41.0503   Application for License and Application Fee.
   
41.0504   Sheriff and EHS Recommendations; Issuance of License, License
Limitations.
   
41.0505   Payment of License Fees.
   
41.0506   Fixed Place of Business Exemption.
   
41.0507   Farm Product Exemption.
   
41.0508   Veterans’ Exemption to Payment of License Fee.
   
41.0509   Tax Exempt Organizations Exemption to Payment of License Fee.
   
41.0510   Enforcement.
   
41.0511   Revocation of License.
   
41.0512   Validity.
   
41.0513   Proof of License.
   
41.0514   Appeal Rights.
§ 41.0501   Definitions.
   For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words used in the present
tense include the future tense, plural words include the singular and singular
words include the plural. Words not specifically defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning. The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely
directory.
   BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The Board of Supervisors for the County of San
Bernardino.
   CLERK OF THE BOARD. The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT. The Land Use Services Department, Code Enforcement
Division of the County of San Bernardino.
   EHS. The Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health
Services of the County of San Bernardino.
   FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any location where goods, wares, merchandise or
services are offered to the public on a regular and continuous basis or where
goods or merchandise are regularly stored and/or maintained on the premises,
provided such fixed place of business has operated for a period of at least 60
days prior to the time peddling or soliciting is done, and provided the
operation of such business is not in violation of any applicable zoning,
building, public health or business license laws.
   HANDICAPPED. Any person who:
      (1)   Has a physical and/or mental impairment(s) which substantially
limits one or more of the person’s major life activities;
      (2)   Has a record of such impairment; or
      (3)   Is regarded as having such an impairment.
   HAWKING. The offering of merchandise on or adjacent to the streets by outcry
or by attracting the attention of persons by exposing goods in a public place
or by placards, labels, or signals.
   PEDDLING. The selling of merchandise which is transported from place to
place either by foot, wagon, cart, automobile, motor truck, ice cream cart, ice
cream wagon, or ice cream truck, or any other type of conveyance, in the course
of approaching prospective customers or selling merchandise or services from
door to door.
   SHERIFF. The Sheriff of the County of San Bernardino and/or any deputy or
representative appointed by him or her.
   SOLICITING. Asking or inviting persons to pay money in return for
merchandise or services to be delivered in the future or asking for a
charitable donation.
   TAX EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS. Any organization qualifying for tax-exempt status
under Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f,
23701g or 23701l.
(Ord. 378, passed --1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed --1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed -
-1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed --1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed --1990; Am. Ord.
3526, passed --1992; Am. Ord. 3730, passed --1998; Am. Ord. 4048, passed - -
2008)
§ 41.0502   License Required and Enforcement Penalty.
   (a)   Hawking Prohibited. Except as set forth in San Bernardino County Code
§
41.0508 (farm product exemption), and except as part of those licensed
activities specified in San Bernardino County Code §§ 85.16.030 et seq.
(Temporary Use Permits),
42.0101 et seq. (Carnivals), and
42.0401 et seq. (Swap Meets), it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
the business of hawking goods, wares, merchandise, fruits and vegetables or
prepared foods within the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino.
   (b)   Peddling or Soliciting License Required. Except as provided in §§
41.0506 and
41.0507, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
peddling goods, wares, merchandise, fruits and vegetables or prepared/
prepackaged foods, including, but not limited to: ice cream; or of soliciting
orders for goods or services; or of offering services for repair or improvement
of real property; or of soliciting donations for charity in an open public
place or door to door within the unincorporated area of the County of San
Bernardino without first having secured a peddling or soliciting license.
   (c)   Licenses shall be issued for a one-year period. Upon expiration of the
license, the former licensee may apply for a new license in the same manner as
a new applicant except that if the licensee applies for a new license before
the old license expires, the old license shall remain in force until the Clerk
of the Board either approves or denies the application for the new license.
Upon obtaining a license issued pursuant to this Section, the licensee shall
keep the information submitted on the application current by immediately
notifying the Clerk of the Board in writing of any change or occurrence which
affects or changes the status of the licensee.
(Ord. 378, passed --1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed --1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed -
-1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed --1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed --1990; Am. Ord.
3730, passed --1998; Am. Ord. 4048, passed - -2008)
§ 41.0503   Application for License and Application Fee.
   (a)   License Application. The applicant for any peddling or soliciting
license shall provide to the Clerk of the Board, on a form prepared by the
Clerk of the Board, the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of each person designated
by the applicant to peddle or solicit under the applicant’s license;
      (3)   The place and date of any conviction within the past five years for
a crime of moral turpitude, criminal battery, fraud, burglary or theft of the
applicant and, if applicant is a corporation, the corporation’s officers,
directors and majority stockholders and each person designated by the applicant
to peddle or solicit under his or her license;
      (4)   Such fingerprints and/or other documents which reasonably relate to
licensing under this Chapter as may be required by the Sheriff of the applicant
and, if applicant is a corporation, the corporation’s officers, directors and
majority stockholders and each person designated by the applicant to peddle or
solicit under his or her license;
      (5)   A copy of the State of California Sales Tax Permit (Revenue and
Taxation Code § 6066) for the applicant’s activities attached to the
application;
      (6)   A description of every type of merchandise or service that the
applicant proposes to peddle or solicit;
      (7)   If applicable, a description of the type, manufacturer and supplier
of any goods to be sold;
      (8)   A designation of the location or locations at which place(s) the
applicant proposes to peddle or solicit and the date(s) and time(s) of same;
      (9)   If applicant is claiming a license fee exemption for a tax exempt
organization, the application shall be accompanied by a copy of the
determination of the tax exempt status issued by the Franchise Tax Board of the
State of California showing the applicant is exempt under Revenue and Taxation
Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, or 23701l.
      (10)   A statement of whether the applicant and each person designated by
the applicant to peddle or solicit under his or her license has been convicted
of a crime that requires registration under California Penal Code § 290.
      (11)   If applicant is a corporation, a statement of whether each person
designated by the applicant to peddle or solicit under the license has been
convicted of a crime that requires registration under California Penal Code §
290.
   (b)   License Application Fee. The application fee set forth in the San
Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees, not including cost of fingerprinting,
shall accompany all written applications for licenses issued under this
Chapter. The payment shall be accepted only in cash, certified check or money
order.
(Ord. 378, passed --1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed --1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed -
-1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed --1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed --1990; Am. Ord.
3526, passed --1992; Am. Ord. 3730, passed --1998; Am. Ord. 4048, passed - -
2008)
§ 41.0504   Sheriff and EHS Recommendations; Issuance of License, License
Limitations.
   (a)   Investigation by Sheriff and EHS. Upon the filing of the application
required by §
41.0503, together with the application fee, the Clerk of the Board shall
transmit one copy to the appropriate Sheriff’s substation, and where required
for issuance of a food permit, one copy to the appropriate EHS office. The
applicant shall cooperate with the Sheriff and EHS in conducting their
investigation and shall if requested provide the Sheriff or EHS other documents
or materials which may be requested which reasonably relate to the course of
the Department’s investigation. The Sheriff and if required EHS shall report to
the Clerk of the Board in writing recommending approval or denial of the
license and stating the reasons therefor.
   (b)   Issuance of Licenses. The Clerk of the Board shall not order the
issuance of the license unless all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The applicant has submitted a correct and complete application form
both as to the applicant and, if applicant is a corporation, the corporation’s
officers, directors and majority stockholders and each person designated by the
applicant to peddle or solicit under his or her license;
      (2)   The applicant has provided fingerprints of the applicant, and if
applicant is a corporation, the corporation’s officers, directors, majority
stockholders and each person designated by the applicant to peddle or solicit
under his or her license;
      (3)   The applicant has paid the application fee and fingerprinting fee
to the Clerk of the Board and to the Sheriff;
      (4)   There is no known cloud upon the title to or ownership of the goods
to be sold by the applicant under the license;
      (5)   Neither the applicant nor, if applicant is a corporation, the
corporation’s officers, directors and majority stockholders and each person
designated by the applicant to peddle or solicit under his or her license has
within the past five years been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude,
criminal battery, fraud, burglary, or theft;
      (6)   The applicant and each person designated by the applicant to peddle
or solicit under his or her license has not been convicted of a crime that
requires registration under California Penal Code § 290;
      (7)   If applicant is a corporation, each person designated by the
applicant to peddle or solicit under the license has not been convicted of a
crime that requires registration under California Penal Code § 290;
      (8)   The time(s) and place(s) of the proposed license activities is in
accordance with regulations set forth in this Chapter;
      (9)   If required, the applicant has applied for and received a food
permit from EHS.
   (c)   Any person denied a license pursuant to this Chapter shall not peddle
or solicit within the unincorporated region of the County. Upon determination
of grounds to deny a license, the Clerk of the Board shall cause a “Notice of
Denial” to be mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to the notice
address designated by the applicant. An applicant whose license has been denied
may appeal the denial to the Board of Supervisors as provided in §
41.0514.
(Ord. 378, passed --1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed --1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed -
-1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed --1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed --1990; Am. Ord.
3526, passed --1992; Am. Ord. 3730, passed --1998; Am. Ord. 4048, passed - -
2008)
§ 41.0505   Payment of License Fees.
   Any person required by this Chapter to have a license shall, upon approval
of said license by the Clerk of the Board, pay a license fee in the sum set
forth in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees to the Clerk of the
Board and shall pay to the Clerk of the Board said license fee annually
thereafter on or before the anniversary date of the Clerk of the Board’s
approval.
(Ord. 378, passed --1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed --1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed -
-1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed --1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed --1990; Am. Ord.
3730, passed --1998; Am. Ord. 4048, passed - -2008)
§ 41.0506   Fixed Place of Business Exemption.
   Any person having a fixed place of business within the County of San
Bernardino shall not be required to obtain a peddling or soliciting license.
(Ord. 378, passed - -1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed
- -1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed - -1990; Am. Ord.
3730, passed - -1998)
§ 41.0507   Farm Product Exemption.
   No peddling or soliciting license shall be required of any farmers selling
farm products produced by them nor for the seasonal sales of Christmas trees or
Halloween pumpkins.
(Ord. 378, passed - -1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed
- -1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed - -1990; Am. Ord.
3730, passed - -1998)
§ 41.0508   Veterans’ Exemption to Payment of License Fee.
   No license fee shall be required for the issuance of a license to any person
who was honorably discharged or honorably relieved from United States military
service. A license for such a person shall be required under the provisions of
this Chapter, as in other cases, but no license fee shall be charged.
Application and fingerprinting fees shall be required for licenses issued under
this Section. The exemption within this Section shall not apply when the
merchandise involved includes spirituous, malt, vinous, or other intoxicating
liquor.
(Ord. 378, passed - -1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed
- -1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed - -1990; Am. Ord.
3730, passed - -1998)
§ 41.0509   Tax Exempt Organizations Exemption to Payment of License Fee.
   Whenever any person intends to peddle or solicit goods, wares, services or
merchandise for the purpose of raising funds or soliciting donations for a tax-
exempt organization, said applicant may apply to the Board of Supervisors for a
license to be issued without payment of the license fee. Payment of application
and fingerprinting fees shall be required for a license issued under this
Section. The exemption within this Section shall not apply when the merchandise
involved includes spirituous, malt, vinous, or other intoxicating liquor.
(Ord. 378, passed --1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed --1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed -
-1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed --1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed --1990; Am. Ord.
3730, passed --1998; Am. Ord. 4048, passed - -2008)
§ 41.0510   Enforcement.
   (a)   The provisions of the Chapter shall be enforced by officers and
authorized representatives of the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department,
by officers and authorized representatives of County Code Enforcement, or by
authorized representatives of the County Department of Public Health, Division
of Environmental Health Services (EHS), in accordance with §§ 11.0201 et seq.
(Violations and Citations) of
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code. Copies of
all licenses, once issued, shall be provided by the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors to the Sheriff, Code Enforcement and, if appropriate, to EHS. A
license issued pursuant to this Chapter will authorize the licensee to peddle
or solicit in the locations and during the time designated in his or her
application, but only when the peddling and soliciting does not interfere with
the free flow of vehicle traffic and does not obstruct pedestrian traffic.
There shall be no peddling or soliciting until the license is issued. Licensees
shall comply with all applicable State laws, including Business and Professions
Code §§ 17510 et seq. and Health and Safety Code provisions.
   (b)   In addition to any criminal action which may be taken, any authorized
officer may seize the goods, wares, merchandise, fruits and vegetables, or
prepared foods offered for sale contrary to §
41.0502(a) of this Chapter, as well as food equipment, defined as equipment
used to prepare or display food, and hold said seized items pending a hearing
before a County Hearing Officer, pursuant to §§
12.2700 et seq. of
Chapter 27 of Division 2 of Title 1 of this Code. Seller shall be personally
served by the authorized officer with a receipt, identifying the seized items,
and a notice of hearing, which shall have the date, time, and place (address)
of the hearing on the seized items. Said hearing must be held within 30 days
following the giving of notice of such seizure and hearing to the seller. If
the seller is unavailable or unknown, the Receipt and Notice of Hearing may be
posted at the location where the items were offered for sale.
   (c)   At the hearing, the County Hearing Officer shall determine whether the
seller was “hawking” as defined in §
41.0501 and as prohibited in §
41.0502(a). If, after the hearing, the County Hearing Officer determines, based
on the evidence presented, beyond a reasonable doubt that the seller was, in
fact, “hawking” as defined in §
41.0501 and as prohibited in §
41.0502(a), the seized items will be considered forfeited to the County, and
the authorized representatives of the County may destroy or otherwise dispose
of the seized items no sooner than the ninetieth day after the date the
decision of the County Hearing Officer is delivered or mailed to seller.
   (d)   If the items seized are perishable, the County may dispose of the
perishable items immediately. If the seller waives his or her right to a
hearing, then the nonperishable seized items will be considered forfeited to
the County and may be immediately destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the
County. If the seller or his or her agent does not appear for the hearing
provided for in this Section, the nonperishable seized items shall be deemed
abandoned, forfeited to the County, and may be immediately destroyed or
otherwise disposed of by the County. If the nonperishable seized items are
evidence in a criminal proceeding, they shall not be returned or destroyed
pending release by the appropriate authorities.
   (e)   Pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6, any action to review the
decision of the County Hearing Officer shall be commenced no later than the
ninetieth day after the date said decision is delivered or mailed to seller.
(Ord. 378, passed - -1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed
- -1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed - -1990; Am. Ord.
3730, passed - -1998)
§ 41.0511   Revocation of License.
   (a)   Grounds for Revocation. A license issued under this Chapter shall be
revoked on one or more of the following grounds:
      (1)   That the holder practiced fraud or deceit in being licensed under
this Chapter;
      (2)    That the holder or the holder's employee violated provisions of
this Chapter;
      (3)   That the holder, or any person designated by the holder to peddle
or solicit under the license, has been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of a crime involving moral turpitude, criminal battery, fraud,
burglary or theft within the past five years;
      (4)   That the license was issued in error;
      (5)   That the holder, or any person designated by the holder to peddle
or solicit under the license, has been convicted of a crime that requires
registration under California Penal Code § 290.
   (b)   Notice of Revocation. Upon determination of grounds to revoke a
license, the Clerk of the Board shall cause a “Notice of Revocation” to be
mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to the notice address designated
by the licensee. Any person whose license is revoked pursuant to this Chapter
shall not peddle or solicit within the unincorporated region of the County. A
licensee may appeal the revocation to the Board of Supervisors as provided in §
41.0514. A license shall remain revoked unless and until the Board of
Supervisors reinstates the license through the appeal process, or the person
applies for and is issued a new license.
(Ord. 378, passed --1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed --1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed -
-1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed --1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed --1990; Am. Ord.
3730, passed --1998; Am. Ord. 4048, passed - -2008)
§ 41.0512   Validity.
   If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this Chapter is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion of this Chapter.
(Ord. 378, passed - -1933; Am. Ord. 1007, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1823, passed
- -1973; Am. Ord. 2415, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 3385, passed - -1990; Am. Ord.
3730, passed - -1998)
§ 41.0513 Proof of License.
   (a)   Licensee and any person designated by licensee to peddle or solicit
under his or her license shall carry the license, or a copy thereof, at all
times while the business is being conducted under the license and shall display
the license to any person upon request.
   (b)   Licensee and any person designated by licensee to peddle or solicit
under his or her license shall carry a form of photo identification issued by a
federal, state or local governmental agency at all times while the business is
being conducted under the license in order for representatives of the County to
verify the existence of a business license.
(Ord. 4048, passed - -2008)
§ 41.0514 Appeal Rights.
   Any person denied a license under this Chapter, or any person whose license
has been revoked under this Chapter, may appeal the Clerk of the Board's
determination to the Board of Supervisors. Any such appeal must be in writing
and must be filed with the Clerk of the Board not more than 15 days following
the Clerk of the Board's deposit into the mails of the Notice of Denial or
Revocation pursuant to §§
41.0504(c) or
41.0511(b). The Board of Supervisors may hear appeals directly or in its sole
discretion, may appoint a hearing officer to hear any appeal and make a
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors pursuant to §§
12.2700, et seq., of the County Code. All decisions of the Board of Supervisors
shall be final as to any appeal presented to them.
(Ord. 4048, passed - -2008)
CHAPTER 6: SOLICITING MOTOR REPAIRS
Section
   
41.0601   Prohibition of the Business of Soliciting Motor Repairs.
   
41.0602   Prohibition of Soliciting Motor Repairs.
§ 41.0601   Prohibition of the Business of Soliciting Motor Repairs.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of soliciting motor vehicle repair, towing or other service work, or
offering to perform motor vehicle repair, towing or other service work, upon
the public roads or highways within the County of San Bernardino, outside of
municipal corporations, for which repair, towing or other service work a charge
is to be made, or is made, or a sum of money paid.
(Ord. 381, passed - -1933; Am. Ord. 445, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1112, passed - -1963)
§ 41.0602   Prohibition of Soliciting Motor Repairs.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit motor vehicle repair, towing,
or other service work, or offer to perform motor vehicle repair, towing or
other service work, upon the public roads or highways within the County of San
Bernardino, outside of municipal corporations, for which repair, towing or
other service work a charge is to be made, or is made, or a sum of money paid.
(Ord. 381, passed - -1933; Am. Ord. 445, passed - -1937; Am. Ord. 1007, passed
- -1962; Am. Ord. 1112, passed - -1963)
CHAPTER 7: SOLICITING ON TRAINS
Section
   
41.0701   Prohibition of Soliciting on Trains.
§ 41.0701   Prohibition of Soliciting on Trains.
   It is unlawful for any person to solicit patronage for or on behalf of any
person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of transporting or
transferring persons or property or baggage, or to solicit patronage for or on
behalf of any hotel, lodging house, apartment house, café, restaurant or
boarding house in or upon any railroad train or car within the limits of the
County of San Bernardino, outside of incorporated cities, without the written
consent of the owner of such railroad, train or car.
(Ord. 171, passed - -1915; Am. Ord. 1007, passed - -1962)
CHAPTER 8: POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS (REPEALED BY ORD. 4272, PASSED - -2015)
CHAPTER 9: (REPEALED BY ORD. 3726, PASSED - -1998)
CHAPTER 10: THEATERS (REPEALED BY ORD. 4272, PASSED - -2015)
CHAPTER 11: (REPEALED BY ORD. 3484, PASSED - -1992)
CHAPTER 12: (REPEALED BY ORD. 3726, PASSED - -1998)
CHAPTER 13: ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSES (REPEALED BY ORD. 4239, PASSED - -
2014)
CHAPTER 14: FORTUNE-TELLING (REPEALED BY ORD. 4272, PASSED - -2015)
CHAPTER 15: TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT (REPEALED BY ORD. 3654, PASSED - -
1996)
CHAPTER 16: AUTOMATIC TELEPHONIC DIALING SYSTEMS
Section
   
41.1601   Automatic Dialing into County Government Line Prohibited.
   
41.1602   Live Answering Service.
   
41.1603   Permit to Install; Requirements.
§ 41.1601   Automatic Dialing into County Government Line Prohibited.
   No person shall install, rise or cause to be used any telephonic device
which is activated electronically to automatically dial a telephone line of the
San Bernardino County Government, or special district with fire prevention and
fire-fighting powers.
(Ord. 1684, passed - -1971)
§ 41.1602   Live Answering Service.
   All automatic telephonic dialing systems, insofar as such systems are used
to transmit messages to San Bernardino County Government installations, under
the authority of the Board of Supervisors, shall dial to, and the message shall
be received by, a live answering service, such as a private alarm dispatch
center, or a telephone answering service, or a 24-hour answering facility.
(Ord. 1684, passed - -1971)
§ 41.1603   Permit to Install; Requirements.
   No person shall install, use or cause to be used any telephonic device which
is activated electronically to automatically dial a telephone within the
unincorporated part of County of San Bernardino without first obtaining a
permit from the San Bernardino County Sheriff to install and use such
telephonic device. The Sheriff shall review all requests for telephonic burglar
alarms and the Sheriff and the County Fire Warden, or the chief of any special
district the department involved, shall review all requests for telephonic fire
alarms. Before a permit may be issued, the following requirements shall be
first complied with:
   (a)   There shall be filed with the San Bernardino County Sheriff by the
current subscriber of the telephone which contains an automatic dialing device,
that party’s name, address, the telephone number and the location of the
telephone for which the application is filed;
   (b)   There shall be filed with the San Bernardino County Sheriff by the
current subscriber of the telephone which receives calls from an automatic
telephone dialing system that party’s name, address, the telephone number and
the location of such telephone.
(Ord. 1684, passed - -1971)
CHAPTER 17: BINGO GAMES
Section
   
41.1701   Legislative Authorization.
   
41.1702   Bingo Authorized.
   
41.1703   License Required.
   
41.1704   Qualified Applicants.
   
41.1705   Application Requirements.
   
41.1706   License Application; Verification. 
   
41.1707   Annual License.
   
41.1708   Conditions of Licensure.
   
41.1709   Responsibility of Licensed Organization.
   
41.1710   Cause for Denial of Application, Suspension or Revocation of License.
   
41.1711   Notice.
   
41.1712   Appeal Hearing.
   
41.1713   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
§ 41.1701   Legislative Authorization.
   This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the
California Constitution, as implemented by Penal Code §§ 326.4 and 326.5.
(Ord. 4240, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1702   Bingo Authorized.
   Bingo, including remote caller bingo, may be lawfully played in the County
pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code §§ 326.4 and 326.5, and this chapter,
and not otherwise.
(Ord. 4240, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1703   License Required.
   No bingo game, including a remote caller bingo game, may be conducted
without a current valid license issued by the responsible department pursuant
to this Chapter, and without compliance with other applicable State law. The
responsible department, for purposes of this chapter, is the Land Use Services
Department.
(Ord. 2110, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2193, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 4240,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1704   Qualified Applicants.
   The following organizations are qualified to apply to the responsible
department for a license to operate a bingo game, including a remote caller
bingo game, if the receipts of those games are used only for charitable
purposes:
   (a)   An organization exempt from the payment of the taxes imposed under the
Corporation Tax Law by §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g,
23701k, 23701l, or 23701w of the Revenue and Taxation Code;
   (b)   A mobilehome park association of a mobilehome park that is situated in
the County;
   (c)   Senior citizens organizations;
   (d)   Charitable organizations affiliated with a school district.
(Ord. 4240, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1705   Application Requirements.
   (a)   The application shall be in a form prescribed by the responsible
department and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable license fee in an amount
set forth in County Code § 16.0215C.
   (b)   The following documentation shall be attached to the application, as
applicable:
      (1)   A certificate issued by the Franchise Tax Board certifying that the
applicant is exempt from the payment of the taxes imposed under the Corporation
Tax Law pursuant to §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k,
23701l, or 23701w of the Revenue and Taxation Code. In lieu of a certificate
issued by the Franchise Tax Board, the responsible department may refer to the
Franchise Tax Board’s Internet Web site to verify that the applicant is exempt
from the payment of the taxes imposed under the Corporation Tax Law;
      (2)   Other evidence as the responsible department determines is
necessary to verify that the applicant is a duly organized mobilehome park
association of a mobilehome park situated in the County, or a senior citizens
organization, or a charitable organization affiliated with a school district.
   (c)   No person may use a fictitious name or fictitious address in
connection with the application.
   (d)   The Sheriff shall investigate the application. The Sheriff shall
determine if the granting of a license would be inimical to public health,
safety, and welfare, or would undermine the public trust that gambling
operations are free from criminal or dishonest elements. The Sheriff shall
report to the Clerk of the Board the findings of the investigation and a
recommendation as to whether the applicant should be issued a license.
(Ord. 2110, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2193, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 4240,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1706   License Application; Verification.
   The license shall not be issued until the responsible department has
verified the facts stated in the application and determined that the applicant
is qualified.
(Ord. 4240, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1707   Annual License.
   A license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be valid for a period of one
year beginning from the date of issuance. At the end of the year the license
shall automatically expire. A new license shall only be issued after the filing
of a new application, payment of the license fee, and compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter. The fact that a license has been issued to an
applicant creates no vested right on the part of the licensee to continue to
offer bingo for play. The Board of Supervisors expressly reserves the right to
amend or repeal this Chapter at any time. If this Chapter is repealed, all
licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall cease to be effective for any
purpose on the effective date of the repealing action.
(Ord. 4240, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1708   Conditions of Licensure.
   (a)   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter for any bingo shall be
subject to the conditions contained in Penal Code § 326.5, and each licensee
shall comply with the requirements of those provisions.
   (b)   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
following additional conditions:
      (1)   For purposes of this Chapter, the term "profit" shall not include
one complimentary meal to be consumed on the premises at which a bingo game,
including remote caller bingo games, is being conducted by any volunteer
helping to staff the bingo game then being played. A volunteer may have no more
than one complimentary meal per five hour period, and must consume the meal on
the same date that his or her services are being rendered.
      (2)   Records required by this Chapter and law shall be retained for a
period of five years. The licensed organization's books and records shall be
available for inspection by the Sheriff upon reasonable notice.
      (3)   Each licensed organization shall display the license issued
pursuant to this Chapter in a conspicuous place in the premises where the bingo
games, including remote caller bingo games, are conducted.
      (4)   A license issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be issued to a
specific qualified organization and for a specific location and shall not be
transferred from one organization to another organization or utilized for
purposes of playing bingo at another location.
      (5)   Bingo games shall not be conducted by any licensed organization on
more than ten days in each calendar month, nor for more than five hours in any
24-hour period, nor between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 4240, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1709   Responsibility of Licensed Organization.
   The licensed organization is responsible for ensuring that the conditions of
this Chapter and Penal Code §§ 326.4 and 326.5 are complied with by the
organization and its officers, members, employees, volunteers, staff, and
agents.
(Ord. 4240, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1710   Cause for Denial of Application, Suspension or Revocation of
License.
   The following shall be cause for the denial of an application for a license
or the suspension or revocation of a license:
   (a)   A violation of any requirement of this Chapter.
   (b)   A violation of any requirement of Penal Code §§ 326.4 or 326.5, or
California Code of Regulations, Title 4, Division 18, Chapter 8 (§§ 12480 et
seq.).
   (c)   The knowingly making of any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement
of a material fact in an application for a license, or in any report, record,
or other information submitted to the responsible department, the Sheriff, or
any other public official or officer.
   (d)   A determination that granting the license would be inimical to public
health, safety, and welfare, or would undermine the public trust that gambling
operations are free from criminal or dishonest elements.
   (e)   The conducting of a bingo game, including a remote caller bingo game,
in a manner that is inimical to public health, safety, and welfare, or that
undermines the public trust that gambling operations are free from criminal or
dishonest elements.
   (f)   The failure of an organization to comply with zoning, building and
safety, environmental health, or fire regulations, or other Federal, State, or
local laws or regulations.
(Ord. 2110, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2193, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 4240,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1711   Notice.
   If the responsible department denies an application, then the responsible
department shall provide the applicant with written notice of the denial and
the applicant's right to request an appeal hearing before a hearing officer
pursuant to §
41.1712. If the responsible department finds cause for the suspension or
revocation of a license, then the responsible department shall provide the
licensed organization with written notice of the responsible department’s
intent to suspend or revoke the license and the organization’s right to request
an appeal hearing before a hearing officer pursuant to §
41.1712.
(Ord. 4240, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1712   Appeal Hearing.
   (a)   A request for an appeal hearing must be submitted to the responsible
department, in writing, within ten working days of the service of the
responsible department’s notice issued pursuant to §
41.1711. The request shall contain the address to which the notice of hearing
shall be sent. If no request for an appeal hearing is submitted, or no request
for an appeal is submitted in compliance with this Subdivision, then the
appellant will be deemed to have waived its right to an appeal hearing and the
decision of the responsible department shall be final.
   (b)   The responsible department shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the
appeal. The responsible department shall provide written notice of the appeal
hearing to the appellant. Upon the written request of the appellant and if good
cause is found, the responsible department or the hearing officer may postpone
the hearing date. If the appellant does not confirm in advance that it will
appear at the appeal hearing or if the appellant fails to appear at the appeal
hearing, the appellant will be deemed to have waived its right to an appeal
hearing and the decision of the responsible department shall be final.
   (c)   The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules
relating to evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort
of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct
of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory
rule which might make improper the admission of the evidence over objection in
civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or
explaining other evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a
finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The
rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that they are otherwise
required by statute to be recognized at the hearing. Irrelevant and unduly
repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
   (d)   The responsible department shall present its case first. The appellant
shall present thereafter. Each party may be represented by counsel, examine and
cross-examine witnesses, and, after completion of both parties’ presentation of
evidence, make a closing oral argument or, if requested by the hearing officer,
submit a written post-hearing brief. The decision of the hearing officer shall
be final.
(Ord. 4240, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1713   Violations, Remedies, and Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision
of this Chapter. Enforcement, violations, remedies, and penalties shall be
governed by Chapter 2 (§§ 11.0201 et seq.) of Division 1 of Title 1 of the
County Code, and other applicable law.
   (b)   Pursuant to Penal Code § 326.5(b) and (c), it is a misdemeanor for any
person to receive or pay a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game
authorized by Section 19 of Article IV of the California Constitution and this
Chapter. A violation of Penal Code § 326.5(b) shall be punishable by a fine not
to exceed $10,000.00, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the
County. A violation of any provision of Penal Code § 326.5, other than
subdivision (b), shall be a misdemeanor. The County may bring an action to
enjoin a violation of Penal Code § 326.5.
(Ord. 2110, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2193, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 4240,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4380, passed - -2020)
CHAPTER 18: TAXICAB SERVICE
Section
   
41.1801   Definitions.
   
41.1802   Permit Required for Taxicab Service.
   
41.1803   Application for Taxicab Service Permit.
   
41.1804   Issuance of Taxicab Service Permit.
   
41.1805   Grounds for Denial or Revocation of Taxicab Service Permit.
   
41.1806   Taxicab Service Permit Fees.
   
41.1807   Taxicab Driver’s Permit.
   
41.1808   Application for a Taxicab Driver’s Permit.
   
41.1809   Grounds for Denial or Revocation of Taxicab Driver’s Permit.
   
41.1810   Issuance of Taxicab Driver’s Permit.
   
41.1811   Appeal Procedures.
   
41.1812   Revocation of Permits.
   
41.1813   Exemptions.
   
41.1814   Time for Compliance by Existing Taxicab Services and Taxicab Drivers.
   
41.1815   Penalty.
§ 41.1801   Definitions.
   As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth below:
   DRIVER. Any person driving a taxicab either as owner or under the direction,
employment control, or service of the owner as herein defined.
   OWNER. Every person having control, whether by outright ownership, lease or
otherwise of any taxicabs for hire.
   PERSON. Includes both singular and plural, and shall mean and include any
individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or society, exclusive
of public agencies.
   TAXICAB. Any vehicle which is used to provide taxicab service as defined in
this Chapter.
   TAXICAB SERVICE. Any public passenger transportation service available for
hire on call or demand over the public streets of the unincorporated area of
San Bernardino County where the service is not provided over a defined route
but between such points and over such routes as may be directed by the
passenger(s) or person(s) hiring the same, and irrespective of whether the
operations extend beyond the area of the unincorporated portion of San
Bernardino County.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1802   Permit Required for Taxicab Service.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating
or causing to be operated any taxicab service within the unincorporated area of
San Bernardino County, without having a County permit to do so under the
provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1803   Application for Taxicab Service Permit.
   (a)   Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate a taxicab service
under this Chapter shall submit a written application to the San Bernardino
County Sheriff's Department. The application forms will be provided by the
Sheriff's Department. Applications shall be signed under penalty of perjury and
shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name, residence address, telephone number and email address of the
applicant;
      (2)   Business name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (3)   Number of vehicles to be operated under the permit;
      (4)   The make, type, year, manufacturer, and passenger seating of the
vehicles to be used by the applicant;
      (5)   The proposed color scheme, insignia or other distinguishable
characteristics of the taxicab to be used, including the type of illuminated
sign to be mounted on the top of the vehicle and legend thereon;
      (6)   Evidence of public liability insurance of not less than $100,000.00
for each person killed or injured and not less than $300,000.00 for injury or
death of any two or more persons in any one accident, and for damages to
property of at least $50,000.00 from any one accident;
      (7)   Legal and registered ownership of the vehicles to be used by the
applicant;
      (8)   Prior experience of the applicant in the taxicab business including
any prior denial, revocation or suspension by any public agency of any taxicab
service or taxicab driving permit, license or certificate;
      (9)   All felony convictions of the applicant and of all persons having
an ownership interest in the proposed taxicab service.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1804   Issuance of Taxicab Service Permit.
   Upon the furnishing of all the information required by §
41.1803 and payment of the required fee under this Chapter, the Sheriff's
Department shall issue the applicant a taxicab service permit if the applicant
is in compliance with this Chapter and there are no grounds for denial of the
permit under the provisions of this Chapter. Any applicant denied a permit
shall be given written notice of the reasons for the denial.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1805   Grounds for Denial or Revocation of Taxicab Service Permit.
   (a)   Taxicab service permits shall be denied or revoked on the following
grounds:
      (1)   Failure to have or maintain insurance as required by this Chapter;
      (2)   Failure to maintain vehicles in good and safe order and in
compliance with all laws;
      (3)   False statements made on an application submitted under this
Chapter;
      (4)   Failure to pay any fees as required under this Chapter or the
County Code Fee Schedule;
      (5)   Repeated and persistent violations by the permittee or the permit
holder's drivers of the traffic laws of the County and State;
      (6)   Employing of a driver who does not have a valid taxicab driver's
permit under the requirements of this Chapter;
      (7)   Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter by the permit
holder.
(Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1806   Taxicab Service Permit Fees.
   Every person engaging in or carrying on the business of taxicab service
shall pay an annual permit fee as set forth in San Bernardino County Code §§
16.0226(w)(4) and (5). Required fees shall be paid at the time an application
for a permit is submitted under this Chapter.
   Every permit issued under this Chapter shall terminate at the expiration of
one year from the date of its issuance unless revoked prior to said
termination. Any renewal of a permit issued under this Chapter shall be
pursuant to the same requirements, procedures, provisions and regulations set
forth in this Chapter for an original permit. A person holding a taxicab
service permit may not drive a taxicab without also possessing a taxicab
driver's permit. Permits issued under this Chapter may not be transferred to
any other person.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1807   Taxicab Driver’s Permit.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab in the unincorporated
area of San Bernardino County without having a taxicab driver's permit to do so
under the provisions of this Chapter. Every person engaging in the activity of
driving a taxicab shall pay an annual permit fee as set forth in San Bernardino
County Code §§
16.0226(w)(4) and (5).
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1808   Application for a Taxicab Driver’s Permit.
   (a)   Any person desiring to obtain a taxicab driver's permit shall submit a
written application to the Sheriff's Department. The applicant shall provide
requested information on application forms supplied by the Sheriff's Department
regarding the following:
      (1)   Pertinent personal data and proof of possession of a valid Class 3
driver's license issued by the State of California;
      (2)   Physical condition;
      (3)   Traffic record for three years prior to application;
      (4)   All criminal convictions of the applicant;
      (5)   Experience in driving motor vehicles, taxis and other vehicles for
hire;
      (6)   The name and address of the taxicab service by whom the applicant
will be employed.
   Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and photographed by the Sheriff's
Department and a criminal records check shall be conducted on the applicant.
The applicant will be required to pay the Sheriff Department's established fees
for such services in addition to the taxicab driver's permit fee. A driver
obtaining a permit renewal need not be fingerprinted and photographed if the
Sheriff's Department determines that such is not necessary for proper
administration of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1809   Grounds for Denial or Revocation of Taxicab Driver’s Permit.
   (a)   Taxicab driver's permits shall be denied or revoked on the following
grounds:
      (1)   The person does not possess a valid Class 3 driver's license issued
by the State of California;
      (2)   The person is less than 18 years of age;
      (3)   The person is required to register pursuant to Penal Code § 290;
      (4)   The person has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude,
soliciting for prostitution, narcotics or dangerous drugs, unless a period of
not less than three years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date
of release from confinement for such offense, whichever is later;
      (5)   The person has been convicted for driving a taxicab recklessly
within the preceding two years;
      (6)   Repeated and persistent violations of the traffic laws of the
County and State;
      (7)   Driving any taxicab the driver knew or should have known was not in
good order and repair;
      (8)   False statements made on an application submitted under this
Chapter;
      (9)   Operating a taxicab while under the influence of alcoholic
beverages, narcotics or other habit-forming drugs;
      (10)   Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1810   Issuance of Taxicab Driver’s Permit.
   If the Sheriff's Department finds that the applicant is duly qualified, of
good moral character, in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and
there are no grounds for denial, the Sheriff's Department shall issue a taxicab
driver's permit to the applicant. Any applicant denied a permit shall be given
written notice of the reasons for the denial. Permits shall remain the property
of San Bernardino County and are not transferable to any other driver. A permit
shall be surrendered to the Sheriff's Department by the driver upon such driver
ceasing to engage in the activity of a taxicab driver. The taxicab driver's
permit shall set forth the driver's name and working address. The permit shall
bear the driver's picture and shall be displayed while the driver is operating
the taxicab so as to at all times be easily visible in the passenger's
compartment of the taxicab.
   Upon payment of all required fees, submittal of the required application and
completion of fingerprinting and photographing, the Sheriff's Department shall
issue a temporary taxicab driver's permit which shall be valid for up to 60
days if the applicant certifies under penalty of perjury that there are no
grounds for denying the applicant a permit under the provisions of §
41.1809. A temporary taxicab driver's permit may be terminated by the Sheriff's
Department at any time by written notification of termination to the holder of
a temporary driver's permit if the Sheriff Department's investigation
determines that grounds for denial of a permit exists under §
41.1809. Any temporary permit shall automatically terminate upon the issuance
of a regular taxicab driver's permit to the applicant after the completion of
the Sheriff Department's investigation.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1811   Appeal Procedures.
   Any person denied a permit pursuant to this Chapter may appeal the decision
in accordance with County Code §
12.2709.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1812   Revocation of Permits.
   No permit issued under this Chapter shall be revoked until notice is
provided and a hearing to determine whether there are grounds for revocation
shall have been held in accordance with County Code §§
12.2711 through
12.2730.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1813   Exemptions.
   This Chapter shall not apply to public transportation service being
performed pursuant to a contract with San Bernardino County or any other public
entity in this State. A taxicab service shall not be required to obtain a
permit under this Chapter for taxicab service in the unincorporated area of the
County when said taxicab service is located within a city of the County and its
vehicles are based within said city and the taxicab service has a license,
certificate or permit from said city to engage in taxicab service under a city
ordinance which regulates taxicab service.
   A driver operating a taxicab for a service that is exempt from a permit
under the preceding sentence shall not be required to have a driver's permit
under this Chapter if such driver has a valid permit or license from a city
within San Bernardino County which requires an individual taxicab driver's
permit or license.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1814   Time for Compliance by Existing Taxicab Services and Taxicab
Drivers.
   Any taxicab service or taxicab driver performing service on the effective
date of this Chapter shall have 60 days from the effective date of this Chapter
to obtain permits required hereunder.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
§ 41.1815   Penalty.
   Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is a misdemeanor and
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the County
Jail not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 2718, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 4487, passed - -2025)
CHAPTER 19: MASSAGE CLINICS
Section
   
41.1901   Definitions.
   
41.1902   License Exemptions.
   
41.1903   License Required.
   
41.1904   Application.
   
41.1905   Investigation by the Sheriff’s Department.
   
41.1906   Investigation by the Planning Division.
   
41.1907   Investigation by the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District.
   
41.1908   Investigation by the Division of Environmental Health Services.
   
41.1909   Approval or Denial of License.
   
41.1910   License Fee.
   
41.1911   Licenses Non-Transferable.
   
41.1912   Duration and Renewal of License.
   
41.1913   Notice of Massage Technicians Utilized by Clinic.
   
41.1914   Hours of Operation and Other Restrictions.
   
41.1915   Additional Requirements.
   
41.1916   Inspection and Enforcement.
   
41.1917   Abatement.
   
41.1918   Suspension or Revocation of License.
   
41.1919   Other Remedies.
   
41.1920   Appeal Rights.
§ 41.1901   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words used in the
present tense includes the future tense, plural words include the singular, and
singular words include the plural. Words not specifically defined shall be
given their common and ordinary meanings. The word “shall” as used herein is
mandatory and not merely directory.
   CUSTOMER. All clients, customers, patrons, guests, and any other persons who
receive a massage.
   MASSAGE. The scientific manipulation of the soft tissues, or as otherwise
defined in the Message Therapy Act (Chapter 10.5 (commencing with § 4600) of
Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code) or defined by the California
Massage Therapy Council.
   MASSAGE CLINIC. Any massage clinic, parlor, business, or any room, place or
institution where massage is given or administered by a massage technician.
   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN. Any person who gives, performs, or administers to
another person a massage.
   NOTICE ADDRESS. The address designated by the applicant or licensee for the
mailing of all notices, legal mail, and other written communications from the
County to the applicant or licensee.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other
form of business organization or group.
   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL. Any school or institution of learning which teaches the
theory, ethics, practice, profession, and work of massage, which school or
institution has been approved by the California Massage Therapy Council.
   RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT. For purposes of this Chapter the Land Use Services
Department of the County of San Bernardino.
   SOLE PROVIDER. A massage clinic where the owner owns 100 percent of the
clinic, and is the only person who provides massage services for compensation
for that clinic pursuant to a valid and active certificate issued in accordance
with Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code. If the
definition of sole provider changes in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the
Business and Professions Code, then the new definition applies in this Chapter.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3556,
passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1902   License Exemptions.
   This Chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals, and no
massage clinic license shall be required of such persons, while engaged in the
performance of the duties of their respective professions:
   (a)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical
therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in
the State of California, and persons working at the place of business and under
the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or
physical therapist;
   (b)   Nurses who are registered as such under the laws of the State of
California;
   (c)   Barbers, beauticians and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under
the laws of the State of California;
   (d)   Athletic trainers;
   (e)   Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their profession in
the State or California.
   (f)   Massage clinics or massage technicians that are sole providers.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3556, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1903   License Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a massage clinic
within the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino without having
an unexpired license issued under this Chapter.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381,
passed - -2020)
§ 41.1904   Application.
   (a)   Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage clinic or
renew an existing massage clinic license shall complete an application form
provided by the responsible department of the County. Said application shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following items:
      (1)   The full name of, and any aliases currently or previously used by,
the applicant, all officers and directors of the massage clinic, each owner of
the massage clinic who has at least a ten percent share of the ownership, and,
if the massage clinic is a partnership, all partners.
      (2)   The work and residential addresses of the applicant, all officers
and directors of the massage clinic, each owner of the massage clinic who has
at least a ten percent share of the ownership, and, if the massage clinic is a
partnership, all partners.
      (3)   A description of the height, weight, color of eyes, and hair of the
applicant, all officers and directors of the massage clinic, each owner of the
massage clinic who has at least a ten percent share of the ownership, and, if
the massage clinic is a partnership, all partners. The responsible department
or the responsible department’s designee shall photograph each of the above-
described persons.
      (4)   A certified birth certificate, immigration papers, passport, or
current California driver’s license evidencing the fact the applicant is not
less than 18 years of age.
      (5)   A description of the business, occupation, or employment of the
applicant, all officers and directors of the massage clinic, each owner of the
massage clinic who has at least a ten percent share of the ownership, and, if
the massage clinic is a partnership, all partners. If the applicant is a
corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in
its articles of incorporation and a copy of the articles of incorporation must
be attached to the application.
      (6)   The address of each location where the licensed activities will be
conducted.
      (7)   The name, home address, number of the state certificate or the
County massage technician license, and address of the location worked, of each
massage technician to be employed or used by the massage clinic.
      (8)   A description of any massage clinic licenses or permits previously
issued by the County or any other public agency to the applicant, all officers
and directors of the massage clinic, each owner of the massage clinic who has
at least a ten percent share of the ownership, and, if the massage clinic is a
partnership, all partners, and a statement as to whether or not any such
license or permit was ever suspended or revoked.
      (9)   A statement of whether the applicant or any officer or director of
the massage clinic, any owner of the massage clinic who has at least a ten
percent share of the ownership, and, if the massage clinic is a partnership,
any partner: is, or has been, required to register under the Sex Offender
Registration Act (Chapter 5.5 (commencing with § 290) Title 9 of Part 1 of the
Penal Code); is, or has been, required to register as a sex offender in another
state; was convicted of any sexually related crime; was convicted of Penal Code
§ 647, excluding subdivisions (c), (e), and (f); or was convicted of any of the
offenses described in Government Code § 51032.
      (10)   The address to which all notices and communications from the
County to the applicant or licensee shall be directed. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant or licensee to immediately inform the
responsible department in writing, of any change to the applicant’s or
licensee’s notice address.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381,
passed - -2020)
§ 41.1905   Investigation by the Sheriff’s Department.
   (a)   An applicant shall submit the completed application to the Sheriff’s
Department and pay any applicable Sheriff’s Department fee.
   (b)   The Sheriff’s Department shall conduct an investigation of the
application. The Sheriff’s Department shall review the information set forth in
the application. The Sheriff’s Department is authorized to request additional
documents and information that are reasonably related to the licensing
requirements of this Chapter from the applicant, any officer or director of the
massage clinic, any owner of the massage clinic who has at least a ten percent
share of the ownership, and, if the massage clinic is a partnership, any
partner. The Sheriff's Department shall require the applicant to be
fingerprinted and to pay the fingerprinting fee in effect.
   (c)   The Sheriff's Department shall promptly report to the responsible
department whether the application meets all of the requirements of this
Chapter and all other applicable laws.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381,
passed - -2020)
§ 41.1906   Investigation by the Planning Division.
   An applicant shall submit the completed application to the Planning Division
of the Land Use Services Department for a review of whether the massage clinic
complies with the development standards of
Chapter 84.13 of the Development Code. The applicant shall pay any applicable
Land Use Services Department fee. The Planning Division shall promptly report
to the responsible department whether the application meets all of the
requirements of
Chapter 84.13 of the County Development Code. An application for the renewal of
a massage clinic license shall not require a review under this Section.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3758,
passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1907   Investigation by the San Bernardino County Fire Protection
District..
   An applicant shall submit the completed application to the San Bernardino
County Fire Protection District (Fire Protection District) for inspection. The
applicant shall pay any applicable Fire Protection District fee. The Fire
Protection District shall promptly report to the responsible department whether
the application meets all of the applicable requirements of the inspection. An
application for the renewal of a massage clinic license shall not require an
on-site inspection pursuant to this Section.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3758,
passed - - 1999; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1908   Investigation by the Division of Environmental Health Services.
   (a)   An applicant shall submit the completed application to the Division of
Environmental Health Services Division (DEHS) of the Department of Public
Health and pay any applicable DEHS fee. DEHS or the designee of DEHS shall
promptly conduct an investigation to determine compliance with the requirements
of this Section. An application for the renewal of a massage clinic license
shall not require an on-site inspection pursuant to this Section.
   (b)   Requirements.
      (1)   A readable exterior sign shall be posted at the main entrance
identifying the establishment as a massage clinic, provided, however, that all
such signs shall otherwise comply with the sign requirements of the County
Code.
      (2)   No sign or advertisement on the premises of the massage clinic may
contain explicit language or graphic pictures describing sexual acts or
genitalia.
      (3)   Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform
Building Code as adopted by the County. In addition, at least one unobstructed
artificial light, white in color, of not less than 60 watts shall be provided
and used at all times in each enclosed room or booth while massage services are
being rendered.
      (4)   Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the
Uniform Building Code as adopted by the County.
      (5)   Instruments used for massage shall be disinfected prior to each use
by a reasonable method approved by DEHS. Where such instruments for massage are
employed, adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection shall be available
during all hours of operation.
      (6)   Hot and cold running water shall be provided.
      (7)   Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean towels
and linen. After use, towels and linen shall be removed from the room or booth
and stored in a clean container until laundered.
      (8)   Dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons.
      (9)   All walls, ceilings, floors, steam and vapor rooms, and all other
physical facilities for the massage clinic shall be kept in good repair,
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (10)   Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for patrons
receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be
permitted.
      (11)   Licensees under this Chapter shall insure that all persons working
on the massage clinic premises, including all massage technicians, shall be
dressed in clothing made of an opaque material, and at a minimum, shall not
expose the technician’s undergarments or bare midriff, or any specified
anatomical areas, and shall comply with the following requirements, as
applicable:
         (A)   All garments covering the upper torso (e.g., shirts or dresses)
shall have sleeves not less than two inches in length, measuring from the top
of the shoulder, and necklines no lower than two inches below the clavicle.
         (B)   Hems of dresses, skirts, smocks, or other similar garments shall
not be more than two inches above the top of the knee.
         (C)   Cuffs or hems of shorts, culottes, pants or other similar
garments shall not be more than six inches above the top of the knee.
      (12)   Any massage clinic license issued by the County shall be displayed
in a conspicuous place within view of customers.
      (13)   Each massage technician providing services at the clinic must
display his or her County issued massage technician license or State issued
certificate wherever he or she provides massages for compensation.
      (14)   The premises to be used for massage services shall at all times
comply with applicable laws.
   (c)   DEHS shall promptly report to the responsible department whether the
application meets all of the requirements of this Section. Upon determining
that the massage clinic complies with the requirements of this section, DEHS
shall issue to the massage clinic a health permit. Said health permit shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of the massage clinic. DEHS shall
conduct annual compliance checks.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3758,
passed - -1999; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1909   Approval or Denial of License.
   (a)   After completion of the investigation by the Sheriff’s Department, the
Planning Division, the Fire Protection District, and DEHS, the applicant shall
submit the completed application to the responsible department for further
processing. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee to the
responsible department as specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the County Code relating to fees.
   (b)   An application for a massage clinic license shall be denied for any of
the following reasons:
      (1)   The applicant failed the inspection by the Sheriff’s Department.
      (2)   The applicant failed the inspection by the Planning Division.
      (3)   The applicant failed the inspection by the Fire Protection
District.
      (4)   The applicant failed the inspection by DEHS.
      (5)   The applicant, any officer or director of the massage clinic, any
owner of the massage clinic who has at least a ten percent share of the
ownership, or, if the massage clinic is a partnership, any partner has within
ten years immediately preceding the date of the application been convicted of
any of the offenses set forth in §
41.1904(a)(9) or has been required to register as a sex offender as set forth
in §
41.1904(a)(9).
      (6)   The applicant, any officer or director of the massage clinic, any
owner of the massage clinic who has at least a ten percent share of the
ownership, or, if the massage clinic is a partnership, any partner has had a
massage clinic license or massage technician license revoked or suspended for
cause within the five year period immediately preceding the date of the
application.
      (7)   The application is incomplete.
      (8)   The applicant has knowingly misstated facts or falsified
information on the application.
      (9)   The applicant has failed to comply with any of the requirements of
this Chapter.
      (10)   The applicant has conducted a business requiring a massage clinic
or massage technician license in the unincorporated portion of the County
without such a license within the five years immediately preceding the date of
the application.
      (11)   The premises used or to be used for massage services fails to
comply with applicable laws, including, but not limited to building, fire,
electrical, plumbing and/or State and local health and safety codes and
regulations.
   (c)   If the responsible department denies an application, the responsible
department shall cause a “notice of denial” to be mailed by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the notice address designated by the applicant.
   (d)   If the responsible department approves an application, the responsible
department shall issue a massage clinic license to be mailed by first class
mail, postage prepaid, to the notice address designated by the applicant.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3556, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3579,
passed - -1994; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1910   License Fee.
   Every holder of a license issued under this Chapter shall pay a license fee
as specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 relating to fees in addition to all other
fees required under this Chapter.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381,
passed - -2020)
§ 41.1911   Licenses Non-Transferable.
   All licenses issued under this Chapter are non-transferable both as to
location, and as to the person holding the license.
(Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1912   Duration and Renewal of License.
   (a)   Each license issued under this Chapter shall terminate at the
expiration of two years from the date of its issuance unless revoked prior to
said termination pursuant to §
41.1918.
   (b)   No application for the renewal of a license shall be accepted earlier
than 90 days prior to expiration of the license. Any renewal of a license
issued under this Chapter shall be subject to the same procedures and
requirements of this Chapter.
   (c)   If a renewal application is filed during the pendency of a proceeding
to suspend or revoke the license, the County is authorized to consider and make
findings from such proceeding upon such application in accordance with this
Chapter.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3603, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1913   Notice of Massage Technicians Utilized by Clinic.
   (a)   Licensees under this Chapter shall not permit anyone not holding a
valid unexpired massage technician’s license issued by the County or a
certificate issued pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Business and
Professions Code to perform massages in the licensed massage clinic.
   (b)   Licensees under this Chapter must notify the responsible department,
in writing, of the name, license or certificate number, date of hire, and
location of work, of each massage technician employed or otherwise utilized by
the massage clinic. The written notice must be provided within five days of the
massage clinic hiring or utilizing the services of a massage technician,
whichever is first. Notification must be provided of the termination of the
services of each massage technician within five days of the termination.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381,
passed - -2020)
§ 41.1914   Hours of Operation and Other Restrictions.
   No massage clinic shall be open or conduct business between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Massage clinics shall not sell or serve food or beverages
to any patrons on the premises of the massage clinic.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381,
passed - -2020)
§ 41.1915   Additional Requirements.
   (a)   A massage technician, whether or not certified pursuant to the Massage
Therapy Act (Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code
(commencing with § 4600)), shall not engage in any behavior or do anything that
violates or that is otherwise contrary to the requirements of the Massage
Therapy Act or that would constitute a ground for the denial or revocation of a
certificate issued pursuant to the Massage Therapy Act or that would constitute
a ground for the discipline of a holder of a certificate issued pursuant to the
Massage Therapy Act. The responsible department may suspend or revoke a license
issued pursuant to this Chapter or the conduct of individuals providing massage
for compensation on the business premises that violate the above-identified
chapter of the Massage Therapy Act, including but not limited to a violation of
subdivision (b) of § 647 of the Penal Code or any other offense described in
paragraph (11) of subdivision (a) of § 4609 of the Business and Professions
Code.
   (b)   No massage services may be provided without first draping the customer
in accordance with the standards of the California Massage Therapy Council.
Draping must cover the genitalia and female breasts.
   (c)   No sign or advertisement on the premises of the massage clinic may
contain explicit language or graphic pictures describing sexual acts or
genitalia.
   (d)   No sign or advertisement on any print advertisement, any video, or on
the internet may contain explicit language or graphic pictures describing
sexual acts or genitalia.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3556,
passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1916   Inspection and Enforcement.
   Officers of the Sheriff’s Department, the Code Enforcement Division of the
Land Use Services Department, the Fire Protection District, and DEHS, and any
other authorized officer of the County shall have the right to enter any
massage clinic during regular business hours to make reasonable inspection to
ascertain whether the requirements of this Chapter are being met, provided that
such officers shall not interfere with the reasonable and normal business
operations of the clinic.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381,
passed - -2020)
§ 41.1917   Abatement.
   Any massage clinic operated or maintained in a manner contrary to the
requirements of this Chapter is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public
nuisance. The District Attorney or County Counsel may, in addition to, or in
lieu of any other administrative, civil, or criminal proceedings, commence an
administrative or civil action for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment of
such massage clinic operation in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381,
passed - -2020)
§ 41.1918   Suspension or Revocation of License.
   (a)   A license issued under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked on any
of the grounds set forth in §
41.1909 or as otherwise provided in this Chapter.
   (b)   Upon a determination that one or more grounds to suspend or revoke a
license exists, the responsible department shall cause a “notice of suspension”
or “notice of revocation” to be mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to
the notice address designated by the licensee.
   (c)   If a license issued under this Chapter is revoked, there shall be a
six-month waiting period before:
      (1)   The holder of the revoked license may apply for a new license under
this Chapter.
      (2)   Any person may apply for a license under this Chapter where such
license relates to the massage clinic that had its license revoked, regardless
of the current location of the massage clinic and the identity of the
applicant.
      (3)   Any person may apply for a license under this Chapter where such
license relates to massage clinic operations located in the same place as the
massage clinic that had its license revoked.
   (d)   Following suspension or revocation, officers of the Sheriff’s
Department, the Code Enforcement Division of the Land Use Services Department,
the Fire Protection District, DEHS, or any other authorized officer of the
County may post a notice of revocation or suspension on the premises stating
the reasons for the revocation or suspension and directing that the premises be
closed and/or locked, thereby prohibiting any public access.
   (e)   It is unlawful for any person to conduct the business of a massage
clinic after a license issued under this Chapter has been suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3579, passed - -1994; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
§ 41.1919   Other Remedies.
   In addition to any other enforcement or remedial action authorized by this
Chapter, violation of any of the requirements of this Chapter may result in the
institution of a criminal action, a civil action, and/or an administrative
action as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the County Code.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381,
passed - -2020)
§ 41.1920   Appeal Rights.
   Any person whose application for a license or the renewal of a license under
this Chapter is denied, or whose license issued under this Chapter is suspended
or revoked, may appeal such action. The request for appeal must be in writing
and filed with the responsible department not more than 15 calendar days
following the responsible department’s deposit into the mails (first class,
postage prepaid) of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation. A hearing
officer shall conduct the appeal hearing pursuant to County Code §§
12.2700 through
12.2725, except that notwithstanding §§
12.2700 et seq., the hearing officer’s decision shall be final and no further
administrative appeal is available.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3579, passed - -1994; Am. Ord. 4115,
passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4381, passed - -2020)
CHAPTER 20: MASSAGE TECHNICIANS
Section
   
41.2001   Definitions.
   
41.2002   License Requirements.
   
41.2003   License Exemptions.
   
41.2004   Application Form and Content.
   
41.2005   Investigation by Sheriff.
   
41.2006   Physical Examinations.
   
41.2007   Massage License Examination.
   
41.2008   License Fee.
   
41.2009   Grounds for Denial of License.
   
41.2010   License Denial.
   
41.2011   Licenses Non-Transferable.
   
41.2012   Display of License.
   
41.2013   Duration and Renewal of License.
   
41.2014   Prohibited Conduct.
   
41.2015   Revocation of License.
   
41.2016   Validity.
   
41.2017   Additional Remedies.
   
41.2018   Appeal Rights.
§ 41.2001   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, plural words include the singular, and
singular words include the plural. Words not specifically defined shall be
given their common and ordinary meanings. The word “shall” as used herein is
mandatory and not merely directory.
   BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County.
   CLERK. The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino.
   CUSTOMER. All clients, customers, patrons, guests, and any other persons who
receive a massage.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The County of San Bernardino Health Officer, or any person
duly authorized to act on his or her behalf.
   MASSAGE. The scientific manipulation of the soft tissues, or as otherwise
defined in Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code or
defined by the California Massage Therapy Council.
   MASSAGE CLINIC. Any massage clinic, parlor, business, or any room, place, or
institution where massage is given or administered by a massage technician.
   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN. Any person who gives, performs, or administers to
another person a massage.
   NOTICE ADDRESS. The address designated by the applicant or licensee for the
mailing of all notices, legal mail, and other written communications from the
County to the applicant or licensee.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other
form of business organization or group.
   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL. Any school or institution of learning which teaches the
theory, ethics, practice, profession, and work of massage, which school or
institution has been approved by the California Massage Therapy Council.
   SHERIFF. The Sheriff of the County of San Bernardino and/or his or her
deputies.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following human anatomical areas:
genitals, pubic regions, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areolae.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. All of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical
areas;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral
copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation; or
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in (1) through (3) above.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3556,
passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 3908, passed - -2004; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014)
§ 41.2002   License Requirements.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to practice, engage in, or carry
on the business or activities of a massage technician within the unincorporated
area of the County without having either an unexpired license issued pursuant
to this Chapter or an unexpired massage therapist certificate or an unexpired
massage practitioner certificate issued pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of Division 2
of the Business and Professions Code (§§ 4600 et seq.).
   (b)   Notwithstanding Subdivision (a) or any other provision of this
Chapter, the Clerk of the Board shall not accept applications to issue any new
licenses or renewals of licenses under this chapter on or after January 1,
2015. An application for purposes of Subdivision (b) means an application that
has fully complied with all of the requirements of §
41.2004, and which has already been reviewed and approved by the Sheriff’s
Department pursuant to §
41.2005.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to practice, engage in, or carry
on the business or activities of a massage technician within the unincorporated
area of the County without being employed and working at a massage clinic that
holds a valid license issued pursuant to
Chapter 19 of Division 1 of Title 4 of the County Code (commencing at §
41.1901), or without complying with all regulations and requirements of
Chapter 20. A license to perform services as a massage technician does not
authorize the operation of a massage clinic.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014)
§ 41.2003   License Exemptions.
   This Chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals, and no
massage technician license shall be required of such persons, while engaged in
the performance of the duties of their respective professions:
   (a)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical
therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in
the State of California, and persons working at the place of business under the
supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or
physical therapist;
   (b)   Nurses who are registered as such under the laws of the State of
California;
   (c)   Barbers, beauticians and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under
the laws of the State of California, in accordance with the limitations of
their licenses;
   (d)   Athletic trainers;
   (e)   Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their profession in
the State of California;
   (f)   Persons who hold an unexpired massage practitioner certificate issued
pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code (§§
4600 et seq.).
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3556, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014)
§ 41.2004   Application Form and Content.
   (a)   Required Information. Any person desiring to obtain a massage
technician license or renew an existing massage technician license shall make a
written application to the Clerk of the Board on a written form to be provided
by the Clerk of the Board, who shall promptly refer all complete applications
to the Sheriff for investigation. Said application shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to the following items:
      (1)   Name. The applicant’s full name and any aliases heretofore used or
currently used and current mailing address and residence address;
      (2)   Addresses. All previous residential addresses of the applicant
within the five years immediately preceding submission of the application;
      (3)   Physical Description. Height, weight, color of eyes and hair of
applicant. The Clerk of the Board or the Clerk of Board’s designee shall
photograph the applicant.
      (4)   Proof of Age. A certified birth certificate, immigration papers,
passport, or current California driver’s license evidencing the fact the
applicant is no less than 18 years of age;
      (5)   Prior Licenses. A statement of licensee’s prior experience in
performing massage or any procedure described in §
41.2001(e), including a statement of whether such person has had an application
for a massage technician or massage clinic license denied, or has had a massage
technician or massage clinic license, and whether any such license has been
revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and a statement setting forth all
massage business history or occupation;
      (6)   Criminal Convictions. A statement of whether the applicant has been
convicted of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under
Penal Code § 290, or conduct which is in violation of the provisions of Penal
Code §§ 266i, 315, 316, 318 or 647(b), or any felony involving the sale of a
controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code §§ 11054 through
11058, or has been convicted in another state of an offense, which, if
committed or attempted in this State would have been punishable as one or more
of the offenses enumerated in this section, or was convicted of one or more
other offenses as may be described under Government Code § 51032;
      (7)   Diploma. A diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized
school, together with a certified transcript or record establishing that the
applicant attended a resident course of study of no less than 200 hours in
theory, ethics, practice and profession and work of massage, and setting forth
the beginning and ending date of the applicant’s course of study. In lieu of
the above, the applicant may: (a) submit a certificate from a recognized school
in the State of California stating the applicant has completed a resident
course of study in massage in another state and has passed the examination
required of a graduate from the recognized school in the State of California;
or (b) the Clerk of the Board shall waive this requirement upon the applicant’s
passage of both written and practical tests as required under §
41.2007;
      (8)   Notice Address. The address to which all notices and communications
from the County to the applicant or licensee shall be directed. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant or licensee to immediately inform the Clerk of
the Board, in writing, of any changes of the applicant’s or licensee’s notice
address.
   (b)   Application Fee. Each application for a massage technician license
shall be accompanied by nonrefundable investigative fee as specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 relating to fees.
   (c)   Incomplete Applications. The Clerk of the Board shall promptly reject
any incomplete application which does not meet all requirements of this
Section, and upon request of the applicant, shall notify the applicant in
writing, by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the address supplied to the
Clerk by the applicant, of the deficiencies in the application.
   (d)   Filing for Renewal. No application for renewal of the license shall be
accepted earlier than 90 days prior to expiration of the license.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014)
§ 41.2005   Investigation by Sheriff.
   (a)   Review of Application. The Sheriff shall conduct a reasonable
investigation of the matters set forth in the application. The Sheriff shall
review the information submitted to the Clerk of the Board and shall review any
other documents or materials which are requested by the Sheriff in the course
of investigation and which reasonably relate to the licensing requirements of
this chapter. The Sheriff shall require the applicant to be fingerprinted and
to pay whatever fingerprinting fee is then in effect.
   (b)   Report on Investigation Results. The Sheriff shall promptly report to
the Clerk of the Board whether the application and the other documents and
materials submitted by the applicant meet all requirements of this Chapter and
all other applicable laws.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014)
§ 41.2006   Physical Examinations.
   All applicants for new massage technician licenses and renewals of existing
massage technician licenses, within 30 days following the submission of an
application, shall obtain a statement from the County Health Officer stating
that the applicant within the 30 days immediately prior thereto, has been
examined by the Department of Public Health and found to be free of infectious
or communicable disease as determined by the County Health Officer. Such
examination shall include those medical tests reasonably related to the license
sought, and required by the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall require
payment of a fee consistent with the fee schedule for the Department of Public
Health to cover the cost of the examination, laboratory services, and
counseling.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014)
§ 41.2007   Massage License Examination.
   All applicants for a new massage technician license and renewals of expired
licenses shall comply with the following requirements. These requirements do
not apply if application for renewal is made prior to the license’s expiration
date:
   (a)   Notification of Examination Date. If the Sheriff reports to the Clerk
of the Board that a massage technician application and accompanying documents
meet the requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable laws, the Clerk
of the Board shall notify the applicant of the next regularly scheduled massage
examination date, and the time and place such examination is to be held. The
Clerk of the Board will additionally schedule the applicant to take the massage
examination on the next regularly scheduled testing date.
   (b)   Preparation of Examinations. The Health Officer shall prepare and
submit to the Clerk of the Board an examination to be administered to all
massage technician applicants. Said examination shall consist of two parts. The
first part of the examination shall consist of a written test of the
applicant’s knowledge of the theory, ethics, and practice of massage relative
to aspects of human anatomy, and requirements of the County Code pertaining to
massage technician licenses. The second part of the examination shall consist
of a practical demonstration of the applicant’s ability to administer or
perform massage, to be administered before an individual selected by the Health
Officer, such person possessing such credentials and being knowledgeable of the
theory, ethics, practice, profession, and work of massage and capable of
impartially assessing the applicant's practical ability to administer or
perform massage. Standards for assessing an applicant’s abilities to administer
or perform massage, knowledge, and professional ethics, shall be based upon
accepted standards of the American Massage Therapy Association and/or the
Associated Professional Massage Therapists and Allied Health Practitioners.
Each applicant will be considered to have passed the massage examination by
answering 70 percent of the written examination questions correctly, and by
successfully demonstrating each of the techniques required in the practical
examination.
   (c)   Scheduling of Examinations. The Clerk of the Board shall schedule a
massage examination to be held no less frequently than once every January,
April, July, and October. Results of massage examinations shall be made
available to applicants within 14 days following the date upon which the
examination is concluded.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014)
§ 41.2008   License Fee.
   Every person applying for a license under this chapter shall pay a license
fee as specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 relating to fees in addition to all other
fees required under this Chapter.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014)
§ 41.2009   Grounds for Denial of License.
   An application for a massage technician license shall be denied upon the
determination of any one of the following:
   (a)   Prior Criminal Convictions. The applicant, has within ten years
immediately preceding the date of the application been convicted of any of the
offenses set forth in §
41.2004(a)(6) or has, within the same time frame been convicted of any offense
in another State which, if committed or attempted in this State, would have
been punishable as one or more offenses enumerated under this Section, or is
required to register under Penal Code § 290.
   (b)   Revocation of Prior Licenses. The applicant has had a massage clinic
license or massage technician license revoked for cause within the five-year
period immediately preceding the date of the application.
   (c)   Misstated Facts. The applicant has knowingly misstated facts or
falsified information on the application.
   (d)   Inadequate Application. The application has failed to comply with the
requirements of §
41.2004.
   (e)   Failure to Pass Tests. The applicant has failed either the physical
examination required pursuant to §
41.2006 or the massage examination required pursuant to §
41.2007.
   (f)   Operating Without a License. The applicant has conducted, within the
five years immediately preceding the application, a business requiring a
massage clinic or massage technician license in the unincorporated portion of
the County without such a license having been issued by the County.
   (g)   Prohibited Conduct. The applicant has been found to have engaged in
prohibited conduct in violation of §§
41.1917(a) and/or
41.2014(a).
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3556, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014)
§ 41.2010   License Denial.
   An applicant whose license has been denied may appeal the denial pursuant to
§
41.2018 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014)
§ 41.2011   Licenses Non-Transferable.
   All licenses issued under this Chapter are non-transferable.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014)
§ 41.2012   Display of License.
   Any person to whom a massage technician license is granted, or to whom a
massage therapist certificate or a massage practitioner certificate is granted
pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code,
shall display said license or certificate prominently in a conspicuous place,
capable of being viewed by customers, at every location where the massage
activities are performed or conducted.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3556,
passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014)
§ 41.2013   Duration and Renewal of License.
   (a)   Term. Each license issued under this Chapter shall terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless revoked prior to
said termination pursuant to §
41.2015.
   (b)   Any renewal of a license issued under this Chapter shall be pursuant
to the same requirements, procedures, provisions and regulations set forth in
§§
41.2004,
41.2005,
41.2006, and
41.2007 (if applicable) of this Chapter.
   (c)   Renewal During Pendency of License Revocation Proceedings. In the
event a renewal application is filed during the pendency of a proceeding to
revoke the license, the license shall continue in full force and effect until
entry of the final order terminating revocation proceedings. The application
for renewal shall become a part of the pending proceeding, and be subject to
all evidence which has been or may thereafter be presented. Failure of the
County to revoke the license shall have the effect of granting renewal of the
license. No further notice to the applicant is required, and the County is
authorized to consider and make findings upon such application in accordance
with this Chapter.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3603, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014)
§ 41.2014   Prohibited Conduct.
   (a)   Prohibited Conduct. No licensee may engage in any specified sexual
activity upon the premises of the massage clinic. No licensee may expose
specified anatomical areas in the presence of any patron, customer, or guest.
In the course of administering a massage, no licensee may make intentional
physical contact with specified anatomical areas of any customer, patron, or
guest. Notwithstanding §
11.0201, violation of §
41.2014 shall not constitute a misdemeanor or an infraction, but such violation
shall be grounds for revocation of a massage technician license.
   (b)   Draping. No licensee may administer any form of massage or come into
any form of physical contact with a customer who is either fully or partially
undressed, without first draping the customer’s specified anatomical areas, if
such areas would otherwise be exposed, in accordance with the accepted
standards of the California Massage Therapy Council.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014)
§ 41.2015   Revocation of License.
   (a)   Grounds for Revocation. A license issued under this chapter shall be
revoked on one or more of the following grounds:
      (1)   Fraud or Deceit. That the licensee practiced fraud or deceit in
obtaining a license under this Chapter;
      (2)   Violation of Chapter. That the licensee violated a provision or
provisions of this Chapter;
      (3)   Criminal Conviction. That the licensee has been convicted in a
court of competent jurisdiction of any offenses described in §
41.2004(a)(6);
      (4)   Employment at Unlicensed Clinic. That the licensee has knowingly
been employed, allowed, or permitted to perform massage at an unlicensed
massage clinic;
      (5)   Error. That the license was issued in error;
      (6)   Civil Penalties. That the licensee has been assessed with three or
more civil penalties during any six month period;
      (7)   Prohibited Conduct. A licensee has been found to have engaged in
prohibited conduct in violation of §
41.2014(a).
   (b)   Notice of Revocation. Upon determination of grounds to revoke a
license, the Clerk of the Board shall cause a “notice of revocation” to be
mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to the notice address designated
by the licensee pursuant to §
41.2004(a)(8).
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 3518, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014)
§ 41.2016   Validity.
   If any Section or Subdivision, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014)
§ 41.2017   Additional Remedies.
   In addition to any other action set forth in this Chapter, violation of the
requirements of this Chapter may result in the institution of a criminal
action, a civil action, and/or an administrative action as set froth in Chapter
2 of Title 1 of the County Code.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4263, passed - -2014)
§ 41.2018   Appeal Rights.
   Any person denied a license under this Chapter or any licensee whose license
has been revoked may appeal in writing. Said appeal must be in writing and must
be filed with the Clerk of the Board not more than 15 days following the Clerk
of the Board’s deposit into the mails (first class, postage prepaid) of the
notice of denial or revocation addressed to the applicant or licensee at the
notice address identified by the applicant or licensee. A hearing officer shall
conduct the appeal hearing pursuant to §§
12.2700 through
12.2725, except that notwithstanding §§
12.2700 et seq., the hearing officer’s decision shall be final and no further
administrative appeal is available.
(Ord. 3484, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 4115, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4263,
passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 21: HOTELS AND MOTELS
Section
   
41.2101   Findings.
   
41.2102   Definitions.
   
41.2103   License and Regulations—Lawful Operation.
   
41.2104   Application Form and Content.
   
41.2105   Investigation by Sheriff.
   
41.2106   Other Investigations.
   
41.2107   License Application and Other Fees.
   
41.2108   Grounds for Denial of License.
   
41.2109   License Denial.
   
41.2110   Prohibited Operation.
   
41.2111   Licenses Non-Transferable.
   
41.2112   Display of License.
   
41.2113   Duration and Renewal of License.
   
41.2114   Standards of Operation.
   
41.2115   Inspection.
   
41.2116   Enforcement.
   
41.2117   Abatement.
   
41.2118   Suspension or Revocation of License.
   
41.2119   Appeal Rights.
   
41.2120   Other Regulatory Provisions.
§ 41.2101   Findings.
   The County of San Bernardino seeks to reduce acts of sexual misconduct, drug
trafficking, and "fencing" activities occurring in the unincorporated area of
the County, and to improve the business environment in the County. These
criminal activities interfere with the safe operation of hotel and motel
businesses and the continuance of such activities on the premises are
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public. It is further
found that such criminal activities have occurred and are likely to continue to
occur on many hotel and motel business premises in the County. In furtherance
of the goals described herein, and to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the public, this Chapter requires a license for the operation of a hotel or
motel.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2102   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations, shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words used in the
present tense includes the future tense, plural words include the singular, and
singular words include the plural. Words not specifically defined shall be
given their common and ordinary meanings. The word “shall” as used herein is
mandatory and not merely directory.
   CEO. The Chief Executive Officer of the County of San Bernardino or his or
her designee.
   DEHS. The Division of Environmental Health Services of the Department of
Public Health of the County of San Bernardino.
   HOTEL. A hotel as defined in §
810.01.100.
   LUSD. The Land Use Services Department of the County of San Bernardino.
   MOTEL. A motel as defined in §
810.01.150.
   NOTICE ADDRESS. The address designated by the licensee for the mailing of
all notices, legal mail, and other written communications from the County to
the licensee.
   PERSON. Individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other
form of business organization or group.
   RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT. The department or subdivision thereof designated by
the Chief Executive Officer of the County of San Bernardino to implement this
Chapter.
   SHERIFF. The Sheriff of the County of San Bernardino and/or his or her
deputies.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2103   License and Regulations—Lawful Operation.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person, or anyone acting as an agent,
representative, or on behalf of any person, to operate a motel or hotel in the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County without a current valid and
unsuspended license issued pursuant to this Chapter.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person, or anyone acting as an agent,
representative, or on behalf of any person, to operate a motel or hotel in the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County without complying with any and all
requirements of this Chapter or other applicable requirements of the County
Code.
   (c)   The requirements of this Chapter do not apply to establishments that
are expressly not included within the definition of a motel or hotel as set
forth in §§
810.01.100 and
810.01.150.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2104   Application Form and Content.
   (a)   Required Information.  Any person desiring to obtain or renew a
license pursuant to this Chapter shall make written application to the
responsible department on a form approved by the County. The application shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Name. The applicant's full name and any past or present aliases
used, the applicant's current business address and mailing address, and the
names and residence addresses of all officers, directors, and each stockholder
holding more than ten percent of the stock, if a corporation, or each partner,
if a partnership. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the
corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its Articles of
Incorporation and a copy of the Articles of Incorporation shall be attached to
the application.
      (2)   Addresses The names and addresses of all previous businesses of the
applicant for the five years immediately preceding submission of the
application, and, where applicable, with respect to each business, the
residential addresses of all officers, directors, and each stockholder holding
more than ten percent of stock, if a corporation, or each partner, if a
partnership.
      (3)   Physical Description. Height, weight, and color of eyes and hair of
the applicant and each individual identified in Subdivision (a)(1), together
with at least two current color photographs at least two inches by two inches
in size for each individual.
      (4)   Proof of Age. A certified birth certificate, immigration papers,
passport, or current California driver's license evidencing the fact the
applicant is not less than 18 years of age.
      (5)   Business Information. The business, occupation, or employment of
the applicant and each individual identified in Subdivision (a)(1) for the
three years immediately preceding the date of the application.
      (6)   Location for Licensed Activities. The location of the motel or
hotel.
      (7)   Prior Licenses. A description of all licenses and permits of the
applicant and each individual identified in Subdivision (a)(1) relating to
motels or hotels, located in any jurisdiction, and a statement as to whether
any such licenses and permits were suspended or revoked and the reason for any
such suspensions or revocations.
      (8)   Criminal Convictions. A statement of whether the applicant and each
individual identified in Subdivision (a)(1) have been convicted of an offense
involving conduct that requires registration under Penal Code § 290, or
convicted of conduct in violation of Penal Code §§ 266i, 315, 316, 318, or 647
(b), or convicted of any felony involving the sale of a controlled substance
specified in Health and Safety Code §§ 11054 through 11058, or convicted of any
"fencing" crime, or convicted of an offense involving conduct that requires
registration under Health and Safety Code § 11590, or convicted in another
state of an offense that, if committed or attempted in this state, would have
been punishable as one or more of the offenses enumerated in this Subdivision.
      (9)   Notice Address. The address to which all notices and communications
from the County to the applicant or licensee shall be directed. The applicant
or licensee is responsible to immediately inform the responsible department, in
writing, of any changes of such address.
   (b)   License Fee. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by
the license fee specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1.
   (c)   Incomplete Applications. The responsible department shall promptly
reject any incomplete application which does not meet all requirements of this
section, and shall notify the applicant in writing, by first-class mail,
postage prepaid, to the notice address of the deficiencies in the application.
   (d)   Filing for Renewal. No application for renewal of a license shall be
accepted earlier than 90 days prior to expiration of the license.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2105   Investigation by Sheriff.
   (a)   Review of Application. The Sheriff shall review the information set
forth in the application and any other documents or materials that are
requested by the Sheriff in the course of investigation and that reasonably
relate to the licensing requirements of this chapter. The Sheriff shall require
the applicant to be fingerprinted and to pay the fingerprinting fee then in
effect as specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1. This investigation and review is intended
to meet the criminal record access authorization requirements of Penal Code §§
11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11).
   (b)   Report on Investigation Results. The Sheriff shall promptly report to
the responsible department whether the application and the other documents and
materials submitted by the applicant meet all the requirements of this chapter
and other applicable laws.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2106   Other Investigations.
   An application that passes the investigation by the Sheriff shall thereafter
be reviewed and investigated by the Planning division of LUSD, the Building and
Safety division of LUSD, DEHS, the fire department having jurisdiction over the
premises of the hotel or motel, and any other regulatory body that the
responsible department deems is necessary to ensure the safe operation of a
motel or hotel, to determine whether the premises comply with applicable laws,
including this chapter, Title 8 of the County Code, and the County General
Plan. The investigation results shall be forwarded to the responsible
department for consideration for approval.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2107   License Application and Other Fees.
   The applicant shall pay a license application fee as specified in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the County Code, in addition to all other
fees required under this Chapter or required as part of any inspection,
investigation, or review.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2108   Grounds for Denial of License.
   A license shall be denied upon the determination of any one of the
following:
   (a)   Criminal Convictions. The applicant or any individual identified
pursuant to §
41.2104(a)(1) has, within ten years immediately preceding the date the
application was submitted, been convicted of an offense set forth in §
41.2104(a)(8).
   (b)   Required to Register. The applicant or any individual identified
pursuant to §
41.2104(a)(1) is required to register under Penal Code § 290 or Health and
Safety Code § 11590.
   (c)   Failure to Pass Investigation. The application does not pass one or
more of the investigations conducted pursuant to §
41.2105 or §
41.2106.
   (c)   Revocation of Prior License. The applicant or any individual
identified pursuant to §
41.2104(a)(1) has had a motel or hotel license revoked or suspended for cause
within the five-year period immediately preceding the date the application was
submitted.
   (d)   Misstated Facts. The applicant has knowingly misstated facts or
falsified information on the application, or reasonably should have known that
such facts were misstated or that such information was false.
   (e)   Failure to Comply with Application Requirements. The application is
incomplete or the applicant has otherwise failed to comply with the
requirements of §
41.2104.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2109   License Denial.
   If a license is denied, the responsible department shall cause a notice of
denial to be mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to the notice
address. An applicant whose license has been denied may appeal the denial
pursuant to §
41.2119.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2110   Prohibited Operation.
   Any person denied a license pursuant to this Chapter, or any person whose
permit is suspended or revoked, may not operate a motel or hotel and must cease
all operations. If a license expires prior to the effective date of any renewal
of the license, all motel or hotel operations must cease.
(Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2111   Licenses Non-Transferable.
   All licenses issued under this Chapter are non-transferable both as to
location, and as to the person holding the license.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2112   Display of License.
   Any person to whom a motel license is granted shall display said license in
a conspicuous place at every location where the licensed activities are
performed or conducted.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2113   Duration and Renewal of License.
   (a)   Term. Each license issued under this Chapter shall terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless revoked prior to
the expiration date pursuant to §
41.2118.
   (b)   Renewal. Any renewal of a license issued under this Chapter shall be
pursuant to the same requirements, procedures, provisions and regulations set
forth in §§
41.2104 through
41.2107.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2114   Standards of Operation.
   As a condition to the issuance, renewal, or holding of a license under this
Chapter, the licensee or the licensee's employee, agent, or representative,
shall be responsible for complying with the following standards:
   (a)   The motel or hotel licensed pursuant to this Chapter, and the subject
property upon which the motel or hotel is located, shall be in compliance with
all applicable laws including, but not limited to, the California Fire Code,
California Building Code, the National Fire Protection Association Standards,
any other applicable uniform codes as adopted by the County of San Bernardino.
   (b)   The motel or hotel licensed pursuant to this Chapter, and the subject
property upon which the motel or hotel is located, shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the County Code.
   (c)   The motel or hotel licensed pursuant to this Chapter, and the subject
property upon which the motel or hotel is located, shall not be operated,
conducted, or maintained so as to constitute a public nuisance.
   (d)   The motel or hotel licensed pursuant to this Chapter, and the subject
property upon which the motel or hotel is located, may be inspected by the
County in accordance with §
41.2115 or other applicable provisions or the County Code or law.
   (e)   The licensee or the licensee's employee, agent, or representative,
shall be available in person, by telephone, by telephone answering machine, or
by other electronic messaging device to authorized representatives of the
County on a 24-hour, seven days a week basis to receive calls regarding the
condition and/or operation of the motel or hotel and subject property. Failure
to respond to calls in a timely and appropriate manner may result in suspension
or revocation of the license. For purposes of this Subdivision, RESPONDING IN A
TIMELY AND APPROPRIATE MANNER shall mean that any response or responses and any
corrective action shall be done pursuant to the required time frame and manner
set forth in any applicable adopted uniform code or other applicable law.
   (f)   A smoke detector(s) shall be installed, in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions, in each dwelling space of the hotel or motel, as
provided by state law and regulations.
(Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2115   Inspection.
   Officers of the Sheriff's Department and officers or agents of the
departments, divisions, and agencies identified in §
41.2106 have the right to enter any motel or hotel during regular business
hours to make reasonable inspection to ascertain whether the provisions of this
Chapter and any other related requirement set forth in the County Code or other
law are being met. In carrying out such inspection, the officer or agent shall
not interfere with the reasonable and normal business operations, unless the
health, welfare, and safety of the public necessitates such interference.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2116   Enforcement.
   (a)   In addition to any enforcement action and remedy authorized by this
Chapter, a violation of any requirement of this Chapter may result in remedial
action by appropriate members of County staff or any Enforcement Officer as
defined in
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code, without notice if
providing notice is not reasonable considering the need for immediate remedial
action, and/or if prior notice to the licensee or motel or hotel manager,
either verbal or written, has not resulted in appropriate remedial action by
the licensee or motel or hotel manager. Remedial actions taken pursuant to this
Section, other than any criminal citations, are subject to appeal pursuant to
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code or other applicable
provision, but no request for appeal shall stay the remedial actions taken
pursuant to this Section.
   (b)   In addition to any enforcement action and remedy authorized by this
Chapter, a violation of any requirement of this Chapter may be subject to the
enforcement and remedy provisions of
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code and any other applicable
enforcement and remedy provisions of the County Code or provided under the law.
(Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2117   Abatement.
   Any motel or hotel operated or maintained in violation of the requirements
of this Chapter, any other provision of the County Code, or other applicable
law, shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public
nuisance. The County may, in addition to, or in lieu of, any other
administrative, civil, or criminal proceeding, commence an administrative or
civil action for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment of such public
nuisance, in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2118   Suspension or Revocation of License.
   (a)   Grounds. A license issued under this Chapter shall be suspended or
revoked on one or more of the following grounds:
      (1)   Fraud or Deceit. The licensee practiced fraud or deceit in
obtaining the license under this Chapter.
      (2)   Violation of Chapter or Other Law. The licensee or the licensee's
employee, agent, or representative violated a provision of this Chapter,
applicable provision of the County Code, or other law.
      (3)   Criminal Conviction. The licensee or any individual identified
pursuant to §
41.2104(a)(1) has been convicted of an offense set forth in §
41.2104(a)(8) or an offense in another Sate which, if committed or attempted in
this State, would have been punishable as one or more offenses enumerated under
§
41.2104(a)(8).
      (4)   Error. The license was issued in error.
   (b)   Notice. Upon a determination of grounds to suspend or revoke a
license, the responsible department shall cause a notice of suspension or
revocation to be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the notice
address.
   (c)   A licensee whose license has been suspended or revoked may appeal the
suspension or revocation pursuant to §
41.2119.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2119   Appeal Rights.
   (a)   The denial, suspension, or revocation of a license based on a property
being in violation of the requirements of
Chapter 6 of Division 3 of Title 6 of the County Code, may be appealed for a
hearing before the Building Appeals Board. The format and process of the appeal
shall be as required by § 63.0107 of the County Code. A decision by the
Building Appeals Board shall be final and no further appeal within the County
shall be available.
   (b)   The denial, suspension, or revocation of a license for a reason other
than a reason referenced in Subdivision (a) may be appealed for a hearing
before a County-appointed hearing officer as defined by §§
12.2701,
12.2702,
12.2703, and
12.2705 of the County Code, or as otherwise authorized by the County Code or
law. The hearing procedure shall include the following:
      (1)   At least ten days written notice of the hearing shall be given to
the applicant or licensee prior to the hearing date. The hearing date may be
postponed or continued by stipulation of the parties. If the applicant or
licensee does not respond or appear, no further hearing procedure shall be
required.
      (2)   Witnesses shall swear or affirm to tell the truth. The oath or
affirmation shall be taken by the hearing officer. The County shall present its
case first, with oral testimony and documentary evidence or other evidence. The
County shall have the right of cross-examination. The applicant or licensee
shall have the right to be represented and shall have the right of cross-
examination. The applicant or licensee may present his or her response after
the County has presented its case. Both parties may thereafter present
argument.
      (3)   No determination or order shall be based solely on hearsay
evidence. The hearing officer shall make his or her determination within five
working days of the end of the hearing, unless a party requests a greater
period of time. The determination shall be in writing, and shall state the
findings upon which the determination is made. The decision by the hearing
officer shall be final and no further appeal within the County shall be
available.
   (c)   The denial, suspension, or revocation of a license for multiple
reasons under both Subdivisions (a) and (b) shall be heard by the Building
Appeals Board in the form and manner defined by § 63.0107 of the County Code. A
decision by such body shall be final and no further appeal within the County
shall be available.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4327, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2120   Other Regulatory Provisions.
   Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter does not exempt a licensee or
applicant for license from complying with other requirements of this Code
relating to motels or hotels.
(Ord. 3548, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 4237, passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 22: CONSUMER PROTECTION BUSINESS PERMIT
Section
   
41.2201   Purpose and Authority.
   
41.2202   Definitions.
   
41.2203   Permit Requirement.
   
41.2204   Duration and Transferability of Permit.
   
41.2205   Posting of Permit.
   
41.2206   Fees.
   
41.2207   Violations.
   
41.2208   Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
   
41.2209   Appeal of Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
   
41.2210   Restoration of Permit.
   
41.2211   Penalties.
§ 41.2201   Purpose and Authority.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish, pursuant to Business and
Professions Code §§ 12103.5, 12210, 12211 and 12240, permitting requirements to
identify, monitor and impose criminal penalties on those persons that are:
   (a)   Commercially engaged in the packaging of commodities in advance of
sale;
   (b)   Utilizing for commercial purposes automated systems for retail
commodity pricing referred to as “scanners”; and/or
   (c)   Utilizing for commercial purposes weighing and measuring devices to
determine the charge for commodities at the time of sale.
(Ord. 3669, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3984, passed - -2006)
§ 41.2202   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases are
defined and shall be construed as having the following meaning. Terms not
defined herein shall be given their meaning by the California Business and
Professions Code or by common usage.
   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE. Includes any sale of a commodity or thing by a person.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Agriculture/Weights and Measures of the County
of San Bernardino.
   LOCATION. Any room, enclosure, building, vehicle, space or area at a single
place.
   PACKER. Any person engaged in wrapping or packaging of a commodity prior to
and for the purpose of sale wherein the item wrapped or packaged is sold on the
basis of weight, count, volume or area.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, business or association.
   SCANNER. Any automated electronic system which determines, by means of coded
information, the price of an item.
   SELL. Includes barter, exchange, trade, keep for sale, offer for sale or
expose for sale in any of their variant forms.
(Ord. 3669, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3984, passed - -2006)
§ 41.2203   Permit Requirement.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business subject
to §
41.2201 of this Chapter without first obtaining a permit in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter. A separate permit shall be required for each
location.
   (b)   Permits shall be issued upon written application on a form furnished
by the Department and payment of fees by the applicant.
   (c)   Packers of less than 10,000 packages per year shall be exempt from
permit requirements.
(Am. Ord. 3984, passed - -2006)
§ 41.2204   Duration and Transferability of Permit.
   (a)   All permits shall be valid for up to one year and expire on June 30 of
each year. Renewal of a permit shall be made in a manner similar to the
issuance of the original permit or by notice of renewal from the Department.
   (b)   Permits shall not be transferable between persons or locations.
   (c)   Permittees shall not lease, sublet, subcontract, or in any manner
allow any other person or entity to engage in activities regulated under the
permit, except as an employee of the permittee.
(Ord. 3669, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3984, passed - -2006)
§ 41.2205   Posting of Permit.
   At each location, the applicable permit shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in or on the premises in respect to which it is issued and shall be
exhibited to any official of the Department.
(Ord. 3669, passed - -1996)
§ 41.2206   Fees.
   The permit fee shall be as established by
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 3669, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3984, passed - -2006)
§ 41.2207   Violations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or any permittee, employee or agent
subject to §
41.2201 of this Chapter to do any of the following:
   (a)   Engage in any business subject to §
41.2201 of this Chapter without a current permit.
   (b)   Fail to post the permit as required.
   (c)   Fail to comply with the provisions of the Business and Professions
Code Division V or Code of Regulations Division 9 of Title 4.
(Ord. 3669, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3984, passed - -2006)
§ 41.2208   Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
   (a)   The permit of any person found in violation of any provisions of
Business and Professions Code Division V or of §
41.2207 of this Chapter more than three times in a 12-month period shall be
suspended until restored pursuant to §
41.2210 of this Chapter.
   (b)   The permit of any person found in violation of the provisions of
Business and Professions Code Division V or §
41.2207 of this Chapter within six months of having said permit restored
pursuant to §
41.2210, shall be revoked.
(Ord. 3669, passed - -1996)
§ 41.2209   Appeal of Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
   Upon the occurrence of any grounds for the suspension or revocation of a
permit, the Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer may suspend or revoke the permit.
Notice of this action to suspend or revoke a permit shall be served upon the
permittee either by personal service or by registered mail to the address
listed on the permit. The permittee may, within ten days after the service or
receipt of the notice, demand a hearing as to why the permit should not be
continued in full force and effect. The hearing shall be before the
Agricultural Commissioner/Sealer or his or her designee and be conducted
according to the procedures for other administrative hearings set forth in
Business and Professions Code § 12015.3.
(Ord. 3669, passed - -1996)
§ 41.2210   Restoration of Permit.
   A suspended or revoked permit shall be restored or reissued when the
permittee has corrected all violations and is in full compliance with Business
and Professions Code Division V and with §
41.2207 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 3669, passed - -1996)
§ 41.2211   Penalties.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provision of this
Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter
specified.
   (b)   Each day or portion thereof such violation is in existence shall be a
new and separate offense.
   (c)   Any person so convicted shall be:
      (1)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $100.00 and not less than $50.00 for a first offense;
      (2)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $200.00 and not less than $100.00 for a second offense; or
      (3)   Guilty of a misdemeanor for the third and any additional offenses
and punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and not less than $500.00 or six
months in jail, or both.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged
and prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
   (e)   Payment of any fine or service of a jail sentence shall not relieve a
person from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the
violation.
   (f)   In addition to the above penalties, the court may order that the
guilty party reimburse the County for all of its costs of investigating,
analyzing and prosecuting the enforcement action against the guilty party. The
court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursement upon submission of proof
of such costs by the County.
   (g)   In addition to all other remedies provided by this Chapter or State
law, in the event of continuing violation of the provisions of this Chapter,
the Department may seek injunctive relief to restrain further violation.
   (h)   In lieu of criminal prosecution, the Department may impose a civil
penalty pursuant to the provisions of Business and Professions Code § 12015.3.
      (1)   The civil penalty for failing to obtain a permit as required under
this Chapter shall be $100.00 for a first offense;
      (2)   For subsequent or continued violation for failing to obtain a
permit as required under this Chapter, the civil penalty shall be increased in
increments of $100.00, up to a maximum of $500.00.
(Ord. 3669, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 3984, passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 23: ISSUANCE OF STILL PHOTOGRAPHY PERMITS AND FEES
Section
   
41.2301   Purposes.
   
41.2302   Authority.
   
41.2303   Permits Required.
   
41.2304   Exemptions: Fees/Charges and Permits.
   
41.2305   Film Office.
   
41.2306   Notification of District.
   
41.2307   Film Office Liaison Functions.
   
41.2308   County Permits, Fees, Costs and Reimbursements.
   
41.2309   Billing Procedures.
   
41.2310   Indemnification.
   
41.2311   Insurance.
   
41.2312   Film Credits.
   
41.2313   Other Regulatory Provisions.
§ 41.2301   Purposes.
   Still photography plays an important role in the economy of San Bernardino
County that should be encouraged. This Chapter will further such activities
within the County by authorizing a centralized Film Office that will coordinate
the issuance of still photography permits and fee processing and encourage such
activity.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2302   Authority.
   Pursuant to Government Code §§ 14999.20, 14999.21, 15335.22(d), 15338, and
65850.1(a), the Board of Supervisors has authority to adopt an ordinance
governing the issuance of still photography permits to engage in occasional
commercial still photography on location, establishing a centralized County
permit processing office, and authorizing use of a permit application form.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2303   Permits Required.
   Except as set forth herein, a still photography permit is required unless a
filming permit has already been obtained. However a still photography permit
shall only be required if the photographic activity is done in the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County; uses lands that belong to, are
managed by, or are under the jurisdiction of the County of San Bernardino; and
otherwise requires the issuance of a permit by the County of San Bernardino.
   All other uses for commercial or non-commercial purposes are not required to
obtain a permit even if the photographer uses tripods, flashbulbs, strobe
lights, portable view cameras, or interchangeable lenses.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2304   Exemptions: Fees/Charges and Permits.
   (a)   Full Exemptions. The following uses are exempt from the requirement of
obtaining a still photography permit, but must otherwise comply with all
applicable laws, rules, and regulations:
      (1)   Still photography at an existing approved film studio. A still
photography permit will only be required if photography is done away from a
permanent facility approved for such use;
      (2)   Still photography for private or family use;
      (3)   Still photography for use in criminal or civil proceedings;
      (4)   News media still photography;
      (5)   Still photography for educational and governmental purposes;
      (6)   Still photography for use in local origination programs for cable
television systems franchised by the County;
      (7)   Still photography of emergencies including, but not limited to,
fire, floods and emergency police activities; and
      (8)   Still photography on private or public land, except when the
issuance of some other permit from the County is otherwise required.
   (b)   Partial Exemptions. The following users are required to apply for a
still photography permit and to pay all fees, costs and reimbursements except
for the still photography permit processing fee referred to in §
41.2308(a) and set forth in § 16.0210B of the San Bernardino County Code, from
which they are exempt:
      (1)   Still photography for use by a charity; and
      (2)   Still photography by a student who has submitted a letter written
on school letterhead by a school administrator or instructor stating that the
student is currently enrolled in a recognized U. S. educational institution and
that the still photographs shall not be commercially released in any manner
whatsoever.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2305   Film Office.
   The Board shall designate a liaison between persons seeking still
photography permits (“permittees”) and the County, which liaison shall be
referred to as the “Film Office.” In addition, the Film Office will promote
still photography in San Bernardino County, will assist production companies in
finding suitable locations within San Bernardino County, will maintain a
location photograph library, will coordinate with local businesses for
production company support, and will serve as a marketing agent for the County.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2306   Notification of District.
   Upon the filing of an application for a still photography permit, the Film
Office will give written notification of the filing of the application to the
County Supervisor for the district wherein the photography will be done.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2307   Film Office Liaison Functions.
   The Film Office will act as liaison between permittees and the County for
obtaining still photography permits and paying County fees and other costs.
Each County department shall have final approval or denial authority for use of
the County properties for which it is responsible, and for issuance of permits
for which it is responsible. When necessary, the Film Office may facilitate
direct contact between permittees and any County department or employee. The
Film Office shall remit to the County all fees, costs and reimbursements
collected on behalf of the County.
   (a)   County Administrative Office. All requests for use of County
facilities must be coordinated through the County Administrative Office or the
designated department head for the facility for which the request is being
made.
   (b)   County Fire Department. Permittees shall comply, at all times, with
the Uniform Fire Code. On behalf of the County Fire Department, the Film Office
will accept applications for fire safety permits. The Film Office will remit
all County Fire Department fees and gather the required information and
documentation for submittal to the County Fire Department. Once all requested
information is received by the County Fire Department, the application will be
reviewed. When approved, fire safety permits shall be delivered by the County
Fire Department to the Film Office. The Film Office will then forward the fire
safety permits to the permittee. The hard copy of the fire safety permit will
be maintained on file with the County Fire Department.
   At the discretion of the County Fire Department, an event may require
standby fire department personnel or equipment for public safety. These costs
shall be paid as set forth hereafter.
   (c)   Sheriff’s Department.
      (1)   Sheriff’s Department’s Facilities and Services. The Film Office
shall coordinate the assistance of the Sheriff’s Department in photographic
activities through the Public Affairs Division of the Sheriff’s Department. The
Sheriffs Department shall charge permittees for use of Sheriff’s Department
equipment, facilities and services, and for reimbursement of the costs
therefor.
      (2)   Bomb/Arson Unit. On behalf of the San Bernardino County Sheriffs
Department’s Bomb/Arson Unit, the Film Office will accept applications for
renewal and reactivation of explosive permits for special effects operators and
will collect, and remit to the Sheriffs Department, all applicable fees.
Applicants for new explosive permits will be required to present themselves in
person at the Sheriffs Department for photographs and fingerprinting. The Film
Office will remit all explosive permit fees to the San Bernardino County
Sheriffs Department and forward the required documentation to the Sheriffs
Department’s Bomb/Arson Unit. A photocopy of the applicants’ pyrotechnic/
special effects operator’s license must accompany the application.
      Applicants for explosive permits, and holders thereof, shall at all times
comply with all laws, regulations and ordinances concerning explosives and
pyrotechnic devices including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code §§
12000 et seq., regulations promulgated by the State Fire Marshal, and §
45.0101 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (d)   Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health
Services. The Division of Environmental Health Services of the County will
provide assistance to the Film Office as needed. All sites used for still
photography shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition. All trash shall be
contained in proper receptacles and disposed of by a San Bernardino County
permitted refuse hauler. All pumping of portable toilets must be done by a
liquid waste hauler with a permit from San Bernardino County. Food vehicles and
food caterers shall be approved and permitted by Environmental Health Services,
if food is to be provided on site, unless otherwise agreed by Environmental
Health Services. To expedite this process, the Film Office will gather the
required information and documentation for submittal to Environmental Health
Services. All required fees will be paid to the Film Office and forwarded to
Environmental Health Services.
   (e)   County Parks and County Museums.
      (1)   Regional Parks. The Film Office will coordinate filming activity
involving County Parks through the Department of Public Works, specifically the
Regional Parks Division. The Film Office will accept applications for still
photography permits and gather all required documentation and information from
the applicant. A completed application and supporting documentation will be
submitted by the Film Office to the Regional Parks Division for its review and
approval. The Regional Parks Division will determine if any park personnel will
be required to be present during still photographic activity. The Regional
Parks Division will forward approved permits to the Film Office and maintain a
hard copy on file until such time as it may be destroyed pursuant to law.
      (2)   County Museum. The Film Office will coordinate filming activity
involving County museums through County Museum. The Film Office will accept
applications for still photography permits and gather all required
documentation and information from the applicant. A completed application and
supporting documentation will be submitted by the Film Office to County Museum
for its review and approval. County Museum will determine if any museum
personnel will be required to be present during still photographic activity.
County Museum will forward approved permits to the Film Office and maintain a
hard copy on file until such time as it may be destroyed pursuant to law.
   (f)   Transportation/Flood Control Department. On behalf of the
Transportation/Flood Control Department, the Film Office will accept
applications and fees for still photographic activities that require road
encroachment, or other permits administered by the Transportation/Flood Control
Department. The Film Office will obtain all necessary information from a
Permittee and supply it to the Department. The Film Office will pay to the
Transportation/Flood Control Department all fees and other monies collected
from a permittee. If the activity must be approved by the California Highway
Patrol, a permit will not be issued until proof of such approval is submitted
to the Transportation/Flood Control Department, directly or via the Film
Office. When approved, the permit will be forwarded to the Film Office which
will then forward the permit to the permittee. The Transportation/Flood Control
Department will retain the hard copy on file until such time as it may be
destroyed pursuant to law.
   (g)   Airports Department. On behalf of the San Bernardino County Airports
Department, the Film Office will accept applications and fees for still
photography on County controlled airports. The Film Office will forward all
required fees to the Airports Department, collect all necessary information and
documentation from the permittee, and provide it to the Airports Department.
When approved by the Airports Department, the still photography permit will be
forwarded to the Film Office, which will then forward it to the permittee. A
hard copy of any permit issued by the Airports Department will be maintained on
file with the Airports Department until such time as it may be destroyed
pursuant to law.
   (h)   Building and Safety Division. When applicable, the Building and Safety
Division will review and approve still photography permit applications that
involve the construction of new sets, or the physical alteration of existing
buildings within the County unincorporated areas. This activity will be
coordinated through the Film Office, which will accept applications from
permittees and will pay to the Building and Safety Division any fees that the
Film Office collects on its behalf. The Film Office may refer permittees to the
Building and Safety Division when direct contact would expedite processing the
permit application.
   (i)   Special Districts Department. On behalf of the Special Districts
Department, the Film Office will accept applications and fees for still
photography activities in areas under the jurisdiction of, or facilities
managed or administered by, the Special Districts Department including, but not
limited to, Board-governed special districts, County Service Areas, Lake
Arrowhead Dam, and other facilities. Such facilities include various roads,
cemeteries, parks and recreation areas, zoos, open space, water and sanitation
facilities and other facilities throughout San Bernardino County. In addition
to fees for use of areas, facilities, and services, permittees shall pay a non-
refundable fee for temporary use or closure of a road, the excavation of a
trench, and the placement of meters and locks on hydrants used to provide water
for the purpose of taking still photographs.
   The Film Office will coordinate construction and safety inspections, where
necessary, by the Special Districts Department and by the Building and Safety
Division of any construction by permittee acting under the jurisdiction of the
Special Districts Department.
   The Film Office will obtain all necessary information from the permittee and
supply it to the Special Districts Department. The Film Office will pay to the
Special Districts Department all fees and other monies collected from the
permittee on behalf of the Special Districts Department. The Special Districts
Department will retain the hard copy of any permits it may issue until such
time as the permits may be destroyed pursuant to law.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2308   County Permits, Fees, Costs and Reimbursements.
   Prior to the issuance of a still photography permit, the permittee must pay
the applicable fees and deposits set forth herein, and in other applicable
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Such fees shall be collected by the
Film Office and paid over to the appropriate County department, except for the
still photography permit processing fees, which shall be retained by the Film
Office.
   (a)   Film Permit Processing Fees. Still photography permit processing fees
are set forth in § 16.0210B of the San Bernardino County Code. Such fees shall
be paid to the Film Office which shall keep them for payment of its services.
   (b)   County Fire Department Fees. In the event that any fire safety permits
are required, they shall be obtained through the Film Office from the local
fire department or County Fire Department, as appropriate. The County Fire
Department will distribute information to, and coordinate actions with, local
fire departments, as appropriate.
   At the discretion of the fire department with jurisdiction over the area
where the still photography will be done, an event may require fire department
personnel or equipment for public safety. These costs shall be paid prior to
the event. The County Fire Department shall charge the fees for fire safety
permits set forth in § 16.0211A(b) of the San Bernardino County Code, and shall
charge for necessary fire department personnel or equipment pursuant to the
Uniform Fire Code, as amended. Such fees may be paid to the Film Office, which
will remit them to the appropriate fire agency.
   (c)   Sheriff’s Department. The Sheriff’s Department may negotiate directly,
or through the Film Office, for use of Sheriff’s equipment, facilities and
services, and for reimbursement of the costs thereof. In the event that a Class
I explosive is to be utilized for any part of the permittee’s, activity, an
explosive permit must be obtained from the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s
Department. Fees charged by the Sheriff’s Department are set forth in § 16.0226
of the San Bernardino County Code. Unless otherwise directed by the Film
Office, the fees shall be paid by the permittee to the film office prior to
issuance of the permit. All fees shall be paid by the Film Office to the
Sheriff’s office.
   (d)   Road Encroachment Permit, Trench Excavation, Flood Control Permits. If
the photographic activity will involve the temporary use or closure of a County
road or highway, excavation of a trench, or use or disturbance of a flood
control channel, a non-refundable permit must be obtained through the Film
Office from the San Bernardino County Transportation and flood Control
Department. These permits must be obtained even if the use is otherwise exempt
pursuant to §
41.2304. Fees for road use or closure, and fees for trench excavation are
respectively set forth in §§ 16.0225(a) and (b) of the San Bernardino County
Code. Fees concerning use, access and disturbance of flood control. channels,
and related matters, are set forth in § 16.0212 of the San Bernardino County
Code.
   (e)   Environmental Health Services. If, during the photographic activity
the permittee operates a food concession, the permittee shall pay the fees set
forth in § 16.0213B of the San Bernardino Code, as amended. If a subcontractor
of permittee, or an independent contractor, provides a food concession, such
person, and not the permittee, shall be responsible for payment of the fees set
forth in § 16.0213B of the San Bernardino County Code, as amended.
   (f)   Airport Use Fees. The Film Office shall charge, collect, and remit to
the Airports Department the fees set forth in § 16.0202 of the San Bernardino
County Code.
   (g)   Museum Fees. If the services or facilities of the County Museum are
used by the permittee, the permittee shall pay the fees and charges set forth
in § 16.0218 of the San Bernardino County Code, as amended, to the Film Office
which shall remit them to the County Museum.
   (h)   Regional Park Fees. If using the facilities or services of the
Regional Parks, permittee shall pay the fees and charges set forth in § 16.0223
of the San Bernardino County Code, as amended, or such other fees and charges
as may be charged by the Regional Parks Division of the Department of Public
Works. The fees and charges shall be paid to the Film Office, which shall
immediately remit them to the Regional Parks Division.
   (i)   Special Districts Department. The Film Office shall charge, collect,
and immediately remit to the Special Districts Department the fees set forth in
§ 16.0226A of the San Bernardino County Code, as amended, and such other fees
and charges as may be charged by the Special Districts Department.
The Film Office shall also collect any fees, including fees for coordinated
permits, that the permittee may need for water and/or sanitation services
within the jurisdiction of the Special Districts Department. Additional fees
may be collected for meters and locks that may be necessary for the use of
hydrants to provide water for uses other than that of the County Fire
Department.
    (j)   Other County Departments. If permittee uses County services, or
property owned, leased, or managed by a County department other than those
listed herein, permittee shall pay the Film Office such charges as are provided
in the San Bernardino County Code, as amended, or that may be required by the
department directly or through the Film Office. The Film Office shall collect
such charges and forward them to the appropriate department.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2309   Billing Procedures.
   All projected fees, reimbursements and costs must be paid to the Film Office
prior to the issuance of a permit. Upon completion of the project for which the
permit was issued, reimbursements and costs actually incurred shall be
determined. Overpayments will be returned by the Film Office within 30 days
from the conclusion of the activity. Underpayments will be billed to permittee
by the Film Office and are due within 30 days of the day the billing is mailed.
Should the underpayments not be timely paid, the affected County department may
pursue collection of the underpayment.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2310   Indemnification.
   The permittee agrees, as a condition of receiving a still photography
permit, to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the County of San Bernardino,
the San Bernardino County Flood Control District and all Districts, County
Service Areas, and other entities governed by the San Bernardino County Board
of Supervisors along with their authorized officers, employees, agents and
volunteers from any and all claims, actions, losses, damages, and/or liability
arising out of the photographic activity from any cause or source whatsoever,
including, but not limited to, the acts, errors or omissions of any person, and
for any costs or expenses incurred by any of the aforementioned entities and
individuals on account of any claim therefor, except where prohibited by law.
Permittee further agrees to be responsible for payment of any medical charges
incurred at any County facility as a result of injury to any person arising out
of the photographic activity.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2311   Insurance.
   (a)   Types of Insurance. Without in any way affecting the indemnity
provided herein, and in addition thereto, the permittee shall, at its sole
expense, maintain at all times the following types of insurance with limits as
shown.
      (1)   Comprehensive General and Automobile Liability Insurance. This
coverage to include contractual coverage and automobile coverage for owned,
hired and non-owned vehicles. The policy shall have combined single limits for
bodily injury and property damage of not less than $1,000,000.00.
      (2)   Pyrotechnic Liability Insurance. In the event that a Class I
explosive permit is to be utilized for any part of the permittee’s filming
activity, the permittee will be required to obtain specific pyrotechnic
coverage at an amount to be determined by the County Risk Manager as suitable
for the scope of the planned pyrotechnic/special effects explosion(s). The
minimum requirement for any pyrotechnic coverage policy shall be combined
single limits for bodily injury and property damage of not less than
$2,000,000.00 per occurrence.
      (3)   Aircraft Liability Insurance. (When applicable), with combined
single limits of $10,000,000.00 for bodily injury (including passengers), death
and property damage.
      (4)   Workers’ Compensation. A program of Workers’ Compensation insurance
or a state-approved Self-Insurance Program in an amount and form to meet all
applicable requirements of the Labor Code of the State of California, including
Employer’s Liability with $250,000.00 limits, covering all persons providing
services on behalf of the permittee and all risks to such persons. Permittee
shall also require all subcontractors to maintain such a program of Workers’
Compensation insurance for all persons providing services on behalf of the
subcontractors.
   (b)   Policy Provisions.
      (1)   Additional Named Insured. All policies, except for Workers’
Compensation policies, shall contain additional endorsements naming the County
and its officers, employees, agents and volunteers as additional named insured
with respect to liabilities arising out of Permittee’s photographic activities.
      (2)   Waiver of Subrogation Rights. Permittee shall require the carriers
of the above required coverages to waive all rights of subrogation against the
County, its officers, employees, agents, volunteers, contractors and
subcontractors.
      (3)   Policies Primary and Non-Contributory. All policies required above
are to be primary and non-contributory with any insurance or self-insurance
programs carried or administered by the County.
   (c)   Proof of Coverage. Permittee shall, prior to issuance of the still
photography permit, furnish certificates of insurance to the Film Office
evidencing the insurance coverage: including endorsements, above required,
which certificates shall provide that such insurance shall not be terminated or
expire, prior to expiration of the still photography permit, without 30 days
written notice to the Film Office, and permittee shall maintain such insurance
throughout the period of the permit.
   (d)   Insurance Review. The above insurance requirements are subject to
periodic review by the County. The County’s Risk Manager is authorized, but not
required, to reduce or waive any of the above insurance requirements whenever
the Risk Manager determines that any of the above insurance is not available,
is unreasonably priced, or is not needed to protect the interests of the
County. In addition, if the Risk Manager determines that heretofore
unreasonably priced or unavailable types of insurance coverage or coverage
limits become reasonably priced or available, the Risk Manager is authorized,
but not required, to change the above insurance requirements to require
additional types of insurance, coverage or higher coverage limits, provided
that any such change is reasonable in light of past claims against the County,
inflation, or any other item reasonably related to the County’s risk.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2312   Film Credits.
   The County of San Bernardino requests to be listed on any credits.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2313   Other Regulatory Provisions.
   Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter does not exempt a permittee
from compliance with other requirements of this Code with the laws of the State
of California, and with the laws of the United States.
(Ord. 3712, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
CHAPTER 24: ISSUANCE OF FILMING PERMITS AND FEES
Section
   
41.2401   Purposes.
   
41.2402   Authority.
   
41.2403   Permits Required.
   
41.2404   Exemptions; Fees/Charges and Permits.
   
41.2405   Film Office.
   
41.2406   Notification of District.
   
41.2407   Film Office Liaison Functions
   
41.2408   County Permits, Fees, Costs and Reimbursements.
   
41.2409   Billing Procedures.
   
41.2410   Indemnification.
   
41.2411   Insurance.
   
41.2412   Film Credits
   
41.2413   Other Regulatory Provisions.
§ 41.2401   Purposes.
   Film, television, and commercial production play an important role in the
economy of San Bernardino County that should be encouraged. This Chapter will
further such activities within the County by authorizing a centralized Film
Office that will coordinate filming permits and fee processing and encourage
filming activity.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2402   Authority.
   Pursuant to Government Code §§ 14999.20, 14999.21 and 65850.1(a), the Board
of Supervisors has authority to adopt an ordinance governing the issuance of
permits to engage in the use of property for occasional commercial filming on
location, establishing a centralized County permit processing office, and
authorizing use of a permit application form.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2403   Permits Required.
   Except as set forth herein, a filming permit shall be required for all
commercial filming done in the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, or
when facilities are used that belong to, are managed by, or are under the
jurisdiction of the County of San Bernardino. Filming permits shall, unless
otherwise specified herein, be required for all visual recording processes that
record motion.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2404   Exemptions; Fees/Charges and Permits.
   (a)   Full Exemptions. The following uses are exempt from the requirement of
obtaining a filming permit, but must otherwise comply with all applicable laws,
rules, and regulations:
      (1)   Activity at an existing approved film studio. A filming permit will
only be required if filming is done away from a permanent facility approved for
such use;
      (2)   Filming activity for private or family use;
      (3)   Filming activity for use in criminal or civil proceedings;
      (4)   News media filming activity;
      (5)   Filming activity for educational and governmental purposes;
      (6)   Local origination programs for cable television systems franchised
with the County; and
      (7)   Filming of emergencies including, but not limited to, fire, floods
and emergency police activities.
   (b)   Partial Exemptions. The following users are required to apply for a
filming permit and to pay all fees, costs and reimbursements except for the
filming permit processing fee referred to in §
41.2408(a) and set forth in § 16.0210A of the San Bernardino County Code, from
which they are exempt.
      (1)   Charitable filming activity; and
      (2)   Filming activity by a student who has submitted a letter written on
school letterhead by a school administrator or instructor stating that the
applicant is currently enrolled in a recognized U. S. educational institution
and that the film shall not be commercially released in any manner whatsoever.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2405   Film Office.
   The Board shall designate a liaison between persons seeking filming permits
(“permittees”) and the County, which liaison shall be referred to as the “Film
Office.” In addition, the Film Office will promote filming activities in San
Bernardino County, will assist production companies in finding filming
locations within San Bernardino County, will maintain a location photograph
library, will coordinate with local businesses for production company support,
and will serve as a marketing agent for the County.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2406   Notification of District.
   Upon the filing of an application for a filming permit, the Film Office will
give written notification of the filing of the application to the County
Supervisor for the district wherein the filming will be done.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2407   Film Office Liaison Functions.
   The Film Office will act as liaison between permittees and the County for
obtaining filming permits and paying County fees and other costs. Each County
department shall have final approval or denial authority for use of the County
properties for which it is responsible, and for issuance of permits for which
it is responsible. When necessary, the Film Office may facilitate direct
contact between permittees and any County department or employee. The Film
Office shall remit to the County all fees, costs and reimbursements collected
on behalf of the County.
   (a)   County Administrative Office. All requests for use of County
facilities must be coordinated through the County Administrative Office or the
designated department head for the facility for which the request is being
made.
   (b)   County Fire Department. Permittees shall comply, at all times, with
the Uniform Fire Code. On behalf of the County Fire Department, the Film Office
will accept applications for fire safety permits. The Film Office will remit
all County Fire Department fees and gather the required information and
documentation for submittal to the County Fire Department. Once all requested
information is received by the County Fire Department, the application will be
reviewed. When approved, fire safety permits shall be delivered by the County
Fire Department to the Film Office. The Film Office will then forward the fire
safety permits to the permittee. The hard copy of the fire safety permit will
be maintained on file with the County Fire Department.
   At the discretion of the County Fire Department, an event may require
standby fire department personnel or equipment for public safety. These costs
shall be paid as set forth hereafter.
   (c)   Sheriff’s Department.
      (1)   Sheriff’s Facilities and Services. The Film Office shall coordinate
the assistance of the Sheriff’s Department in filming activities through the
Public Affairs Division of the Sheriff’s Department. The Sheriff’s Department
shall charge permittees for use of Sheriff’s equipment, facilities and
services, and for reimbursement of the costs therefore.
      (2)   Bomb/Arson Unit. On behalf of the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s
Bomb/Arson Unit (Bomb/Arson Unit), the Film Office will accept site permit
applications from California State Fire Marshal-licensed pyrotechnic and
special effects operators. The Film Office will be responsible for verifying
the operator’s state and federal licenses. If explosives, as defined in Health
and Safety Code §§ 12000 et seq., will be used and/or stored within the County
of San Bernardino, and such explosives are not listed on Table 14A “Special
Effects Materials” of California Code of Regulations, title 19, § 992.23, then
an additional permit must first be obtained from the Bomb/Arson Unit and an
explosive storage inspection shall be completed. If a member of the Bomb/Arson
Unit is required to stand by during the filming operation, the Film Office will
collect fees and remit those fees to the Sheriff's Department.
      If there is any question as to the validity of a State or Federal
license, the individual will be directed to the Bomb/Arson Unit prior to the
issuance of a permit.
      Applicants for permits under this Subdivision (c)(2), and holders
thereof, shall at all times comply with all laws, regulations and ordinances
concerning explosives and pyrotechnic devices including, but not limited to,
Health and Safety Code §§ 12000 et seq., regulations promulgated by the State
Fire Marshal, §
45.0101 of the San Bernardino County Code, and other applicable law.
   (d)   Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health
Services. The Division of Environmental Health Services of the County will
provide assistance to the Film Office as needed. All filming sites shall be
kept in a safe and sanitary condition. All trash shall be contained in proper
receptacles and disposed of by a San Bernardino County permitted refuse hauler.
All pumping of portable toilets must be done by a liquid waste hauler with a
permit from San Bernardino County. Food vehicles and food caterers shall be
approved and permitted by Environmental Health Services prior to filming, if
food is to be provided on site, unless otherwise agreed by Environmental Health
Services. To expedite this process, the Film Office will gather the required
information and documentation for submittal to Environmental Health Services.
All required permit fees will be paid to the Film Office and forwarded to
Environmental Health Services.
   (e)   County Parks and County Museums.
      (1)   Regional Parks. The Film Office will coordinate filming activity
involving County Parks through the Department of Public Works, specifically the
Regional Parks Division. The Film Office will accept applications for filming
activity and gather all required documentation and information from the
applicant. A completed application and supporting documentation will be
submitted by the Film Office to the Regional Parks Division for its review and
approval. The Regional Parks Division will determine if any park personnel will
be required to be present during filming. The Regional Parks Division will
forward approved permits to the Film Office and maintain a hard copy on file
until such time as it may be destroyed pursuant to law.
      (2)   County Museum. The Film Office will coordinate filming activity
involving County museums through County Museum. The Film Office will accept
applications for filming activity and gather all required documentation and
information from the applicant. A completed application and supporting
documentation will be submitted by the Film Office to County Museum for its
review and approval. County Museum will determine if any museum personnel will
be required to be present during filming. County Museum will forward approved
permits to the Film Office and maintain a hard copy on file until such time as
it may be destroyed pursuant to law.
   (f)   Transportation/Flood Control Department. On behalf of the
Transportation/Flood Control Department, the Film Office will accept
applications and fees for filming activity and for road encroachment permits.
The Film Office will obtain all necessary information from a permittee and
supply it to the Department. The Film Office will pay to the Transportation/
Flood Control Department all fees and other monies collected from a permittee.
If the activity must be approved by the California Highway Patrol, a permit
will not be issued until proof of such approval is submitted to the
Transportation/Flood Control Department, directly or via the Film Office. When
approved, the permit will be forwarded to the Film Office which will then
forward the permit to the permittee. The Transportation/Flood Control
Department will retain the hard copy on file until such time as it may be
destroyed pursuant to law.
   (g)   Airports Department. On behalf of the San Bernardino County Airports
Department, the Film Office will accept applications and fees for filming
activity on County controlled airports. The Film Office will forward all
required fees to the Airports Department, collect all necessary information and
documentation from the Permittee, and provide it to the Airports Department.
When approved by the Airports Department, the permit will be forwarded to the
Film Office, which will then forward it to the permittee. A hard copy of the
permit will be maintained on file with the Airports Department until such time
as it may be destroyed pursuant to law.
   (h)   Building and Safety Division. When applicable, the Building and Safety
Division will review and approve permit applications that involve the
construction of new sets, or the physical alteration of existing buildings
within the County unincorporated areas. This activity will be coordinated
through the Film Office, which will accept applications from Permittees and
will pay to the Building and Safety Division any fees that the Film Office
collects on its behalf. The Film Office may refer permittees to the Building
and Safety Division when direct contact would expedite processing the permit
application.
   (i)   Special Districts Department. On behalf of the Special Districts
Department, the Film Office will accept applications and fees for filming
activities in areas under the jurisdiction of, or facilities managed or
administered by the Special Districts Department including, but not limited to,
Board-governed special districts, County Service Areas, Lake Arrowhead Dam, and
other facilities. Such facilities include various roads, cemeteries, parks and
recreation areas, zoos, open space, water and sanitation facilities and other
facilities throughout San Bernardino County. In addition to fees for use of
areas, facilities, and services, permittees shall pay a non-refundable fee for
temporary use or closure of a road, the excavation of a trench, and the
placement of meters and locks on hydrants used to provide water for filming
purposes.
   The Film Office will coordinate construction and safety inspections, where
necessary, by the Special Districts Department and by the Building and Safety
Division of any construction by permittee acting under the jurisdiction of the
Special Districts Department.
   The Film Office will obtain all necessary information from the permittee and
supply it to the Special Districts Department. The Film Office will pay to the
Special Districts Department all fees and other monies collected from the
permittee on behalf of the Special Districts Department. The Special Districts
Department will retain the hard copy of any permits it may issue until such
time as the permits may be destroyed pursuant to law.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003; Am. Ord. 4160,
passed - -2012)
§ 41.2408   County Permits, Fees, Costs and Reimbursements.
   Prior to the issuance of a permit, the permittee must pay the applicable
fees and deposits set forth herein, and in other applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations. Such fees shall be collected by the Film Office and paid
over to the appropriate County Department, except for the film permit
processing fees, which shall be retained by the Film Office.
   (a)   Filming Permit Processing Fees. Filming permit processing fees are set
forth in § 16.0210A of the San Bernardino County Code. Such fees shall be paid
to the Film Office which shall keep them for payment of its services.
   (b)   County Fire Department Fees. In the event that any fire safety permits
are required, they shall be obtained through the Film Office from the local
fire department or County Fire Department, as appropriate. The County Fire
Department will distribute information to, and coordinate actions with, local
fire departments, as appropriate.
   At the discretion of the fire department with jurisdiction over the area
where the filming will be done, an event may require fire department personnel
or equipment for public safety. These costs shall be paid prior to the event.
The County Fire Department shall charge the fees for fire safety permits set
forth in § 16.0211A(b) of the San Bernardino County Code, and shall charge for
necessary fire department personnel or equipment pursuant to the Uniform Fire
Code, as amended. Such fees may be paid to the Film Office, which will remit
them to the appropriate fire agency.
   (c)   Sheriff’s Department. The Sheriff’s Department may negotiate directly,
or through the Film Office, for use of Sheriff’s Equipment, facilities and
services, and for reimbursement of the costs thereof. In the event that a Class
I Explosive is to be utilized for any part of the permittee’s filming activity,
an explosive permit must be obtained from the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s
Department. Fees charged by the Sheriff’s Department are set forth in § 16.0226
of the San Bernardino County Code. Unless otherwise directed by the Film
Office, the fees shall be paid by the permittee to the Film Office prior to
issuance of the permit. All fees shall be paid by the Film Office to the
Sheriff’s Department.
   (d)   Road Encroachment Permit, Trench Excavation, Flood Control Permits. If
the filming activity will involve the temporary use or closure of a County road
or highway, excavation of a trench, or use or disturbance of a flood control
channel, a non-refundable permit must be obtained through the Film Office from
the San Bernardino County Transportation and Flood Control Department. These
permits must be obtained even if the use is otherwise exempt pursuant to §
41.2404. Fees for road use or closure, and fees for trench excavation are
respectively set forth in § 16.0225(a) and (b) of the San Bernardino County
Code. Fees concerning use, access and disturbance of flood control channels,
and related matters, are set forth in § 16.0212 of the San Bernardino County
Code.
   (e)   Environmental Health Services. If, during the filming, the permittee
operates a food concession, the permittee shall pay the fees set forth in §
16.0213B(b) of the San Bernardino Code, as amended. If a subcontractor of
permittee, or an independent contractor, provides a food concession, such
person, and not the permittee, shall be responsible for payment of the fees set
forth in §§ 16.0213B(b)(5) and (6) of the San Bernardino County Code, as
amended.
   (f)   Airport Use Fees. The Film Office shall charge, collect, and remit to
the Airports Department the fees set forth in § 16.0202 of the San Bernardino
County Code.
   (g)   Museum Fees. If the services or facilities of the County Museum are
used by the permittee, the permittee shall pay the fees and charges set forth
in § 16.0218 of the San Bernardino County Code, as amended, to the Film Office
which shall remit them to the County Museum.
   (h)   Regional Park Fees. If using the facilities or services of the
Regional Parks, permittee shall pay the fees and charges set forth in § 16.0223
of the San Bernardino County Code, as amended, or such other fees and charges
as may be charged by the Regional Parks Division of the Department of Public
Works. The fees and charges shall be paid to the Film Office, which shall
immediately remit them to the.
   (i)   Special Districts Department. The Film Office shall charge, collect,
and immediately remit to the Special Districts Department the fees set forth in
§ 16.0226A of the San Bernardino County Code, as amended, and such other fees
and charges as may be charged by the Special Districts Department.
   The Film Office shall also collect any fees, including fees for coordinated
permits, that the permittee may need for water and/or sanitation services
within the jurisdiction of the Special Districts Department. Additional fees
may be collected for meters and locks that may be necessary for the use of
hydrants to provide water for uses other than that of the County Fire
Department.
   (j)   Other County Departments. If permittee uses County services, or
property owned, leased, or managed by a County department other than those
listed herein, permittee shall pay the Film Office such charges as are provided
in the San Bernardino County Code, as amended, or that may be required by the
department directly or through the Film Office. The Film Office shall collect
such charges and forward them to the appropriate Department.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2409   Billing Procedures.
   All projected fees, reimbursements and costs must be paid to the Film Office
prior to the issuance of a permit. Upon completion of the project for which the
permit was issued, reimbursements and costs actually incurred shall be
determined. Overpayments will be returned by the Film Office within 30 days
from the conclusion of the activity. Underpayments will be billed to permittee
by the Film Office and are due within 30 days of the day the billing is mailed.
Should the underpayments not be timely paid, the affected County Department may
pursue collection of the underpayment.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2410   Indemnification.
   The permittee agrees, as a condition of receiving a permit, to indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the County of San Bernardino, the San Bernardino
County Flood Control District and all districts, County Service Areas, and
other entities governed by the San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors along
with their authorized officers, employees, agents and volunteers from any and
all claims, actions, losses, damages, and/or liability arising out of the
filming activity from any cause or source whatsoever, including, but not
limited to, the acts, errors or omissions of any person, and for any costs or
expenses incurred by any of the aforementioned entities and individuals on
account of any claim therefor, except where prohibited by law. Permittee
further agrees to be responsible for payment of any medical charges incurred at
any County facility as a result of injury to any person arising out of the
filming or still photography activity.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2411   Insurance.
   (a)   Types of Insurance. Without in any way affecting the indemnity
provided herein, and in addition thereto, the permittee shall, at its sole
expense, maintain at all times the following types of insurance with limits as
shown:
      (1)   Comprehensive General and Automobile Liability Insurance. This
coverage to include contractual coverage and automobile coverage for owned,
hired and non-owned vehicles. The policy shall have combined single limits for
bodily injury and property damage of not less than $1,000,000.00.
      (2)   Pyrotechnic Liability Insurance. In the event that a Class I
Explosive permit is to be utilized for any part of the permittee’s filming
activity, the permittee will be required to obtain specific pyrotechnic
coverage at an amount to be determined by the County Risk Manager as suitable
for the scope of the planned pyrotechnic/special effects explosion(s). The
minimum requirement for any pyrotechnic coverage policy shall be combined
single limits for bodily injury and property damage of not less than
$2,000,000.00 per occurrence.
      (3)   Aircraft Liability Insurance. (When applicable), with combined
single limits of $10,000,000.00 for bodily injury (including passengers), death
and property damage.
      (4)   Workers’ Compensation. A program of Workers’ Compensation insurance
or a State-approved Self-Insurance Program in an amount and form to meet all
applicable requirements of the Labor Code of the State of California, including
Employer’s Liability with $250,000.00 limits, covering all persons providing
services on behalf of the permittee and all risks to such persons. Permittee
shall also require all subcontractors to maintain such a program of Workers’
Compensation insurance for all persons providing services on behalf of the
subcontractors.
   (b)   Policy Provisions.
      (1)   Additional Named Insured. All policies, except for Workers’
Compensation policies, shall contain additional endorsements naming the County
and its officers, employees, agents and volunteers as additional named insured
with respect to liabilities arising out of permittee’s filming activities.
      (2)   Waiver of Subrogation Rights. Permittee shall require the carriers
of the above required coverages to waive all rights of subrogation against the
County, its officers, employees, agents, volunteers, contractors and
subcontractors.
      (3)   Policies Primary and Non-Contributory. All policies required above
are to be primary and non-contributory with any insurance or self-insurance
programs carried or administered by the County.
   (c)   Proof of Coverage. Permittee shall, prior to issuance of the filming
permit, furnish certificates of insurance to the Film Office evidencing the
insurance coverage, including endorsements, above required, which certificates
shall provide that such insurance shall not be terminated or expire, prior to
expiration of the filming permit, without 30 days written notice to the Film
Office, and permittee shall maintain such insurance throughout the period of
the permit.
   (d)   Insurance Review. The above insurance requirements are subject to
periodic review by the County. The County’s Risk Manager is authorized, but not
required, to reduce or waive any of the above insurance requirements whenever
the Risk Manager determines that any of the above insurance is not available,
is unreasonably priced, or is not needed to protect the interests of the
County. In addition, if the Risk Manager determines that heretofore
unreasonably priced or unavailable types of insurance coverage or coverage
limits become reasonably priced or available, the Risk Manager is authorized,
but not required, to change the above insurance requirements to require
additional types of insurance coverage or higher coverage limits, provided that
any such change is reasonable in light of past claims against the County,
inflation, or any other item reasonably related to the County’s risk.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2412   Film Credits.
   The County of San Bernardino requests to be listed in the film credits.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
§ 41.2413   Other Regulatory Provisions.
   Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter does not exempt a permittee
from compliance with other requirements of this Code, with the laws of the
State of California, and with the laws of the United States.
(Ord. 3704, passed - -1997; Am. Ord. 3896, passed - -2003)
CHAPTER 25: RENTAL DWELLING UNITS
Section
   
41.2501   Findings and Declarations.
   
41.2502   Definitions.
   
41.2503   License Required.
   
41.2504   Duration of License.
   
41.2505   License Non-Transferable.
   
41.2506   Application for License.
   
41.2507   Standards of Operation.
   
41.2508   Application for License Renewal.
   
41.2509   License Application Fee.
   
41.2510   Issuance or Renewal of License.
   
41.2511   Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of License.
   
41.2512   No Operation with Denied, Suspended, or Revoked License.
   
41.2513   Appeal Rights.
   
41.2514   Violations.
   
41.2515   Abatement.
§ 41.2501 Findings and Declarations.
   The Board of Supervisors finds and declares as follows:
   (a)   It is found and declared that there exist in the County of San
Bernardino, substandard and unsanitary residential buildings and dwelling
units, the physical conditions and characteristics of which render them unfit
or unsafe for human occupancy and habitation, and which conditions and
characteristics are such as to be detrimental to or jeopardize the health,
safety, and welfare of their occupants and of the public.
   (b)   It is further found and declared that the existence of such
substandard buildings and dwelling units threatens the physical, social, and
economic stability of sound residential buildings and areas, and of their
supporting neighborhood facilities and institutions; necessitates
disproportionate expenditures of public funds for law enforcement and remedial
action; impairs the efficient and economical exercise of governmental powers
and functions; and destroys the amenity of residential areas and neighborhoods
and of the community as a whole.
   (c)   Finally, it is found and declared that the business of renting or
leasing rental dwelling unit has resulted in instances of absentee landlords
and/or off-site managers, which, in turn, has increased the likelihood of
instances of substandard buildings and rental dwelling units, health
violations, and crime, all of which are a public nuisance.
   (d)   For these reasons it is hereby declared to be the policy of the County
of San Bernardino:
      (1)   That it is in the public interest of the people of the County of
San Bernardino to protect and promote the existence of sound and wholesome
residential buildings, rental dwelling units, and neighborhoods by the adoption
and enforcement of such standards, regulations, and procedures as will remedy
the existence or prevent the development or creation of dangerous, substandard,
or unsanitary and deficient residential buildings and dwelling units; and,
      (2)   That the adoption of this Chapter relating to the licensing of
rental dwelling units is in the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of
the people of the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2502 Definitions.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth herein.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense, plural words include
the singular, and singular words include the plural. Words not specifically
defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not merely directory.
      APPLICANT. The owner, or the owner's authorized representative, applying
for a license or the renewal of a license pursuant to this Chapter.
      FAMILY. A person or persons living together as a single housekeeping unit
in a rental dwelling unit.
      LICENSEE. The person issued a license pursuant to this Chapter.
      OWNER'S AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE or AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
OWNER.  Any person authorized by a writing signed by the owner to act on the
owner's behalf in regards to the owner's rental dwelling unit.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, organization, joint stock association, or body politic; including
any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
      RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. Real property that includes any structure or part
of a structure, including but not limited to, a home, apartment, condominium,
mobile home (except a mobile home in a mobile park as described in Subdivision
(b)(4)), units of multiplexes, and units of apartment buildings, which is used
as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons and that is
rented or leased, in whole or in part, for 30 consecutive days or greater in
any consecutive 12-month period. All units operated as a rental dwelling unit
on the subject property shall constitute a single rental dwelling unit for
purposes of this chapter.
      RENTAL DWELLING UNIT LICENSE or LICENSE. The license issued pursuant to
this Chapter.
      RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT. The department or subdivision thereof designated
by the Chief Executive Officer of the County of San Bernardino to implement
this Chapter.
      SUBJECT PROPERTY. The underlying real property where the rental dwelling
unit is located.
   (b)   Scope. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Housing accommodations subject to a license under §§
41.2101 et seq. of the County Code. This exception does not apply to
residential hotels as defined in Health and Safety Code § 50519(b)(1).
      (2)   Housing accommodations in any hospital; State licensed community
care facility; convent, monastery, or other facility occupied exclusively by
members of a religious order; extended medical care facility; asylum; on-campus
fraternity or sorority house; or on-campus housing accommodation owned,
operated, or managed by an institution of higher education, a high school, or
an elementary school for occupancy by its students.
      (3)   Housing accommodations that a federal, state or local government
unit, agency, or authority owns, operates, or manages, or which are
specifically exempted from municipal regulation by Federal or State law or
administrative regulation. This exception shall not apply once the governmental
ownership, operation, or management regulation is discontinued.
      (4)   Mobilehomes in mobilehome parks, recreational vehicles as defined
in Health and Safety Code § 18010, or recreational vehicle parks.
      (5)   Rental dwelling units that have a valid short-term private home
rental permit pursuant to
Chapter 84.28 of Title 8 of the County Code.
      (6)   Owner occupied single family dwelling.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2503 License Required.
   On and after July 1, 2008, every person who owns a rental dwelling unit, as
defined in this Chapter, shall procure and maintain a license from the County,
which license shall authorize the person to operate such rental dwelling unit.
A current and effective license issued pursuant to this Chapter is required for
the operation of each rental dwelling unit in the unincorporated region of the
County. Operation of a rental dwelling unit without such a license is
prohibited.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2504 Duration of License.
   A license issued or renewed under this Chapter shall terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of its issuance unless revoked prior to
said termination pursuant to §
41.2511.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2505 License Non-Transferable.
   A license issued under this Chapter is non-transferable both as to the
location of the rental dwelling unit and as to the person holding the license.
When the owner of the rental dwelling unit procures a license, any other person
who conducts, manages, or carries on such business as an authorized
representative of the owner, is not required to obtain an additional license.
However, the authorized representative must verify that a valid license has
been issued and is in effect at all times while operating the rental dwelling
unit. There must also be a signed statement from the owner that the authorized
representative in question has authority to act on behalf of the owner
regarding the rental dwelling unit.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2506 Application for License.
   The applicant for a license or the renewal of a license pursuant to this
Chapter shall provide to the responsible department, on a form approved by the
County, the following information:
   (a)   The name, address, electronic contact information if available, and
telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is not the owner of the
rental dwelling unit, the applicant must submit the owner's written signed
authorization indicating that the applicant is the authorized representative or
agent of the owner.
   (b)   If the owner of the rental dwelling unit is not the applicant, then
the name, address, electronic contact information if available, and telephone
number of the owner of the rental dwelling unit must be submitted.
   (c)   A telephone number to contact the owner and/or the authorized
representative, as provided in the Standards of Operation, as described in §
41.2507. A confidential/non-business 24-hour contact telephone number,
designated by the owner and/or the authorized representative as confidential,
shall be treated as confidential by the County and shall only be available to
authorized representatives of the County.
   (d)   The location and address of the rental dwelling unit.
   (e)   A description of the size and character of the rental dwelling unit,
including, but not limited to, the type (home, apartment, condominium), the
number of units, subunits, total square feet, and the number of bedrooms/
bathrooms.
   (f)   A certification signed by the owner/authorized representative under
penalty of perjury that to the best of his or her knowledge and belief on the
date of application, the rental dwelling unit identified in the application
complies with the Standards of Operation, as described in §
41.2507.
   (g)   Any other information deemed necessary by the responsible department
in carrying out the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2507 Standards of Operation.
   As a condition to the issuance, renewal, or holding of a license under this
Chapter, the owner, and the owner's authorized representative (if any), shall
be responsible for complying with the following standards:
   (a)   The rental dwelling unit, and the subject property upon which the
rental dwelling unit is located, shall be in compliance with all applicable
laws including, but not limited to, the California Fire Code, California
Building Code, the National Fire Protection Association Standards, any other
applicable uniform codes as adopted by the County of San Bernardino.
   (b)   The rental dwelling unit, and the subject property upon which the
rental dwelling unit is located, shall be in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the County Code.
   (c)   The rental dwelling unit, and the subject property upon which the
rental dwelling unit is located, shall not be operated, conducted, or
maintained so as to constitute a public nuisance.
   (d)   The rental dwelling unit, and the subject property upon which the
rental dwelling unit is located, may be inspected by the County.
   (e)   The owner or any authorized representative(s) of the owner shall be
available in person, by telephone, by telephone answering machine, or by other
electronic messaging device to authorized representatives of the County on a
24-hour, seven days a week basis to receive calls regarding the condition and/
or operation of the rental dwelling unit and subject property. Failure to
respond to calls in a timely and appropriate manner may result in suspension or
revocation of the license. For purposes of this Subdivision, responding in a
timely and appropriate manner shall mean that any response or responses and any
corrective action shall be done pursuant to the required time frame and manner
set forth in any applicable adopted uniform code or other applicable law.
   (f)   A smoke detector(s) shall be installed, in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions, in each dwelling space of the rental dwelling
unit, as provided by State law and regulations.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2508 Application for License Renewal.
   Prior to the expiration of a license, the licensee shall apply for the
renewal of the license following the same procedures stated in §
41.2506. To ensure County review of an application for renewal prior to
expiration of a license, an application to renew must be provided to the
responsible department at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the license.
However, no application for renewal shall be accepted earlier than 90 days
prior to the expiration of the license.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2509 License Application Fee.
   The application/license fee set forth in
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the County Code shall accompany each
application for a license, including an application for the renewal of a
license, issued under this Chapter.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2510 Issuance or Renewal of License.
   (a)   The responsible department shall not issue or renew a license under
this Chapter unless and until the responsible department has received a correct
and complete application and the appropriate license application fee.
   (b)   No license shall be issued or renewed if the County determines that
the rental dwelling unit, or the subject property upon which the rental
dwelling unit is located, is not in compliance with any provision of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2511 Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of License.
   (a)   A license issued under this Chapter shall be denied, suspended, or
revoked by the responsible department upon one or more of the following
grounds:
      (1)   The applicant or licensee provided material information that was
knowingly incorrect, or provided material information that the applicant or
licensee should have reasonably known was incorrect, in its application for a
license under this Chapter.
      (2)   The applicant or licensee violated any provision of this Chapter.
      (3)   The rental dwelling unit, or subject property upon which the rental
dwelling unit is located, is not in compliance with any provision of this
Chapter.
      (4)   The license was issued in error.
   (b)   In the event that a license is denied, suspended, or revoked, the
responsible department shall notify the applicant or licensee in writing, with
said notice to be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant
or licensee at the applicant's or licensee's mailing address shown on the most
recent application or otherwise filed by the applicant or licensee with the
responsible department. Service may also be made by personal service on the
applicant or licensee or by leaving the notice at the applicant's or licensee's
residence in the custody of a person over the age of 18 years of age or older.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2512 No Operation with Denied, Suspended, or Revoked License.
   Any person whose license is denied, suspended, or revoked pursuant to this
Chapter shall not operate the rental dwelling unit to which the application or
license pertained.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2513 Appeal Rights.
   (a)   The denial, suspension, or revocation of a license based on a property
being in violation of the requirements of Chapter 6 of Division 3 of Title 6 of
the County Code, may be appealed for a hearing before the Building Appeals
Board. The format and process of the appeal shall be as required by § 63.0107
of the County Code. A decision by the Building Appeals Board shall be final and
no further appeal within the County shall be available.
   (b)   The denial, suspension, or revocation of a license for a reason other
than a reason referenced in Subdivision (a) may be appealed for a hearing
before a County-appointed hearing officer as defined by §§
12.2701,
12.2702,
12.2703, and
12.2705 of the County Code, or as otherwise authorized by the County Code or
law. The hearing procedure shall include the following:
      (1)   At least ten days written notice of the hearing shall be given to
the applicant or licensee prior to the hearing date. The hearing date may be
postponed or continued by stipulation of the parties. If the applicant or
licensee does not respond or appear, no further hearing procedure shall be
required.
      (2)   Witnesses shall swear or affirm to tell the truth. The oath or
affirmation shall be taken by the hearing officer. The County shall present its
case first, with oral testimony and documentary evidence or other evidence. The
County shall have the right of cross-examination. The applicant or licensee
shall have the right to be represented and shall have the right of cross-
examination. The applicant or licensee may present his or her response after
the County has presented its case. Both parties may thereafter present
argument.
      (3)   No determination or order shall be based solely on hearsay
evidence. The hearing officer shall make his or her determination within five
working days of the end of the hearing, unless a party requests a greater
period of time. The determination shall be in writing, and shall state the
findings upon which the determination is made. The decision by the hearing
officer shall be final and no further appeal within the County shall be
available.
   (c)   The denial, suspension, or revocation of a license for multiple
reasons under both Subdivisions (a) and (b) shall be heard by the Building
Appeals Board in the form and manner defined by § 63.0107 of the County Code. A
decision by such body shall be final and no further appeal within the County
shall be available.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2514 Violations.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction or misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, the penalty
shall be as described in §
11.0201 of the County Code. In addition, all other sections of
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 shall apply to this Chapter.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
§ 41.2515 Abatement.
   Any rental dwelling unit, or the subject property upon which the rental
dwelling unit is located, operated or maintained in violation of the
requirements of this Chapter, any other provision of the County Code, or other
applicable law, shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a
public nuisance. The County may, in addition to, or in lieu of any other
administrative, civil, or criminal proceedings, commence an administrative or
civil action for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment of such public
nuisance, in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4328, passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 26: RENTAL DWELLING UNITS-LICENSE APPLICATION FEE WAIVER
Section
   
41.2601   Findings and Declarations.
   
41.2602   Definitions and Scope.
   
41.2603   Rental Dwelling Unit License Application Fee Waiver.
   
41.2604   Severability.
§ 41.2601 Findings and Declarations.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors finds and declares as follows:
      (1)   That participation by owners of rental dwelling units and
participation by their on-site or off-site managers in the Crime Free Multi-
Housing Program, as sponsored by the San Bernardino County Sheriff's
Department, substantially reduces the risk of substandard and unsanitary
conditions that render residential buildings and dwelling units unfit or unsafe
for human occupancy and habitation, and jeopardize the health, safety and
welfare of their occupants and of the public.
      (2)   That the training provided to owners and managers through the Crime
Free Multi-Housing Program covers the eviction process, the Crime Free Lease
Addendum (whereby criminal activity committed by renters; other members of
their household; and their guests on the rented premises constitute a material
breach of the rental agreement and, therefore, an independent basis for
eviction), fair tenant screening procedures, the legal rights and
responsibilities of tenants and landlords, improving working relationship with
law enforcement, and reducing the property's suitability for criminal conduct
by identifying the physical or environmental features that invite criminal
activity (e.g., inadequate lighting, lack of fencing, fencing that reduces or
impairs visibility; overabundance of vegetation that creates hiding spaces or
concealed routes of access to or escape from the property).
      (3)   That participation by owners of rental dwelling units and
participation by their on-site or off-site managers in a Crime Free Multi-
Housing Program substantially reduces the likelihood of such properties
becoming blighted or promoting an environment conducive to criminal and
nuisance activity, and actually reduces the occurrence of crime and calls for
service. As a result, there is an improvement in the quality of life for the
tenants of such properties, their neighborhoods, and the community as a whole.
   (b)   For these reasons it is hereby declared to be the policy of the County
of San Bernardino:
      (1)   That it is in the public interest of the people of the County of
San Bernardino to encourage owners of rental dwelling units, as well as their
managers, to participate and continue to participate in the Crime Free Multi-
Housing Program, as sponsored by the San Bernardino County Sheriff's
Department; and
      (2)   That it is appropriate to encourage participation in the Crime Free
Multi-Housing Program by waiving the application fee for the rental dwelling
license required of owners of rental dwelling units under
Chapter 25 of this Division, in that the waiver of the fee serves the public
purposes described herein.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008)
§ 41.2602 Definitions and Scope.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this Chapter, the definitions set forth
in
Chapter 25 of this Division shall apply. Further, the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words
used in the present tense include the future tense, plural words include the
singular and singular words include the plural. Words not specifically defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. The word "shall" is mandatory
and not merely directory.
      RENTAL DWELLING UNIT LICENSE APPLICATION FEE. The application fee set
forth in the San Bernardino County Code Schedule of Fees for rental dwelling
unit licenses required under
Chapter 25 of this Division, including single-family residences.
   (b)   Scope. The provisions of this Chapter shall only apply to rental
dwelling units, as provided in
Chapter 25 of this Division.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008)
§ 41.2603 Rental Dwelling Unit License Application Fee Waiver.
   (a)   The rental dwelling unit license application fee required by
Chapter 25 of this Division, including that required for single-family
residences, shall be waived for those applicants who include with their
application:
      (1)   A valid certificate issued by the San Bernardino County Sheriff's
Department's Public Affairs Division (or other law enforcement agency
participating in the International Crime Free Multi- Housing Program) to the
applicant or the manager of the rental dwelling unit(s) showing completion of
the eight-hour training course; and
      (2)   A valid, final certification (which must be updated yearly by the
applicant) issued by the San Bernardino County Sheriff's Department's Public
Affairs Division showing that all of applicant's real property/properties where
the rental dwelling units are located has/have completed all phases of the
Crime Free Multi-Housing Program.
   (b)   The application fee waiver available under this section shall apply to
both initial and renewal applications.
   (c)   The application fee waiver available under this section shall only
apply to the rental dwelling unit license application fee and does not apply to
any special inspection or health permit fees.
   (d)   The failure of the applicant to maintain a current, valid, final
certificate for the property/properties where the rental dwelling unit(s) is/
are located shall render the waiver of the rental dwelling unit application fee
null and void; and such fee shall become immediately due and payable.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008)
§ 41.2604 Severability.
   The provisions of this Chapter are severable, and, if any sentence, section,
or other part of this Chapter should be found to be invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect the remaining provisions, and the remaining provisions shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 4044, passed - -2008)
CHAPTER 27: ADULT BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMIT
Section
   
41.2701   Adult Business Regulatory Permit.
§ 41.2701 Adult Business Regulatory Permit.
   In order to establish and/or operate an adult business as defined in §
810.01.030(l) of Chapter
810.01 of Division 10 of Title 8 (Development Code) of the San Bernardino
County Code, the owner/operator must first receive an Adult Business Regulatory
Permit issued pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 85.21 of Title 8 of the County Code.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 28: ADULT BUSINESS PERFORMER LICENSE
Section
   
41.2801   Definitions.
   
41.2802   Purpose.
   
41.2803   Adult Business Performer License.
   
41.2804   Investigation and Action on Application for Adult Business Performer
License.
   
41.2805   Revocation/Suspension/Renewal/Denial of Adult Business Performer
License.
   
41.2806   Display of License Identification Cards.
   
41.2807   Adult Business Performer License Nontransferable.
   
41.2808   Violations.
   
41.2809   Regulation Non-Exclusive.
   
41.2810   Severability.
§ 41.2801 Definitions.
   The definitions for this Chapter shall be governed by the definitions found
in §
810.01.030(m) of the County Development Code unless otherwise stated.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2802 Purpose.
   It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to provide for the licensing of
adult business performers in order to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the County. The goals of the performer licensing provisions are (a)
to protect minors by requiring that all performers be over the age of 18 years;
(b) to assure the correct identification of persons performing in adult
businesses; (c) to enable the County Sheriff to deploy law enforcement
resources effectively; and (d) to detect and discourage the involvement of
crime in adult businesses by precluding the licensing of performers with
certain sex-related convictions within a prior time period. It is neither the
intent nor the effect of these regulations to invade the privacy of performers
or to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative
material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of these
regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to communicative materials or
to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult businesses to their
intended lawful market. Nothing in these regulations is intended to authorize,
legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any
business, building, or use which violates any County ordinance or any statute
of the State of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent
exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter, or the
exhibition or public display thereof.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2803 Adult Business Performer License.
   (a)   No performer/adult cabaret dancer shall be employed, hired, engaged,
or otherwise retained in an adult business, legally established pursuant to
Chapter 85.21 of Division 5 of Title 8 (Development Code) of the San Bernardino
County Code, to participate in or give any live performance displaying
“specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” without first
having a valid adult business performer license issued by the County.
   (b)   The responsible department shall grant, deny, and renew adult business
performer licenses in accordance with these regulations.
   (c)   License applicants shall file a written, signed, and verified
application or renewal application on a form provided by the responsible
department. Such application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The license applicant’s legal name and any other names (including
“stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant.
      (2)   Principal place of residence.
      (3)   Age, date and place of birth.
      (4)   Height, weight, hair and eye color, and tattoo descriptions and
locations.
      (5)   Each present and/or proposed business address(es) and telephone
number(s) of the establishments at which the applicant intends to work.
      (6)   Driver’s license or identification number and state of issuance.
      (7)   Satisfactory written proof that the license applicant is at least
18 years of age.
      (8)   Verification that the applicant has submitted a completed Livescan
form and two, color two-by-two inch photographs clearly showing the applicant’s
face to the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Department. Any fees for the
photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. Fingerprints and
photographs shall be taken within six months of the date of application.
      (9)   Whether the license applicant has pled guilty or nolo contendere or
been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex
related offense including crimes involving moral turpitude, prostitution, or
obscenity subject to the time periods established in §
85.21.020(c)(4)(A), (B), and (C).
      (10)   If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license,
the license applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed.
   (d)   The information provided above in Subdivision (c) of this Section
which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could
expose the applicant to the risk of harm will not be disclosed under the
California Public Records Act or the open government ordinance. Such
information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s residence address,
telephone number, date of birth, age, and driver’s license. The Board of
Supervisors in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set
forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code § 6255 that the
public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed
by the public interest in achieving compliance with this Chapter by ensuring
that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality or security interests are
protected. The above-mentioned information shall be redacted from any copy of a
completed application form made available to any member of the public.
   (e)   The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee and an annual license fee. The amount of such fees shall be as
set forth in the schedule of fees established by ordinance from time to time by
the Board of Supervisors.
   (f)   The completeness of an application shall be determined within 24
business hours by the responsible department. The responsible department or his
or her designee must be available during normal working hours Monday through
Friday to accept adult business performer license applications. If the
responsible department determines that the application is incomplete, the
responsible department shall immediately inform the applicant of such fact and
the reasons therefor, including identifying any additional information
necessary to render the application complete. Upon receipt of a completed adult
business performer license application and payment of the license fee specified
in Subdivision (e) of this Section, the responsible department shall
immediately issue a temporary license which shall expire of its own accord 20
business days from the date of issuance and shall only be extended as provided
in §
41.2804.
   (g)   This temporary adult business performer license shall authorize the
license applicant to commence performance at an adult business establishment
that possesses a valid adult business regulatory permit authorized to provide
live entertainment.
   (h)   The fact that a license applicant possesses other types of State or
city permits or licenses does not exempt the license applicant from the
requirement of obtaining an adult business performer license.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2804 Investigation and Action on Application for Adult Business Performer
License.
   (a)   Upon submission of a completed application, payment of license fees,
and issuance of a temporary adult business performer license pursuant to §
41.2803, the responsible department shall immediately stamp the application
“Received” and in conjunction with County staff, including members of the
Sheriff’s Department, shall promptly investigate the information contained in
the application to determine whether the license applicant should be issued an
adult business performer license.
   (b)   Investigation shall not be grounds for the County to unilaterally
delay in reviewing a completed application. The responsible department’s
decision to grant or deny the adult business performer license shall be made
within 20 business days from the date the temporary license was issued and in
no case shall the decision to grant or deny the license application be made
after the expiration of the temporary license. In the event the responsible
department is unable to complete the investigation within 20 business days, the
responsible department shall promptly notify the license applicant and extend
the temporary license for up to 20 additional days. In no case shall the
investigation exceed 40 days to allow sufficient time for the LiveScan result,
nor shall the decision to grant or deny the license application be made after
the expiration of the temporary license.
   (c)   The responsible department shall render a written decision to grant or
deny the license within the time period set forth in Subdivision (b) of this
section. Said decision shall be mailed first class postage prepaid or hand
delivered to the applicant within the foregoing 20-day period, or 40-day period
if extended pursuant to Subdivision (b) of this Section, at the address
provided by the applicant in the application.
   (d)   The responsible department shall notify the applicant as follows:
      (1)   The responsible department shall write or stamp “Granted” or
“Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.
      (2)   If the application is denied, the responsible department shall
attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial. Such
notice shall also provide that the license applicant may appeal the denial
pursuant to §
41.2805.
      (3)   If the application is granted, the responsible department shall
attach to the application an adult business performer license.
      (4)   The application, as acted upon, and the license, if any, shall be
placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, or hand
delivered, addressed to the license applicant at the residence address stated
in the application in accordance with the time frames established herein.
   (e)   The responsible department shall grant the application and issue the
license unless the application is denied based on one of the grounds set forth
in Subdivision (f) of this section.
   (f)   The responsible department shall deny the application based on any of
the following grounds:
      (1)   The license applicant has made false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the application for an adult business performer
license.
      (2)   The license applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (3)   The adult business performer license is to be used for performing
in a business prohibited by laws of the State or County or a business that does
not have a valid adult business regulatory permit.
      (4)   The license applicant, has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been
convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex related
offense including crimes involving moral turpitude, prostitution, or obscenity
subject to the time periods established in §
85.21.020(c)(4)(A), (B), and (C).
   (g)   Failure of the responsible department to render a decision on the
license within the time frames established by this Section shall be deemed to
constitute an approval.
   (h)   Each adult business performer license, other than the temporary
license described in §
41.2803, shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed
only by filing with the responsible department a written request for renewal,
accompanied by the annual license fee and a copy of the license to be renewed.
If said application conforms to the previously approved application and there
has been no change with respect to the license holder being convicted of any
crime classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and no
other grounds exist under Subdivision (f) of this Section, the responsible
department or his or her designee shall renew the license for one year. If any
ground set forth in Subdivision (f) of this section exists, then the license
shall not be automatically renewed and the notice, including notice of right to
appeal, shall be provided as set forth in Subdivision (d)(2) of this Section.
The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date of the license. Applications for renewal shall be acted upon as provided
herein for action upon applications for license. The responsible department’s
denial of a renewal application is subject to the provisions of §
41.2805.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2805 Revocation/Suspension/Renewal/Denial of Adult Business Performer
License.
   (a)   On determining that grounds for denial of a license, denial of a
license renewal, license revocation or license suspension exist, the
responsible department shall furnish written notice of the proposed action to
the applicant/license holder.
   (b)   The decision of the responsible department shall be appealable to a
designated hearing officer by filing a written request for a hearing with the
responsible department within 15 days following the day of mailing of the
responsible department’s decision. All such appeals shall be filed with the
responsible department and shall be public records. The responsible department
shall issue a notice which shall set forth the time and place of a hearing
before a designated hearing officer which is within 30 days from the date the
appeal was filed and the ground or grounds upon which the proposed action is
based, the pertinent San Bernardino County Code sections, and a brief statement
of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the applicant/license holder,
or shall be delivered to the license holder personally, at least ten days prior
to the hearing date.
   (c)   At the hearing, the applicant/license holder shall have the right to
offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues
and may be represented by counsel. The designated hearing officer shall not be
bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any hearing under this Section may be
continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at
the request of the license holder. Extensions of time or continuances sought by
a license holder/appellant shall not be considered delay on the part of the
County or constitute failure by the County to provide for prompt decisions on
license suspensions or revocations.
   (d)   An application for a license or license renewal may be denied or a
license may be revoked or suspended, based on any of the following causes
arising from the acts or omissions of the applicant/license holder:
      (1)   The applicant/license holder has made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a performer
license.
      (2)   The applicant/licensee has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been
convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related
offense including crimes involving moral turpitude, prostitution, or obscenity
subject to the time periods established in § 85.21.020(c)(4)(A), (B), and (C).
      (3)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
   (e)   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this
Section, if the designated hearing officer finds and determines that there are
grounds for the denial of the application or revocation or suspension of the
license, the hearing officer shall deny the application or revoke or suspend
the license. The hearing officer shall render a written decision that shall be
hand delivered or overnight mailed to the applicant/license holder within four
business days of the hearing. The designated hearing officer’s failure to
render such a decision within this time frame shall constitute an approval of
the application or a reinstatement of the license.
   (f)   In the event an application for a license or renewal is denied or a
license is revoked pursuant to this Section, another adult business performer
license shall not be granted to the applicant/licensee within 12 months after
the date of such decision.
   (g)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and no further
administrative appeal is available.
   (h)   The time for a court challenge to a decision of the hearing officer is
governed by Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8.
   (i)   Notice of the responsible department’s or hearing officer’s decision
and the findings shall include citation to Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8.
   (j)   Any applicant or license holder whose license has been denied,
suspended, or revoked, pursuant to this section shall be afforded prompt
judicial review of that decision as provided by Code of Civil Procedure §
1094.8.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2806 Display of License Identification Cards.
   The responsible department shall provide each performer/adult cabaret dancer
required to have a license pursuant to this Chapter with an identification card
containing the name, address, photograph, and license number of such performer/
adult cabaret dancer. Every performer/adult cabaret dancer shall have such card
available for inspection at all times during which he or she is on the premises
of the adult business at which he or she performs.
(Ord. 4239, passed - - 2014; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2807 Adult Business Performer License Nontransferable.
   No adult business performer license may be sold, transferred, or assigned by
any license holder or by operation of law, to any other person, group,
partnership, corporation, or any other entity. Any such sale, transfer, or
assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to
constitute a voluntary surrender of the adult business performer license, and
the license thereafter shall be null and void.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2808 Violations.
   (a)   Any license holder violating or causing the violation of any of these
provisions regulating adult business performer licenses shall be subject to
license revocation/suspension pursuant to §
41.2805 above, a fine of not more than $1,000.00 pursuant to Government Code §§
25132 and 53069.4, and any and all other civil remedies. All remedies provided
herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions
shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such
violation is committed or continued.
   (b)   In addition to the remedies set forth in §
41.2805, any violation of any of these provisions regulating adult business
performer licenses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and may
be abated or enjoined.
   (c)   The restrictions imposed pursuant to this Section are part of a
regulatory licensing process, and do not constitute a criminal offense.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the San Bernardino County Code, the
County does not impose a criminal penalty for violations of the provisions of
this Chapter related to sexual conduct or activities.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2809 Regulation Non-Exclusive.
   The provisions of this Chapter regulating adult business performer licenses
are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse
noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the licensing provisions
as adopted by the County Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2810 Severability.
   This Chapter and each Section and provision of said Chapter hereunder, are
hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not
withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to
be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said Chapter,
or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid,
the remaining Sections or provisions and the application of such Sections and
provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held
invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such
Sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such Section or
provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this Chapter
be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the
substantive aspects of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
CHAPTER 29: ADULT BUSINESS NON-PERFORMER LICENSE
Section
   
41.2901   Definitions.
   
41.2902   Purposes.
   
41.2903   Adult Business Non-Performer License.
   
41.2904   Investigation and Action on Adult Business Non-Performer License
Application.
   
41.2905   Revocation/Suspension/Denial of Adult Business Non-Performer License.
   
41.2906   Display of License Identification Cards.
   
41.2907   Adult Business Non-Performer License Nontransferable.
   
41.2908   Violations.
   
41.2909   Regulations Non-Exclusive.
   
41.2910   Severability.
§ 41.2901 Definitions.
   The definitions for this Chapter shall be governed by the definitions found
in §
810.01.030(m) of the County Development Code unless otherwise stated.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4378, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2902 Purpose.
   It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to require certain background
checks on non-performers who work in adult businesses during regular business
hours to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the County. The
goals of these non-performer employee provisions are: (a) to protect minors by
requiring that all non-performers regularly employed be over the age of 18
years; (b) to assure the correct identification of persons working in adult
businesses; (c) to enable the County Sheriff to deploy law enforcement
resources effectively; and (d) to detect and discourage the involvement of
crime in adult businesses by precluding the employment of non-performers with
certain sex-related convictions within a prior time period. It is neither the
intent nor the effect of these regulations to invade the privacy of adult
business employees or to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of
any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect
of these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to communicative
materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult
businesses to their intended lawful market. Nothing in these regulations is
intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or
maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any County
ordinance or any statute of the State of California regarding public nuisances,
unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful
matter, or the exhibition or public display thereof.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4378, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2903 Adult Business Non-Performer License.
   (a)   No individual who works as a non-performer in a managerial position in
an adult business shall be employed, hired, engaged, or otherwise retained in
an adult business without first obtaining an adult business non-performer
license. Non-managerial individuals who are not performers do not need a
license.
   (b)   Individuals who wish to work as non-performer managers in an adult
business shall file a written, signed, and verified application or renewal
application for an adult business non-performer license on a form provided by
the responsible department. Such application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The applicant’s legal name and all used aliases.
      (2)   Date of birth.
      (3)   Driver’s license or identification number and state of issuance or
other state identification which confirms the name of the applicant.
      (4)   The license applicant’s fingerprints on a Livescan form provided by
the San Bernardino Sheriff’s Department. Any fees for fingerprints shall be
paid by the applicant. Fingerprints shall be taken within six months of the
date of application.
      (5)   Whether the non-performer employee applicant has pled guilty or
pled nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any
other state as a sex related offense including crimes involving moral
turpitude, prostitution, or obscenity subject to the time periods established
in §
85.21.020(c)(4)(A), (B), and (C). Any applicant who admits of a recent prior
sex related offense as specified above shall be denied employment in an adult
business during the applicable time period for disqualification called out
herein.
      (6)   The name and address of the adult business where the applicant
proposes to work as a non-performer in a managerial capacity.
   (c)   The information provided above in Subdivision (b) of this Section,
which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could
expose the applicant to the risk of harm, will not be disclosed under the
California Public Records Act. Such information includes, but is not limited
to, the applicant’s mailing address, date of birth, age, and driver’s license
number. The Board of Supervisors in adopting the application system set forth
herein has determined in accordance with Government Code § 6255 that the public
interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the
public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the
applicant’s privacy, confidentiality and/or security interests are protected.
The above-mentioned information shall be redacted from any copy of a completed
application form made available to any member of the public.
   (d)   The responsible department must be available during normal working
hours Monday through Friday to accept adult business non-performer license
applications. The responsible department shall determine if an application is
complete within five business days after receipt of the results of the Livescan
application. If the responsible department determines that the application is
incomplete, the responsible department shall immediately inform the applicant
of such fact and the reasons therefor, including identifying any additional
information necessary to render the application complete. Upon receipt of a
completed adult business non-performer license application in which the
applicant denies any conviction of a misdemeanor or felony constituting a
specified criminal activity as specified in §
41.2903(b)(5), the responsible department shall permit temporary employment of
such applicant in an adult business that possesses a valid adult business
regulatory permit.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4378, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2904 Investigation and Action on Adult Business Non-Performer License
Application.
   (a)   Upon submission of a completed adult business non-performer license
application by an individual who wishes to work in a managerial position in an
adult business, the responsible department shall immediately stamp the
application “received” and in conjunction with County staff, including members
of the Sheriff’s Department, shall promptly investigate the information
contained in the application to determine whether the provisions of §
41.2903 are satisfied.
   (b)   Investigation shall not be grounds for the County to unilaterally
delay in reviewing a completed application. The responsible department’s
determination of any violation of §
41.2903 or the existence of any of the grounds set forth in Subdivision (f)
below shall be made within ten business days from the date the application is
filed with the responsible department. In the event the responsible department
is unable to complete the investigation within ten business days, responsible
department shall promptly notify the applicant. In no case shall the
investigation exceed 30 days.
   (c)   The responsible department shall render a written decision to grant or
deny the non-performer license within the foregoing ten-day time period set
forth in Subdivision (b) of this Section. Said decision shall be mailed first
class postage prepaid or hand delivered to the applicant, within the foregoing
ten-day period, or 30-day period if extended pursuant to Subdivision (b) of
this Section, at the address provided by the applicant in the application.
Notice of such decision shall also be mailed first class postage prepaid or
hand delivered to the owner or management of the adult business(es) identified
on the applicant’s application.
   (d)   The responsible department shall grant the application for a non-
performer license unless the application is denied based on one or more of the
grounds set forth in Subdivision (e) of this Section.
   (e)   The responsible department shall deny the application of a non-
performer for a license to work in a managerial capacity at an adult business,
or suspend or revoke an existing license, based on any of the following
grounds:
      (1)   The applicant/license holder has made a false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a non-performer
license.
      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (3)   The adult business identified by the applicant is not authorized to
operate as a business under the laws of the State or County and/or does not
have a valid adult business regulatory permit.
      (4)   The non-performer work applicant has pled guilty, or pled nolo
contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other
state as a sex related offense including crimes involving moral turpitude,
prostitution, or obscenity subject to the time periods established in §
85.21.020(c)(4)(A), (B), and (C).
      (5)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
   (f)   The responsible department shall notify the applicant as follows:
      (1)   The responsible department shall write or stamp “Granted” or
“Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.
      (2)   If the application for a non-performer license is denied, the
responsible department shall attach to the application a statement of the
reasons for the denial. Such notice shall also provide that the applicant may
appeal the denial to a designated hearing officer. The designated hearing
officer shall conduct a hearing as described in §
41.2905.
   (g)   Failure of the responsible department to render a decision on the
application within the time frames established by this Section shall be deemed
to constitute an approval of the non-performer license.
   (h)   Each license holder must annually renew his or her license with the
responsible department designee by a written application for a license renewal.
If said application conforms to the previously approved application and there
has been no change with respect to the applicant having been convicted of any
crime classified by this or any other state as a sex related offense, the
responsible department shall renew the applicant’s availability for work in an
adult business during regular business hours for one year. The renewal
application shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the
license. Applications for renewal shall be acted upon as provided herein for
action upon an initial application for a non-performer license. The responsible
department’s denial of a renewal application is subject to the provisions of §
41.2905.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4379, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2905 Revocation/Suspension/Denial of Adult Business Non-Performer License.
   (a)   On determining that grounds exist to deny an original or renewal
application for a non-performer license, or suspend or revoke an existing
license, the responsible department shall furnish written notice of the
proposed action to the applicant.
   (b)   The decision of the responsible department to deny an application for
a non-performer license or to suspend or revoke a non-performer license shall
be appealable to an appointed hearing officer by filing a written request for a
hearing with the responsible department within 15 days following the day of
mailing of the responsible department’s decision. All such appeals shall be
filed with the responsible department and shall be public records. The
responsible department shall issue a notice which shall set forth the time and
place of a hearing before an appointed hearing officer which is within 30 days
from the date the appeal was filed and the ground or grounds upon which the
hearing is based, the pertinent San Bernardino County Code sections, and a
brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the applicant/
license holder or shall be delivered to the applicant/license holder
personally, at least ten days prior to the hearing date.
   (c)   At the hearing the applicant/license holder shall have the right to
offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues
and may be represented by counsel. The hearing officer shall not be bound by
the formal rules of evidence. Any hearing under this Section may be continued
for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the
request of the applicant. Extensions of time or continuances sought by an
applicant/license holder shall not be considered delay on the part of the
County or constitute failure by the County to provide for prompt decisions on
denial of a non-performer license.
   (d)   The application of a non-performer to work in an adult business may be
denied, or such license may be suspended or revoked based on any of the
following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the applicant/license
holder:
      (1)   The applicant/license holder has made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for work as a non-
performer in an adult business during regular business hours.
      (2)   The applicant/license holder has pled guilty, pled nolo contendere
or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex
related offense including crimes involving moral turpitude, prostitution, or
obscenity and subject to the time periods established in §
85.21.020(c)(4)(A), (B), and (C).
      (3)   Failure to comply with the operating standards of
Chapter 84.02 or the requirements of this Chapter.
   (e)   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this
Section, if the hearing officer finds and determines that there are grounds to
deny an application, or revoke or suspend a non-performer license, the hearing
officer shall take such action. The hearing officer shall render a written
decision that shall be hand delivered or overnight mailed to the applicant/
license holder and any adult business that the applicant/license holder has
identified on his or her application within four working days of the hearing.
The hearing officer’s failure to render such a decision within this time frame
shall constitute approval of the application or reinstatement of the license.
   (f)   If an application is denied pursuant to this section, the applicant
may reapply for managerial work with an adult business 12 months after the date
of such denial.
   (g)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and no further
administrative appeal is available.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4378, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2906 Display of License Identification Cards.
   The responsible department shall provide each individual required to have a
license pursuant to this Chapter with an identification card containing the
name, address, photograph, and license number of such individual. Every
individual required to have the license shall have such card available for
inspection at all times during which he or she is on the premises of the adult
business.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4378, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2907 Adult Business Non-Performer License Nontransferable.
   No adult business non-performer license may be sold, transferred, or
assigned by any license holder or by operation of law, to any other person,
group, partnership, corporation, or any other entity. Any such sale, transfer,
or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to
constitute a voluntary surrender of the adult business non-performer license,
and the license thereafter shall be null and void.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4378, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2908 Violations.
   (a)   Any license holder violating or causing the violation of any of these
provisions regulating adult business non-performer licenses shall be subject to
license revocation/suspension pursuant to §
41.2905 above, a fine of not more than $1,000.00 pursuant to Government Code §§
25132 and 53069.4, and any and all other civil remedies. All remedies provided
herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions
shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such
violation is committed or continued.
   (b)   In addition to the remedies set forth in §
41.2905, any violation of any of these provisions regulating Adult Business
Non-Performer Licenses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and
may be abated or enjoined.
   (c)   The restrictions imposed pursuant to this Section are part of a
regulatory licensing process.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4378, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2909 Regulations Non-Exclusive.
   The provisions of this Chapter regulating adult business non-performer
employment applications are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance
therewith shall not excuse non-compliance with any other regulations pertaining
to the adult business licensing provisions as adopted by the County Board of
Supervisors.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4378, passed - -2020)
§ 41.2910 Severability.
   This Chapter and each Section and provision of said Chapter hereunder, are
hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not
withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to
be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said Chapter,
or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid,
the remaining Sections or provisions and the application of such Sections and
provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held
invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such
Sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such Section or
provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this Chapter
be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the
substantive aspects of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4378, passed - -2020)
CHAPTER 30: COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY AT THE HALL OF RECORDS CAMPUS PROHIBITED
Section
   
41.3001   Findings.
   
41.3002   Acknowledgments.
   
41.3003   Purpose.
   
41.3004   Authority.
   
41.3005   Definitions.
   
41.3006   Prohibition.
   
41.3007   Violations and Penalties.
   
41.3008   Severability.
§ 41.3001 Findings.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors finds that the efficient, unimpeded
administration of the functions of the Auditor-Controller/Treasurer-Tax
Collector and the Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk is essential to the provision
of the County’s document recording, marriage licensing, assessment services,
payment services, and other vital County services.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors finds that the Hall of Records Campus (as
defined herein) is unique among County facilities in that the pathways which
are part of the Hall of Records Campus are not thoroughfares and instead merely
connect the parking lot and the Hall of Records building. These pathways are
the sole means by which patrons utilizing the parking lot may access the Hall
of Records building. These pathways were constructed solely to provide for the
passage of individuals engaged in County Hall of Records business and not as a
public passageway or as an area dedicated to expressive activity. The Board of
Supervisors takes note that the Hall of Records Campus is not directly
accessible via public sidewalks and roadways nor has it been otherwise
dedicated to First Amendment activities and is thus not a public forum.
   (c)   The Board of Supervisors finds that the nature of the governmental
operations provided at the Hall of Records Campus is such that commercial
solicitors and vendors may intimidate, impede, or mislead individuals who have
come to access County government services and information at the Hall of
Records Campus. The purpose of the Hall of Records Campus is to provide patrons
with vital County services including assistance in filing business licenses,
marriage licensing, assessment services, and payment services. Commercial
activity on the Hall of Records Campus is an intrusion upon, and creates
significant interference with, the ability of individuals to access the
County’s services and information. Patrons are confronted by in-person
solicitors and vendors peddling third party products and/or services just at
the moment they are seeking to access free government information and/or
services. This interferes with the function of the Hall of Records Campus.
   (d)   The Board of Supervisors finds that direct in-person soliciting and
vending of commercial products and services at the Hall of Records Campus leads
to congestion, intimidation of patrons and County employees, as well as the
distribution of misleading information. Specifically the Board of Supervisors
finds that the County has received from patrons of County services at and
within the Hall of Records Campus, numerous written complaints, including
complaints of being accosted by aggressive solicitors, of being misinformed by
third party commercial solicitors that certain of the County Clerk’s functions
have been relocated to the premises of a private business, and of third party
commercial solicitors wearing lanyards with identification badges similar in
appearance to those worn by County employees resulting in County patrons
misidentifying such commercial solicitors as County employees.
   (e)   The Board of Supervisors finds that County employees have reported
incidents involving third party commercial solicitors that were intimidating
and confrontational and that gave rise to employees’ concerns for their
personal safety.
   (f)   The Board of Supervisors finds that the complaints and incidents
described above have necessitated the installation of additional security
surveillance equipment, the posting of advisory signage, and the deployment of
additional security personnel at the Hall of Records Campus. Such preventative
measures have not been sufficient to deter interference by commercial
solicitors with County services and functions. Nor have state general laws and
criminal statutes (disturbing the peace, trespass, fraud, etc.) been sufficient
to effectively protect the public and County employees from misinformation,
intimidation, or confrontation, due in part to the lack of law enforcement
resources available to respond to lower priority offenses and the delay in
response time to such lower priority offenses. Furthermore, the physical
characteristics of the Hall of Records Campus do not accommodate placement of
advisory signage in locations that would provide County patrons with notice of
such misleading or intimidating activities prior to, or contemporaneously with,
the patrons’ point of contact with such misleading or intimidating activities.
This chapter includes regulations addressing these issues and enables the
County to enforce such regulations with its own Code Enforcement Officers and
other authorized personnel.
   (g)   The Board of Supervisors finds that in addition to the above-discussed
activity for which it has received complaints from patrons and employees alike,
any in-person commercial solicitation and vending by third parties at the Hall
of Records Campus has the potential to create congestion, and interfere with
and distract from the County’s ability to provide its essential services to
patrons. Thus, the Board of Supervisors finds that commercial solicitation and
vending at, on, or about the premises of the Auditor-Controller/Treasurer-Tax
Collector and the Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk at the Hall of Records Campus
obstructs, interferes, and conflicts with the proper conduct of essential
governmental functions and may create a health and/or safety hazard within,
about, or upon such premises.
(Ord. 4308, passed - -2016)
§ 41.3002 Acknowledgments.
   The Board of Supervisors acknowledges the primacy of protecting the people’s
right of free speech under the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution and the right of free speech under the California Constitution.
The Board of Supervisors further acknowledges and takes legislative notice of
the holdings of the courts interpreting the permissible limits that may be
imposed by government on expressive vending, solicitation, and commercial
speech, as set forth in, but not limited to, the following California Supreme
Court opinions and federal court opinions: International Society for Krishna
Consciousness, Inc. v. Lee (1992) 505 U.S. 672; United States v. Kokinda (1990)
497 U.S. 720; Los Angeles Alliance for Survival v. City of Los Angeles (2000)
22 Cal.4th 352; International Society for Krishna Consciousness of California,
Inc. v. City of Los Angeles (2010) 48 Cal.4th 446; Children of the Rosary v.
City of Phoenix (9th Cir. 1998) 154 F.3d 972; Central Hudson Gas & Electric
Corp v. Public Service Commission of New York (1980) 447 U.S. 557; Retail
Digital Network, LLC v. Appelsmith (9th Cir. 2016) 810 F.3d 638; One World One
Family Now v. City and County of Honolulu (9th Cir. 1996) 76 F.3d 1009; and
Friends of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial v. Kennedy (D.C. Cir. 1997) 116 F.3d
495, 497. These opinions, in summary, establish that:
   (a)   The government may regulate both commercial speech and noncommercial
speech;
   (b)   Expressive vending and solicitation may be regulated by the
government;
   (c)   Government ownership of property does not open that property to the
public for First Amendment purposes; and
   (d)   Regulations impacting expressive activity at government property that
is not a traditional public forum and has not been dedicated to First Amendment
activities, will survive judicial scrutiny if they are reasonable and viewpoint
neutral, which means the regulations are not arbitrary, capricious, or
invidious, and are not merely an effort to suppress expression.
(Ord. 4308, passed - -2016)
§ 41.3003 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the right of members of the public
to freely and without undue interference access those governmental offices and
functions at the Hall of Records Campus, thereby preserving the proper
operation of government, by prohibiting third party commercial activity, as
defined herein, at, on, or about the Hall of Records Campus, as defined herein.
This Chapter is not intended in any manner to prohibit or restrict
noncommercial speech.
(Ord. 4308, passed - -2016)
§ 41.3004 Authority.
   This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the California
Constitution, which authorizes counties to make and enforce within their limits
all local, police, sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations not in
conflict with general laws that serve to protect the health, safety and welfare
of its residents, and § 23004 of the Government Code, which authorizes counties
to manage county property.
(Ord. 4308, passed - -2016)
§ 41.3005 Definitions.
   As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   “BOARD OF SUPERVISORS” means the Board of Supervisors of the County of San
Bernardino.
   “COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY” means any third party in-person activity where the
primary purpose is to initiate a commercial transaction. COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
does not include: the donation of funds made to 501(c)(3) non-profit
organizations; or the marketing, advertising, or sale of employee benefits to,
or for the primary benefit of, County employees.
   “COUNTY” means the County of San Bernardino, any of its agencies,
departments, and subdivisions, any associated districts, any entity for which
the Board of Supervisors serves as the legislative body, and any officer or
employee thereof.
   “HALL OF RECORDS CAMPUS” means all that real property owned by the County
located in the City of San Bernardino, County of San Bernardino, California,
commonly known as 222 West Hospitality Lane, San Bernardino, California, and
268 West Hospitality Lane, San Bernardino, California, including the buildings,
landscaped areas, walkways, and parking lots, located upon and consisting of
Assessor Parcel Nos. 0141-363-15, 0141-363-16, and 0141-372-40, as depicted in
the maps attached to Ord. 4308 as Exhibit A and made a part hereof by this
reference. The HALL OF RECORDS CAMPUS does not include the public sidewalks
located immediately adjacent to Hospitality Lane and Sunwest Court.
   “PERSON” means any individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture,
firm, company, association, group, body politic, or other entity, and any
officer, employee, agent, volunteer, trustee, assignee, contractor, or other
representative thereof.
(Ord. 4308, passed - -2016)
§ 41.3006 Prohibition.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in commercial activity at or
on the Hall of Records Campus.
(Ord. 4308, passed - -2016)
§ 41.3007 Violations and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
Chapter. Enforcement, violations, remedies, and penalties shall be governed by
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 (commencing with §
11.0201) of the County Code, and other applicable law.
(Ord. 4308, passed - -2016)
§ 41.3008 Severability.
   If any portion, provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Chapter or
the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the other provisions of this Chapter which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions
of this Chapter are hereby declared to be severable. The Board hereby declares
that it would have passed this Chapter and each portion, provision, clause,
sentence and phrase herein, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
portions, provisions, clauses, sentences or phrases be declared invalid.
(Ord. 4308, passed - -2016)
DIVISION 2: SPECIAL LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: CARNIVALS
Section
   
42.0101   License Required.
   
42.0102   Application, Investigation and Hearing.
   
42.0103   Issuance and Display of License.
   
42.0104   Revocation of License, Hearing.
   
42.0105   Enforcement.
   
42.0106   Duration of License.
   
42.0107   Definition of Person or Party.
   
42.0108   Reasons for Denial of License or Renewal of License.
   
42.0109   Exemption of Incorporated Area.
   
42.0110   Show License.
   
42.0111   Skating License.
   
42.0112   Race Track License.
§ 42.0101   License Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons whether as principal, clerk,
servant, agent or employee to engage in, conduct, or carry on or participate in
any business, exhibition or occupation, in this Chapter specified, without
having first procured a license so to do, and paid the fee for such license as
in this Chapter provided, or to engage in, or conduct or carry on any such
business unless a license shall have been duly issued for the particular
business or establishment sought to be conducted, and such license shall not
have expired or shall not have been revoked; and every person who shall violate
any law the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in
the County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0102   Application, Investigation and Hearing.
   Application for such license shall be made to the Board of Supervisors of
the County of San Bernardino in writing and shall state the name and address of
the applicant; the particular kind of business, exhibition or occupation to be
conducted; the place where the same is to be conducted and must be accompanied
by the license fee, as in this Chapter prescribed, for the period for which the
license is sought. Upon receipt of such application, together with the license
fee, as in this Chapter provided, the Board of Supervisors shall thoroughly
investigate the application. After such investigation the Board of Supervisors
may grant the application, or in its judgment, may call for a public hearing to
determine whether or not the application shall be granted.
   Notice of such public hearing shall be given by two publications in a
newspaper of general circulation, circulated in the town, village, community or
district wherein or in the vicinity of which such business, exhibition or
occupation is sought to be conducted, and if there be no such newspaper, then
by posting such notice in three public places in such town, village, community
or district.
   At the time and place set for the hearing or to which said hearing may be
continued by the Board of Supervisors, the Board of Supervisors shall hear the
applicant for such license who may present any facts or witnesses to show why
such license should be granted, and shall hear and consider all oral and
written objections to the granting of said license, and may place under oath
and interrogate any person before it. At the close of the hearing, or at any
time within 30 days thereafter, the Board of Supervisors may deny the
application for such license if, from the facts produced at the hearing, and
from any other facts in its possession, it shall appear:
   (a)   That the premises in respect to which the license is to be issued do
not comply with the requirements of any law, or are injurious to the public
Health, safety or morals; or
   (b)   That the applicant for such license is an unfit person to be trusted
with the privilege granted by such license; or
   (c)   That the conduct of the business, exhibition or occupation sought to
be licensed is likely to become a public nuisance or to constitute a breach of
the public peace or is likely to become, in any way, a detriment to public
welfare.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0103   Issuance and Display of License.
   Upon approval of any application for such license by the Board of
Supervisors as herein provided, the County Tax Collector shall issue a license
to the applicant; such license shall set forth the name of the applicant; the
place where the business, exhibition or occupation is to be conducted; the
period for which issued and the amount of the fee paid. Each license shall be
non-transferable, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or on the premises
in respect to which it is issued and shall be exhibited to any peace officer.
Each license issued hereunder is separate and distinct and no person shall seek
to exercise the privileges granted thereunder except the person, corporation or
association to whom it is issued and at the specific place for which it was
issued.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0104   Revocation of License, Hearing.
   Every license granted under this Chapter or any Section thereof is granted
and accepted by all parties receiving such license with the express
understanding that the Board of Supervisors may revoke the same or the order
for the issuance thereof, at any time when it appears to the Board of
Supervisors that any state of facts exists upon which it would be authorized to
deny an application for such license, or that the person to whom such license
was issued or any of its agents, servants or employees, or any other person in
charge of or employed about the business, exhibition or occupation for which
such license was issued, has violated any of the conditions of the license or
terms of this Chapter or of any other ordinance or of any law of the State, now
or hereafter in force, regulating the exhibition, occupation or business for
which such license is issued, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent
representations, or that the holder of the license is an unfit person to be
trusted with the privileges granted by said license, or has conducted its
business in an immoral or disorderly manner, or has conducted such business,
exhibition or occupation in such a manner as to be detrimental to public peace,
public safety or public welfare; provided however, that no license shall be
revoked without giving the holder thereof an opportunity to appear before the
Board of Supervisors in his or her own behalf. If the Board of Supervisors is
of the opinion that a hearing should be had to determine whether or not the
license should be revoked, it shall cause a notice of such hearing to be given
to the holder of such license at a time not less than five days before the
hearing. At the time set for the hearing or at the date to which said hearing
may be continued by the Board of Supervisors, the Board of Supervisors shall
hear the holder of the license, who may present any facts to show why such
license shall not be revoked, and shall hear statements from other persons who
may attend the hearing and present reasons why the license should or should not
be revoked, and may, if it so desires, place under oath and question any person
before it; provided, that the Board of Supervisors may close the hearing when
it is convinced that no public good will result from its continuance. At the
close of the hearing, or at any time within 30 days thereafter, the Board of
Supervisors shall determine from the facts produced at the hearing, and from
any other facts in its possession, whether or not the license should be
revoked, and shall make its order accordingly and may make such order
conditional upon the doing or not doing of any act by the holder of the license
or his or her agents or servants, which the Board of Supervisors deems for the
public good. On the revocation of the license no part of the money in the hands
of the Tax Collector shall be returned, but such license fee shall be forfeited
to the County. Notice of such revocation shall be given to the Tax Collector by
the Clerk of the Board.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0105   Enforcement.
   (a)   Suit by Tax Collector. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to
cause suit to be brought in the name of the County of San Bernardino as
plaintiff for the recovery of any license fee herein imposed against any person
required by this Chapter to first procure a license before engaging in any
business, as herein defined, who carries on or attempts to carry on such
business without such license.
   (b)   Representation of Tax Collector by District Attorney. It shall be the
duty of the District Attorney to prosecute all violations of this Chapter on
sworn complaint thereto, and to act as attorney for the Tax Collector, for the
collection of any unpaid license fees.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0106   Duration of License.
   All sums of money for licenses provided for in this Chapter are due and
payable in advance at the Office of the County Tax Collector and all licenses
herein provided for may be issued for any period not exceeding one year and not
less than the period for which a license fee is fixed.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0107   Definition of Person or Party.
   Whenever the word PERSON or PARTY is used in this Chapter referring to those
liable to pay license fees, the same is intended and shall be construed to
include as well a firm, association or corporation carrying on the business for
which a license must be procured, and when the terms in this Chapter designate
the principal, the same shall be construed to include as well the agents,
servants, representatives and employees of such principal. It is the intention
hereof to license the business, exhibition or occupation, and not separate or
individual acts, except as herein otherwise provided.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0108   Reasons for Denial of License or Renewal of License.
   No license nor any renewal of the same shall be granted for any business,
exhibition or occupation, which is a public nuisance or which has been so
conducted as to a public nuisance. A license or a renewal thereof may be
refused because the business, exhibition or occupation is apt to become a
public nuisance, or is, apt to be in any way detrimental to the public
interest, or that the applicant therefor is a person unfit to be trusted with
the privileges granted by said license. No person who has been once refused a
license, or who has failed to prosecute his or her application therefor to a
hearing before the Board of Supervisors, as herein provided, shall be granted a
license for the same business, occupation or exhibition except upon order of
the Board of Supervisors. Any applicant for a license may be examined under
oath to determine who is the real party in interest in the business, occupation
or exhibition for which a license is sought, and if the Board of Supervisors is
satisfied that the application is not in the interest of the party in whose
name the application is made it may refuse to grant the license, and if found
to be in the interest of one who has already been refused a license, it may
treat the application as though made by the real party in interest, and the
application shall have the same effect against any future application as if it
had been made in the name of the real party in interest.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0109   Exemption of Incorporated Area.
   Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to regulate or impose a license
upon any business, exhibition or occupation carried on within the boundaries of
any incorporated city or town.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0110   Show License.
   Every person carrying on the business or occupation of exhibiting or
conducting a traveling show or entertainment open to the public, including any
caravan, museum, menagerie, collection of animals or freaks, circus, sideshows,
burlesque show, rodeo, carnival, exhibition of animals, feats of horsemanship,
acrobatic performance, “Wild West” show or other show or entertainment similar
in character and not otherwise named, shall procure a license and pay a license
fee as indicated in the current fee ordinance.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0111   Skating License.
   Every person conducting the business of a public exhibition of a roller
skating race, roller derby, roller skating derby, roller skating exhibition, or
ice skating race, ice skating derby, ice skating exhibition or any contest or
exhibition of speed or skill on roller skates or ice skates, which is open to
the public, shall procure a license and pay a license ad indicated in the
current fee ordinance.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
§ 42.0112   Race Track License.
   Every person conducting the business of a race track which is open to the
public and at which races or exhibitions of speed, skill, daring or endurance
by means of automobiles, midget automobiles, midget races, racing cars or
motorcycles are held shall procure a license and pay a license fee as indicated
in the current fee ordinance. Every person conducting the business of a race
track which is open to the public and at which races between animals are held
shall procure a license and pay a license fee as indicated in the current fee
ordinance.
(Ord. 474, passed - -1939; Am. Ord. 649, passed - -1950; Am. Ord. 1522, passed
- -1969)
CHAPTER 2: CIRCULATION OF PAPERS
Section
   
42.0201   Circulation of Advertising Papers—Prohibited.
   
42.0202   Posting of Advertising Papers—Prohibited.
§ 42.0201   Circulation of Advertising Papers—Prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, circulate, or distribute upon
any of the streets of any unincorporated towns any poster, dodger, circular, or
other printed advertising matter on paper.
(Ord. 81, passed - -1901)
§ 42.0202   Posting of Advertising Papers—Prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, or attach to any building,
post, or structure, along any street of any unincorporated town of said County,
any poster, dodger, circular or any other printed advertising matter or paper,
unless the same is securely fastened to said building, post or structure.
(Ord. 81, passed - -1901)
CHAPTER 3: DISTRESS SALES
Section
   
42.0301   License Required.
   
42.0302   Sales Designation.
   
42.0303   Application—Content; Verification.
   
42.0304   Reasons for Denial of License.
   
42.0305   Fee and Duration of License.
   
42.0306   Extended Duration of License in Special Hardship Cases.
   
42.0307   Additional Information Requirement.
   
42.0308   Verifications of Applicant.
   
42.0309   Verified Inventory.
   
42.0310   Compliance with Terms of Permit.
   
42.0311   Violation.
   
42.0312   Enforcement.
§ 42.0301   License Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining from the
Sheriff of San Bernardino County, a license to be designated as a “Distress
Sale License,” to advertise or conduct any sale of goods at retail, which sale
is represented, by said person or any agent of his or her’s:
   (a)   As a sale of goods damaged by fire, water, or other casualty; or
   (b)   As a sale for liquidation or closing out of a business or moving of
the place of business; or
   (c)   As a sale of assets of the estate of a bankrupt, insolvent, or
deceased person, or, in the hands of an assignee, adjuster, trustee, executor,
administrator, guardian, receiver, or other fiduciary, unless the person
conducting such sale possesses a valid appointment by a court of competent
jurisdiction appointing said person to a position entitling said person, either
by its terms or by operation of law, to conduct such sale of the assets
actually sold and offered for sale; or
   (d)   As a sale of jobbers, manufacturers, or wholesalers; or
   (e)   As a sale of salvaged goods; or
   (f)   As any other sale which is by representation or advertisement intended
to lead, or does actually reasonably lead, or has a reasonable tendency to lead
the public to believe that the person conducting such sale is selling out the
goods for less than the current or going retail price thereof in the County of
San Bernardino, by reason of damage, economic or legal distress, or similar
temporary circumstances.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0302   Sales Designation.
   All such sales shall be known as distress sales.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0303   Application—Content; Verification.
   Said “distress sales license” shall be issued only upon application
including or accompanied by the following requirements:
   (a)   The name and residence address of the person to whom the license is to
be issued, hereinafter designated as the applicant, and the name and residence
address of the legal owner of the stock to be sold;
   (b)   Request for issuance of a “distress sale license,” and a designation
of the proper subdivision of §
42.0301 of this Chapter which apply to the proposed sale;
   (c)   An inventory of the stock on hand in triplicate;
   (d)   A complete list, and proof of the correctness thereof, of all goods
not yet on hand which will or may be offered at the proposed distress sale, and
proof that the same already belong to applicant, or have previously been
ordered, or that applicant is legally bonded to purchase (or dispose of) the
same;
   (e)   The business address or addresses at which the proposed distress sale
is to occur;
   (f)   The business name under which the proposed distress sale is to occur;
   (g)   The length of time that the applicant has conducted the business or
used the business name under which the proposed distress sale will occur, and
the same as applied to the present address;
   (h)   Whether the stock on hand or to come was ordered for the purpose of
the proposed distress sale;
   (i)   The proposed beginning and ending date of the proposed distress sale;
   (j)   The location of the records of such proposed distress sale;
   (k)   Any other information which applicant wishes to offer;
   (l)   A certificate under penalty of perjury or an affidavit attesting to
the correctness of the preceding information, inventory, and list.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0304   Reasons for Denial of License.
   The said license shall not be issued if:
   (a)   The business has not been in existence at the address for more than
six months last past, in cases where the proposed distress sale falls under
categories (b) or (f) as described in §
42.0301;
   (b)   The stock or any portion thereof proposed to be sold was acquired or
contracted for, for the purpose of the proposed distress sale, if the same
falls under categories (b) or (f), as described in §
42.0301;
   (c)   Applicant fails to declare under penalty of perjury that goods
proposed to be sold under categories (a), (c), (d), or (e) of §
42.0301 are actually or the description therein designated, such as damaged
under Subdivision (a), sold under circumstances described in Subdivision (c),
or by persons described in Subdivision (d), or salvaged under Subdivision (e);
   (d)   Applicant has conducted any distress sale during the previous six
months, whether of the same or a different category, and whether under the same
or a different business or firm name, and whether alone, or in partnership with
the same or different persons; and if any person shall be the owner of the
majority of stock in a corporation applying or which has applied for or been
granted any sort or distress sale license, said owner shall be deemed the
applicant for purposes of this Section, Subdivision (d), (e), or (f);
   (e)   Applicant has obtained a previous distress sale license when not
actually entitled thereto, or has obtained such a license and has exceeded the
terms thereof, or has conducted a distress sale without proper required
license; or
   (f)   Applicant or legal owner has been convicted of grand theft or fraud in
the State of California, or of any crime in another state which would be grand
theft or fraud if committed in the State of California.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0305   Fee and Duration of License.
   The fee for such license shall be $37.00; if an extension is granted under §
42.0306, the fee shall be $55.00 for each 30-day period or portion thereof for
which extension is so granted.
   The said license shall permit the distress sale of the type therein
designated for a period of 30 days, which period shall be designated by
beginning and ending date in the license; and if the license shall fail to
specify the year, it shall apply only to the first month and day as described
following the date on which the license is issued.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0306   Extended Duration of License in Special Hardship Cases.
   In cases of special hardship, as determined by the County Sheriff,
extensions may be granted allowing the permit to remain in affect for
additional time, not to exceed a total of 90 days from the proposed beginning
date of the sale as described in the original permit.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0307   Additional Information Requirement.
   The application for any permit herein mentioned may require such additional
information as will enable the issuing authority to determine any facts needed
by it as foundation for any action it is herein authorized expressly or by
implication to take.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0308   Verifications of Applicant.
   Wherever herein the applicant is required to give his or her oath or
declaration under penalty of perjury, this may be done by an agent if the
applicant is a corporation. Any body politic shall be excluded from these
provisions.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0309   Verified Inventory.
   The inventory required by the preceding §
42.0303 shall contain a complete and accurate list of the stock of goods, wares
and merchandise to be sold at such sale for which a license is hereby required,
together with the wholesale price thereof, which inventory or list shall be
signed by the person seeking the license or by a resident agent thereto
authorized and by affidavit at the foot thereof he or she or such agent shall
swear or affirm that the information therein given is full and true and known
by him or her or such agent to be so.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0310   Compliance with Terms of Permit.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the acts set forth in §
42.0301, although such person has a valid current distress sale license, unless
such distress sale is conducted in strict and exact conformance to the
description and terms of the said sale, as described in the application for
said license, except that, where the terms of the permit differ from the terms
of the application therefor, it shall be unlawful to conduct such distress sale
contrary to any term of the license.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0311   Violation.
   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale at any such sale, or
to list on such inventory, any goods, wares or merchandise which are not the
regular stock of the store or other place, the business of which is to be
closed out by such sale, or to make any replenishment or additions to such
stock for the purpose of such sale, except those items listed as provided in §
42.0303, Subdivision (d), or during the time thereof, or to fail, neglect or
refuse to keep accurate records of the articles or things sold, from which
records the license-issuing authority may ascertain the kind and quantity of
goods sold, and it shall be unlawful to fail to make and keep all records of
the distress sale available for inspection at any reasonable business hour by a
representative of the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s office.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
§ 42.0312   Enforcement.
   The Sheriff is the officer empowered with the authority and charged with the
duty of issuing licenses under this Chapter and enforcing the provisions
thereof.
(Ord. 927, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1522, passed - -1969)
CHAPTER 4: SALE OR TRADE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY (SWAP MEET)
Section
   
42.0401   To Whom Applicable.
   
42.0402   Notice Required.
   
42.0403   Definitions.
   
42.0404   Emergency Measure.
   
42.0405   Violation.
§ 42.0401   To Whom Applicable.
   Every person who attends a public meeting, assembly or gathering outside the
incorporated areas of this County for the purpose of selling, trading, or
offering for sale or trade any identifiable, tangible personal property shall,
prior to the time that he offers any property by him or her to the public for
sale or exchange, submit a list of all of the identifiable, tangible personal
property proposed to be sold or traded together with the other information as
set forth in the following Section to the owner, manager or proprietor of said
premises. Any person who pays a fee for the privilege of selling or trading
personal property or who displays any personal property to the public at a
“swap meet” or location where personal property is generally sold or traded
other than by the licensed owner, lessee, shall be deemed to have attended a
public meeting, assembly or gathering for the purpose of selling or trading all
identifiable, tangible personal property in his or her immediate possession,
even though some or all of said identifiable, tangible personal property has
not been included in the list or property or has not (yet) been offered for
sale or exchange.
(Am. Ord. 1125, passed - -1963)
§ 42.0402   Notice Required.
   The list of property referred to in the previous Section shall contain the
following: (a) the name, address, and description of the person who proposes to
sell or trade identifiable, tangible personal property; (b) an accurate
enumeration and description of all of said identifiable, tangible personal
property, the description to include the serial number or other identifying
mark(s); (c) a certification by the proposed seller or trader that all the
information in the form is accurate; that he or she is the lawful and legal
owner of the listed property, and that such property is free of liens and
encumbrances.
   Upon demand by any peace officer, the owner, manager or proprietor shall
deliver him or her the list of property to compare with the property being sold
or traded unless said list is delivered to a peace officer, the owner, manager
or proprietor shall deliver said list to the Sheriff of San Bernardino County
within 24 hours after its submission to the owner, manager or proprietor.
(Am. Ord. 1125, passed - -1963)
§ 42.0403   Definition.
   IDENTIFIABLE, TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY, as used in this Chapter, means
tangible personal property which bears a serial number or personalized initials
or inscription and shall include tangible personal property which, at the time
it is offered for sale or exchange, bears evidence of having had a serial
number or personalized initials or inscription. Sections
42.0401 to
42.0405 of this Code shall not apply to retail or wholesale business firms
operating at permanent locations in San Bernardino County, whose principal
business is the sale or resale by the firms themselves of personal property
directly to the consumer or retailer.
(Am. Ord. 1125, passed - -1963)
§ 42.0404   Emergency Measure.
   The Board of Supervisors finds that stolen property has been, and is
presently being, sold or traded at public gatherings known as “swap meets;”
that innocent purchasers are thereby defrauded; that the opportunity to dispose
of stolen property with little risk of detection encourages crime and juvenile
delinquency; that the Sheriff of San Bernardino County is unable to control the
sale of stolen property or to recover it for its owners without a means of
control such as that set forth in this Chapter; that the immediate preservation
of the public peace and safety required this Chapter to be passed as an
emergency measure.
(Am. Ord. 1125, passed - -1963)
§ 42.0405   Violation.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
42.0401 to
42.0404 inclusive of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. No person
shall be deemed to have substantially complied with the provisions of this
Chapter if (a) he or she fails to list all identifiable, tangible personal
property proposed to be sold or traded; or (b) if he or she fails to list the
correct serial number or identifying mark(s) of said property; or (c) he or she
willfully gives false information on the list relating to the identity of
himself or herself or the property even through such information is not
specifically required by this Chapter.
(Am. Ord. 1125, passed - -1963)
CHAPTER 5: CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
Section
   
42.0501   Title.
   
42.0502   Purpose and Scope.
   
42.0503   Continuation.
   
42.0504   Application.
   
42.0505   Statutory Provisions Applicable.
   
42.0506   Definitions.
   
42.0507   License Requirement.
   
42.0508   License Area.
   
42.0509   Term.
   
42.0510   License Nonexclusive.
   
42.0511   License Review Board.
   
42.0512   Composition of License Review Board.
   
42.0513   License Review Board.
   
42.0514   Conduct of License Review Board Meetings.
   
42.0515   License Application Forms.
   
42.0516   License Application and Transfer Fees.
   
42.0517   License Application Procedures.
   
42.0518   Granting of License.
   
42.0519   Denial of License.
   
42.0520   Acceptance of License.
   
42.0521   Establishment and Extension of Service.
   
42.0522   Transfer or Abandonment of License.
   
42.0523   Modification of License.
   
42.0524   License Area Expansion.
   
42.0525   Fees, Costs, and Other Charges.
   
42.0526   Rates.
   
42.0527   Insurance Requirements.
   
42.0528   Bonding Requirements and Other Security.
   
42.0529   Recourse Against Bonds and Other Security.
   
42.0530   Indemnification.
   
42.0531   PEG Availability.
   
42.0532   PEG Utilization.
   
42.0533   Periodic License Review.
   
42.0534   Design and Construction Requirements.
   
42.0535   Technical Standards and Requirements.
   
42.0536   Undergrounding of Cable.
   
42.0537   Street Occupancy.
   
42.0538   Test and Compliance Procedures.
   
42.0539   Service To Applicants,
   
42.0540   Service Standards and Requirements.
   
42.0541   Consumer Service Standards.
   
42.0542   Notice of Construction and Reconstruction.
   
42.0543   Notices to Subscribers.
   
42.0544   Termination of Subscriber Services.
   
42.0545   Subscriber Complaints to the Licensee.
   
42.0546   Subscriber Complaint Procedure Requirements.
   
42.0547   Subscriber Complaints to the County.
   
42.0548   Rights Reserved to the County.
   
42.0549   Rights of Subscribers.
   
42.0550   Equal Employment Opportunities.
   
42.0551   Continuity of Service.
   
42.0552   Retention of Licensee’s Records.
   
42.0553   Licensee Reporting Requirements.
   
42.0554   Severability.
   
42.0555   Force Majeure.
   
42.0556   Civil Penalties, Default and Revocation Proceedings.
§ 42.0501   Title.
   This Chapter shall be known and cited as the San Bernardino County Cable
Television Systems Chapter.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0502   Purpose and Scope.
   It is the purpose of this Chapter to standardize practices in the cable
television industry, to provide for administration of cable television
licenses, to regulate rates to the extent allowable by Federal, State, and
local laws when necessary for the public good, and to regulate the operation of
licenses for the purpose of protecting and promoting the public health, safety,
and welfare in the interest of the subscriber, licensee, and the public.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2908, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0503   Continuation.
   The provisions of this Chapter, insofar as they are the same as existing
chapter provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as
restatements and continuations thereof, and not as new enactments.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2355,
passed - -1979; Am. Ord. 2667, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0504   Application.
   All the provisions of this Chapter apply to licenses issued pursuant to this
Chapter. All provisions of this Chapter shall, including license fees, apply to
existing licensed operating cable television systems in San Bernardino County,
unless FCC or PUC regulations require otherwise.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2908, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0505   Statutory Provisions Applicable.
   All licenses for a cable television system shall be granted pursuant to the
Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and Government Code § 53066.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2754, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 2908, passed - -1984;
Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0506   Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivation, shall have the meaning set forth herein. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, plural words include the singular, and
singular words include the plural. Words not specifically defined shall be
given their common and ordinary meaning. The word “shall” is also mandatory and
not merely directory.
   ACCESS. The physical extension of cables, wires, conduit and associated
fixtures capable of carrying cable service to a point immediately adjacent to
the structure or facility to be serviced.
   ADVERTISING RECEIPTS. Any and all income, compensation, fees, and other
consideration received directly or indirectly by licensee derived from any form
of advertising, relating directly or indirectly to the licensee’s license
activities and operations.
   AFFILIATE. When used in relation to any person, another person who owns or
controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control
with, such person.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals including all public, educational, and
government use (PEG) channels and all broadcast channels required to be carried
pursuant to Federal law.
   BASIC SUBSCRIBER RECEIPTS. Any and all income, compensation, fees, and other
consideration received directly or indirectly by the licensee from subscribers
in payment for the basic service of the cable television system.
   BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The Board of Supervisors of the County of San
Bernardino. If any territory covered by the license falls within the limits of
any incorporated city, then as to such incorporated area “board” means the
legislative body of such city (e.g., the city council).
   CABLE ACT. The Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. Law No.
98-549, 98 slat. 2779 (1984), which amends the Federal Communications Act of
1934 and as hereafter amended.
   CABLECAST. The distribution of programming which originates within the
facilities of the cable television system.
   CABLE SERVICE. Any transmission to or from subscribers and institutional
users of video programming and other programming services.
   CABLE TV COORDINATOR.
      (1)   That person charged with the primary responsibility for the
administration of this Chapter.
      (2)   Designates a person in the Department of Weights and Measures
charged with the responsibility for administering the cable television chapter
provisions of the County.
   CABLE TV SYSTEM. A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that
is designed to provide cable service, but does not include:
      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
      (2)   A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple
unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless the
facility or facilities uses any public right of way.
      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title 2 of the Cable Act except that such facility
shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of § 621(c)) to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly
to subscribers; or
      (4)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility systems.
   CHANNEL or CABLE CHANNEL. A portion of the electomagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television
signal as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.
   COMMENCEMENT OF OPERATIONS. The time and date when sufficient distribution
facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of full service to
a dwelling unit located within the license area and such service is actually
subscribed to by a resident of the license area.
   CONSTRUCTION. Any new construction, reconstruction, upgrade, mandatory
extensions or reconfigurations of the cable television system.
   CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT. The time and date in a given phase when the first
connection is physically made to a utility pole, or undergrounding of cables is
initiated, after engineering and mapping is complete, and after all necessary
permits and authorizations have been obtained.
   CONSTRUCTION COMPLETION. The point and time when all cable system equipment
specified in the license as required under §
42.0518(b)(5) of this Chapter has been installed by the licensee so as to
permit the offering of cable service to all the potential subscribers in the
license area, as well as the provision, in an operational state, of all
facilities required by the license agreement.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino, a political subdivision of the State
of California.
   CURRENT INDUSTRY STANDARDS. That level of technical performance or capacity,
service, plant or other equipment, production or other facilities, or
construction techniques for which there is a reasonable market demand and which
has been developed and demonstrated to be workable, and such that it would be
economically feasible and viable in the license area during the term of the
license.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Weights and Measures, or successor thereto, of
the County of San Bernardino.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Weights and Measures of the
County of San Bernardino.
   DIVISION. The Division of Consumer Affairs of the County of San Bernardino.
   ENHANCED SERVICE. Any service distributed over the subscriber system for
which there is a per channel(s), per unit(s), or per package charge to the
subscriber.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor
thereto.
   GROSS REVENUES. Any and all income, compensation, fees, and other
consideration received directly or indirectly by the licensee and/or its
affiliates, and any other person or entity in which the licensee has a
financial interest or which has a financial interest in the licensee, arising
from or attributable to the operation of the cable television system within the
unincorporated areas of the County, including, but not limited to, the
following sources:
      (1)   Installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees, and fees for
cable service derived from operations within the authorized license area;
      (2)   Basic subscriber receipts;
      (3)   Enhanced service receipts, including, but not limited to, income
derived from per-program, or per-channel charges;
      (4)   Advertising receipts;
      (5)   Lease receipts; and
      (6)   Any other income from any source derived from licensee’s licensed
operations. Excluded are refundable deposits and sales, excise, and other taxes
collected for direct pass-through to local, State, or Federal governments.
   HEAD END. The electronic processing center for the distribution of the
signals received from a master antenna or earth stations.
   INFERIOR RECEPTION QUALITY. A partial failure of sound or picture of one or
more channels affecting one or more subscribers.
   INSTALLATION. The connection of the system from feeder cable to subscriber’s
terminals, and the provision of actual service.
   LEASE RECEIPTS. Any and all income, compensation, fees, and other
consideration received directly or indirectly by the licensee from the lease or
rental of license property, and compensation for any services in connection
therewith, including but not limited to, studio and equipment rental and
production costs of any channel permitted or designated by the FCC to be so
leased or rented.
   LICENSE. Any authorization or renewal thereof granted hereunder by the
county, whether such authorization is designated as a license, privilege,
permit, franchise, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise,
which authorizes the construction, operation, and maintenance of a cable
television system within a specified area in the unincorporated portions of the
county. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not include any
other license or permit as may be required by the county or any other
governmental entity.
   LICENSE AREA. That geographic portion of the unincorporated area of the
county in which the licensee is authorized to construct, operate, and provide
connections for a cable television system pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the license, and may consist of not more than five service areas.
   LICENSE EXPANSION AREA. That geographic portion of the unincorporated area
of the county which may be added contiguous to an existing license area.
   LICENSE PAYMENT PERIOD. The time period from the effective date of the
license agreement through the end of the calendar year in which the license was
granted, and each calendar year thereafter during the term of the license.
   LICENSE REVIEW BOARD. The board established under this Chapter to evaluate
applications for cable TV systems, make recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors with respect to licenses issued under this Chapter, to hear appeals
of subscriber complaints, and to administer other related responsibilities.
   LICENSEE. A person, firm, or corporation granted a license by the board
under this Chapter, and its lawful successor, transferee, or assignee.
   NCTA. The National Cable Television Association.
   PEG. Public, educational, and governmental uses as defined in § 611 of the
Cable Act.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, joint
venture, company, syndicate, club, business, common-law trust, society, or
other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or, not for profit, but
shall not mean the county.
   PROPERTY OF LICENSEE. All property owned, installed, or used within the
county by a licensee in the conduct of a cable television system under
authority of a license granted pursuant to this Chapter.
   PUC. The Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.
   SECTION. Any section, subsection, or provision of this Chapter.
   SERVICE AREA. That geographical portion of a license area containing not
less than 20 percent of the license area’s population within its boundaries as
designated by the licensee.
   SERVICE TIER. A category of cable service or other services provided by a
cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the cable operator.
   STREET. All of the following which have been or hereafter may be dedicated
to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located
within the unincorporated area of the county: streets, roadways, highways,
avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, green belts, and
similar public property and areas which the county shall determine to be
included within the definition of STREET from time to time.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person lawfully receiving for any purpose, any service of
the licensee’s cable television system, including the ultimate recipient of any
distribution of the licensee’s service.
   SYSTEM OUTAGES. The following interruptions to subscriber service:
      (1)   SYSTEM OUTAGE. Total failure of sound and picture of all channels
affecting at least ten percent of the system’s subscribers.
      (2)    ISOLATED OUTAGE. Total failure of sound and picture of one or more
channels affecting less than ten percent of the system’s subscribers.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2908, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0507   License Requirement.
   No cable TV system shall within the unincorporated areas of San Bernardino
County be allowed to begin construction, occupy or use the streets or public
utility poles or rights-of-way, or operate without a license issued in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0508   License Area.
   The County may grant one or more licenses for any area within the
unincorporated portions of San Bernardino County. Each license area shall be
defined by a legal description and such maps as required by the Department, to
a scale prescribed by the Director, and which maps shall describe and
specifically designate the initial and subsequent, if any, service areas.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0509   Term.
   The term of any new license or renewal of an existing license shall not
exceed 15 years, and shall be subject to earlier termination as hereinafter
provided.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0510   License Nonexclusive.
   Any license granted shall be nonexclusive. The County specifically reserves
the right to grant, at any time, such additional licenses for cable television
systems as it deems appropriate to the public interest, provided, however, that
such additional grant shall not operate to materially modify, revoke, reduce,
or terminate any rights previously granted to any licensee.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0511   License Review Board.
   A License Review Board is hereby established to review license applications
and make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors for licenses issued under
this Chapter, hear appeals of subscriber complaints, and to administer other
related responsibilities as the Board of Supervisors may require.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0512   Composition of License Review Board.
   (a)   Membership. The members of the License Review Board shall consist of
the following: the Director or his or her designee, who shall chair the License
Review Board; the Assistant Administrative Officer for the General Services
Group or his or her designer; the County Treasurer/Tax Collector or his or her
designee; the Director of the County Department of Transportation or his or her
designee; the Director of the Communications Division of the Office of
Management Services or his or her designee; a representative from the Cable
Television Industry who has no interest, direct or indirect in the matter under
consideration; and a consumer lay person.
   (b)   Voting. Each member of the License Review Board shall have one vote
except for the Director who shall only vote in the event of a tie vote among
the other voting members. The Director and four members present shall
constitute a quorum.
   (c)   Support. The Cable TV Coordinator shall provide staff support to the
License Review Board as needed.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 3497, passed - -1992)
§ 42.0513   License Review Board.
   Any matter which may come before the License Review Board shall be open to
the public. The time, date, and place of meetings and hearings shall be
determined by the Director.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2355,
passed - -1979; Am. Ord. 2667, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0514   Conduct of License Review Board Meetings.
   At the time and place set for meetings of the License Review Board, or at
the time and place which the meeting may be continued by the Director or his or
her representative, the License Review Board shall hear an applicant, a
licensee, or interested party, who may testify and present any evidence as to
the subject matter of such proceedings.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0515   License Application Forms.
   Applicants shall obtain license application forms from the Department.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0516   License Application and Transfer Fees.
   All license applications or applications to transfer a license, when filed,
shall be accompanied by payment of a nonrefundable fee, which shall be in the
form of cash, certified or cashier’s check, or money order, payable to the
County, to pay for the cost of processing and evaluating the application. Such
fee amounts shall be set forth in the fee provisions of the County Code.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2775, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 2908, passed - -1984;
Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0517   License Application Procedures.
   All license applications, when filed, shall be available for public
inspection at places designated by the County within the proposed license area.
Not later than 60 days after any application has been received, one or more
public meetings pursuant to §§
42.0513 and
42.0514 shall be held on the application by the License Review Board. The
License Review Board shall, within 30 days following the final public meeting,
or no more than 90 days following the application’s receipt, whichever occurs
first, forward to the Board of Supervisors its evaluation of the application
together with its findings and recommendations as to the granting or denial of
a license. The Board of Supervisors shall then grant or deny the license within
30 days following its receipt of the License Review Board’s recommendations.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2908, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0518   Granting of License.
   (a)   Public Hearing. A license may be granted by the Board or Supervisors
pursuant to this Chapter following a public meeting conducted by the License
Review Board.
   (b)   Requirements. Any license granted pursuant to this Chapter will be
granted only upon the applicant’s satisfaction of the following criteria:
      (1)   Applicant’s completion of such application form as the Director may
deem necessary to properly evaluate the applicant’s legal, technical, and
financial qualifications;
      (2)   Proof of the applicant’s ability to conduct a viable business
operation for a minimum of two years following the granting of a license;
      (3)   Proof of technical ability to provide current industry standards of
performance with respect to quality of audio and video signals received by
subscribers;
      (4)   A construction schedule designating service areas and describing
the sequence in which service shall be extended within the license area
pursuant to County Code §
42.0521;
      (5)   Execution of a licensing agreement in such form and including such
terms as may be required by the Board of Supervisors;
      (6)   Submission of licensee’s written procedure for receiving, acting
upon, and resolving subscriber complaints pursuant to §
42.0545 of this Chapter; and
      (7)   Satisfaction of such other requirements as the Board of Supervisors
may deem necessary.
   (c)   Filing of License. All licenses granted under this Chapter shall be
filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors and a copy shall be maintained
by the Department.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2754, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0519   Denial of License.
   The following constitute grounds for denial of a license:
   (a)   Failure to satisfy application requirements;
   (b)   Knowingly making any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a
material fact in the application for license or to the Cable Coordinator,
Director, County employees, License Review Board, or Board of Supervisors with
regard to a license application;
   (c)   Conviction within the past five years of the applicant, or a principal
officer, director, majority or controlling shareholder, or partner of the
applicant of a crime of fraud, embezzlement, burglary, or theft;
   (d)   Previous violations by applicant, or a principal officer, director,
majority or controlling shareholder, partner, or parent or subsidiary company
of applicant of the Cable Act, laws of the State of California regarding the
use or regulation of cable TV systems, or any County Code provision or rule or
regulation adopted by the Board of Supervisors relating to cable TV systems.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2775, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0520   Acceptance of License.
   The licensee shall within 30 days after the granting of the license by the
Board of Supervisors, file with the Director a performance bond, and/or other
security pursuant to §
42.0528, together with evidence of insurance as required by §
42.0527. Any license granted by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to this
Chapter shall not be operative until such time as the licensee satisfies the
above requirements.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2754, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0521   Establishment and Extension of Service.
   Except as provided under Government Code § 53066.2, and subject to County
approval, the licensee shall design and construct the cable system in a manner
so as to provide the capability to pass every single-family dwelling unit,
multiple-family dwelling, school, and public agency within the license area.
Within one year after receiving the license, the licensee shall accomplish
construction of an operable head-end and shall make cable service available to
not less than one service area, and each year thereafter shall expand service
coverage by no less than an additional service area per year so as to achieve
100 percent build-out of the license area within the five years following the
grant of the license.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0522   Transfer or Abandonment of License.
   (a)   License Transfers. Any license granted hereunder shall be a privilege
to be held for the benefit of the public. Said license cannot in any event be
sold, transferred, leased, or disposed of, without the prior written consent of
the County, and subject to such reasonable conditions as the Board of
Supervisors may require. Consent to transfer will not be unreasonably withheld
by the County.
   (b)   Methods of Transfer. For the purposes of this Section, the term
TRANSFER shall include, but not be limited to, changes in the ownership of the
cable TV system operated under the license by means of forced or voluntary
sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, or sale of the majority or
controlling interest of the licensee’s corporate stock.
   (c)   Consent to Transfer. In seeking the County’s consent to any transfer
of a license, the licensee shall follow the application procedures set forth in
§§
42.0515 through
42.0520 of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0523   Modification of License.
   Upon the request of the licensee or Director, the terms and conditions of
any license granted under this Chapter, may at any time during the term of the
license be amended or modified at a public meeting by the Board of Supervisors,
provided such amendment or modification is consistent with the Cable Act and
rules and regulations of the FCC.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0524   License Area Expansion.
   During the term of the license, should licensee determine that any adjacent
areas not included in the original license application warrant the extension of
cable TV services, the licensee may apply to the Department for approval to
extend services to such areas.
   (a)   Application. Licensee shall apply to the Department for approval of
such license area expansion. The application shall include, but not be limited
to, maps of the area(s) to be constructed, a construction schedule, a copy of
the Subscriber Complaint Record as required by §
42.0546(b), and such other information as may be required by the Director.
   (b)   License Area Expansion Fee. All license area expansion applications,
when filed, shall be accompanied by payment of a nonrefundable application fee,
which shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier’s check, or money
order to pay for the cost of processing and evaluating the application.
Application fee amounts shall be set forth in the County Code fee provisions.
   (c)   Approval. Upon receipt of the licensee’s application for the license
area expansion, the matter will be submitted to the License Review Board and
Board of Supervisors in accordance with §
42.0517.
   (d)   Term. After approval of the license area expansion by the Board of
Supervisors, and upon notification by the licensee that the construction of
said area(s) has been completed, said area(s) shall be considered a part of the
license area, and the term of the license for such expansion area(s) shall
expire when the term of the original license expires. The Director shall
provide written notice to the licensee to this effect, and copies of said
notice shall be filed with the Clerk of the Board and the Department.
   (e)   Service. As a condition to expansion of the license area, licensee
shall within five years following approval of a license expansion area,
complete all construction and provide all subscribers within that area with the
same services at the same rates as charged other subscribers within the
original license area.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0525   Fees, Costs, and Other Charges.
   (a)   Annual License Fee. As consideration for the license granted, licensee
shall pay to the Department in lawful money of the United States, payable to
the County, during the life of the license, for each and every year, including
the prorated portion of the year in which the license was granted, five percent
of the gross revenues received by licensee for all cable television services
rendered to customers within the license area. License fees shall be due no
later than first day of March of each year. In the event licensee fails to make
payment of the license fee on or before the due date, the County shall assess a
late payment charge of ten percent of the amount due, with an additional ten
percent accruing on the first day of each calendar month thereafter that the
license fee remains unpaid. Any license fee more than 90 days delinquent shall
constitute a material breach of the terms of the license and is grounds for
license revocation. The County reserves the right to change the amount of such
license fee if the County determines such action to be appropriate and that it
is not in conflict with Federal law, FCC Rules and Regulations, or laws of the
State of California.
   (b)   Other Fees. Fees regarding license grant, renewal, transfer,
modification, and license area expansion shall be set forth in the fee
provisions of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (c)   Cost of Technical Assistance. The licensee shall pay all reasonable
costs incurred by the County for any technical assistance deemed necessary by
the County for obtaining independent verification of technical compliance with
all license standards.
   (d)   Charge for Underreported Revenue. If the report of gross revenue made
by licensee should be found to be less than the amount of gross revenue
disclosed by audit, the licensee shall pay to the County the delinquent amount
and all charges required by Subdivision (a) above, within 30 days of billing
thereof.
   (e)   Independent Audit at Licensee’s Costs. The County reserves the right
to require the licensee to obtain, at licensee’s cost, an independent audit of
gross revenue by certified public accountants as required by the County. The
certified public accountant shall be required to certify in the audit that the
license is in compliance with this Chapter and the license agreement. This
right shall be in addition to the County’s right to conduct any other audit.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0526   Rates.
   To the extent permitted by law, the County reserves the right to regulate
the licensee’s rates for its services (excluding bulk rates and limited time
promotional discounts).
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0527   Insurance Requirements.
   The licensee shall provide, and maintain, at its own expense during the term
of its license, programs of insurance covering its operations hereunder, as set
forth below. Such insurance shall be provided by insurer(s) authorized by the
Insurance Commissioner of the State of California to transact business in the
State of California. Satisfactory evidence of such insurance consisting of
copies of the actual insurance policies and/or certificates of insurance shall
be delivered to the Director on or before the effective date of license.
Insurance policies and certificates evidencing coverage shall name the County,
its officers, agents, and employees as additional insureds with respect to
licensee’s operations under the license, and shall contain express conditions
that the County is to be given written notice by registered mail at least 30
days in advance of any modification or termination of any insurance policy.
   (a)   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance. Licensee shall obtain
comprehensive liability insurance endorsed for premises/operations, products/
completed operations, contractual, broad form property damage, and personal
injury with a combined single limit per occurrence as may be set by the County
Risk Management Division. If the above insurance is written on a claims-made
form, such insurance shall be endorsed to provide an extended reporting period
of not less than five years following termination of policy. Licensee shall
also obtain comprehensive auto liability insurance endorsed for all owned and
hired vehicles with a combined single limit per occurrence as may be set by the
County Risk Management Division. Said amounts of insurance shall be subject to
review and adjustment by the County, at the County’s sole option at any time
during the period of the license. In the event of such adjustment, licensee
agrees to provide insurance in such amounts as are determined by the County
Risk Management Division, within 30 days after written notice to do so from the
Director.
   (b)   Worker’s Compensation. Licensee shall obtain Worker’s Compensation
Insurance in an amount and form to meet all applicable requirements of the
Labor Code of the State of California, including employer’s liability insurance
with a limit as may be set by the County Risk Management Division covering all
persons providing services on behalf of licensee and all risk to such persons
under the license. licensee shall provide, if applicable, a certificate of
consent to self-insure issued by the Director of industrial Relations of the
State of California. Should the licensee utilize the self-insurance provision
of this Section, and should the licensee’s certification of consent to self-
insure expire or be revoked, the licensee shall be required to obtain Worker’s
Compensation Insurance prior to or upon said expiration or revocation.
   (c)   Uninsured Operations. No license operation shall commence until
licensee has complied with all the aforementioned provisions of this Section,
and any such operation shall be suspended during any period that licensee fails
to maintain required insurance in full force and effect.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0528   Bonding Requirements and Other Security.
   All bonds required hereunder shall be in a form and executed by a corporate
surety acceptable to the County and licensed to transact business as a surety
within the State of California.
   (a)   Performance Bond. Within 30 days of the granting of the license
required under §
42.0507, the licensee shall file with the Treasurer/Tax Collector a bond
payable to the County, which shall be calculated as five percent of the annual
projected gross revenue of the licensee or $10,000.00 whichever is greater.
Such bond shall be maintained in full force and effect at all times during the
term of the license. Said bond shall ensure the faithful performance of the
licensee of the terms and conditions of the license and shall provide that, in
the case of any breach of a condition of the license, the bond amount shall be
applied to the County’s damages and shall be payable to the County by the
principals and sureties of the bonding company. Other security may be approved
by the License Review Board in lieu of or in combination with the performance
bond.
   (b)   Other Security in Lieu of Bond. Licensee may request of the License
Review Board that in addition to, and/or in lieu of, the performance bond as
set forth under §
42.0528(a), above, licensee provide other security to the County in an amount
not to exceed the bond amount as determined under §
42.0528(a) above. Such other security must be in a form acceptable to the
License Review Board, and at the License Review Board’s sole discretion, may
consist of cash, assignment of savings and loan certificates, certificates of
deposits, irrevocable letters of credit, or U.S. Government securities. All
such other security shall be made payable to the County and shall be deposited
with the Treasurer/Tax Collector. The licensee, however, shall be entitled to
the return of such other security, less any accrued interest of any cash
deposit held by County, or such portion thereof which remains on deposit, not
later than one year after the expiration of the term of the license, provided
there is at that time no outstanding default on the part of licensee.
   (c)   Review and Adjustment. The amounts of the performance bond and/or
other security shall be subject to review and adjustment by the License Review
Board, and the License Review Board, for reasonable cause, may adjust the
amount at any time during the term of the license. In the event of such an
adjustment, the licensee shall renew said bond, within 30 days after written
notice to do so.
   (d)   Continuance of Performance Bond and/or Other Security Upon Transfer of
License. Said performance bond shall continue to exist until replaced by a new
performance bond or other security satisfactory to the County, or for one year
following the Board of Supervisors’ approval of any sale, transfer, assignment,
or other change of ownership of the license, or the expiration or termination
of the license, whichever is sooner, for the purpose of assuring licensee’s
faithful performance under the terms and conditions of the license prior to the
date of approval of such change of ownership and/or of expiration or
termination. The Treasurer/Tax Collector may release said bond prior to the end
of such one year period upon authorization of the Department and satisfaction
by the licensee of all said obligations under the license.
   (e)   No Limitation of Licensee’s Liability. In no event, shall the amount
of any performance bond posted by licensee be construed to limit the liability
to the County of said licensee or limit licensee’s obligation to faithfully
perform the terms of the license.
   (f)   Other Bonds. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit or preclude any
other County agency from requiring licensee to post a bond or other undertaking
in connection with operations under its license.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0529   Recourse Against Bonds and Other Security.
   Bonds and other security may be utilized by the County for the purposes,
including, but not limited to, reimbursement of the County by reason of the
licensee’s failure to pay the County any sums due under the terms of this
Chapter or the license, reimbursement of the County for reasonable costs borne
by the County to correct license violations not corrected by the licensee after
due notice; and monetary remedies or damages assessed against the licensee due
to default or violations of the license requirements of this Chapter.
   (a)   Recourse. In the event licensee has been declared to be in default by
the License Review Board under §
42.0556(b), and if the licensee fails, within 30 days of mailing of the License
Review Board’s finding, to pay the County any license fee, penalties, or
monetary sanctions, or fails to perform any of the conditions of the license,
the County may thereafter foreclose against the performance bond and/or
withdraw from any other security an amount sufficient to compensate the
County’s damages, with interest at the legal rate. Upon such foreclosure or
withdrawal, the County shall notify the licensee in writing, by first class
mail, postage prepaid, of the amount and date thereof.
   (b)   Restoration. Within 30 days after mailing notice to the licensee that
the County has foreclosed licensee’s performance bond or that any amount has
been withdrawn by the County from the other security pursuant to Subdivision
(a) above, the licensee shall deposit such further bond or sum of money, or
other security, as the County may require, sufficient to meet the requirements
of this Chapter.
   (c)   Rights of the County. The rights reserved to the County with respect
to any bond or security are in addition to all other rights of the County
whether reserved by this Chapter or authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to any bond or other security
shall constitute an election or waiver of any rights or other remedies the
County may have.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0530   Indemnification.
   (a)   Claims for License-Related Activities. A licensee shall, by acceptance
of any license granted, indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the County, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees from and against any and
all losses, damages, liabilities, claims, suits, costs and expenses, including
reasonable attorney’s fees regardless of the outcome of any such claim or suit
arising from any act or omission on the part of the licensee, its officers,
employees, agents, or subcontractors arising from activities or work conducted
pursuant to the license.
   (b)   Claims of Suppliers and Employees of Licensee. A licensee shall
indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the County and its officers, agents, and
employees from and against any and all claims from losses whatsoever, including
reasonable attorney’s fees, accruing and resulting from any and all persons,
firms, or corporations furnishing or supplying work, services, materials,
equipment, or supplies in connection with work or activities conducted or
performed pursuant to the license, and arising out of such activities or work,
and from any and all claims or losses whatsoever, including reasonable
attorney’s fees, accruing or resulting from any person, firm, or corporation
for damage, injury, or death arising out of licensee’s licensed operation.
   (c)   Nature of Claims. Such indemnification shall include, but not be
limited to, all claims arising in tort, contracts, civil rights, infringements
of copyright, violations of statutes, ordinances, regulations, or otherwise.
Provided, however, that the County in its sole discretion may participate in
the defense of any such claim at its own expense, and in such event, licensee
shall not agree to any settlement of claims without County approval.
   (d)   Exemption. Licensee shall not be required to indemnify the County for
negligence or willful misconduct on the part of the County, or its officials,
boards, commissions, agents, or employees.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0531   PEG Availability.
   (a)   License Conditional on PEG Availability. The grant of a license under
this Chapter shall be conditioned upon licensee providing, at licensee’s
expense, one basic service cable drop to any government building within the
license area, including schools, within 750 feet of any existing cable
distribution facilities, within a reasonable period after licensee’s receipt of
a request from the agency operating or administering that site.
   (b)   Notification of PEG Availability. Prior to its initiating service
within any newly constructed area, licensee shall notify all government
agencies having buildings within that area of the availability of cable access.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0532   PEG Utilization.
   In accordance with § 611 of the Cable Act, the County may, at no cost to the
County, utilize a portion of the cable TV system’s capacity and associated
facilities and resources to develop noncommercial PEG cable TV services in the
public interest, and the licensee shall provide such capacity, facilities and
resources upon the County’s request. For this purpose, the County may
additionally establish a commission, public corporation, or other entity to
receive and allocate facilities, equipment, support funds, and other
considerations provided by the County, the licensee, and/or others. The County
or such an entity, if established, may exercise the following responsibilities:
   (a)   To receive and utilize, or allocate for utilization, channel capacity,
facilities, funding, and other support provided specifically for public usage
of the cable TV system;
   (b)   To plan, prepare, coordinate and implement emergency communication
during the event of an emergency or natural disaster within the County;
   (c)   Review the status and progress of each service developed for public
benefits;
   (d)   Allocate resources jointly with the licensee on a periodic basis to
conform with changing priorities and public needs;
   (e)   Report to the County and the licensee annually on the utilization of
resources, new public services developed, and benefits achieved for the County
and its residents.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0533   Periodic License Review.
   At the County’s sole option, the License Review Board may hold one or more
public hearings as provided in §§
42.0513 and
42.0514 at which the licensee shall be present and shall participate, to review
licensee’s compliance with the terms and conditions of its license and this
Chapter and the performance and quality of the service of the licensee’s cable
TV system. The reports required by §
42.0546 regarding subscriber complaints, the records of performance tests, and
opinion survey reports may be utilized as a basis for review. In addition, any
subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the reviews, either orally
or in writing.
   (a)   Areas of Inquiry. Topics for review and discussion shall include, but
shall not be limited to, license area and license area expansion, services
provided, feasibility of providing new services, application of new
technologies, system performance, programming, subscriber complaints, user
complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the license, undergrounding
process, developments in the law and regulatory constraints.
   (b)   License Review Board Report. Not later than 60 days after the
conclusion of the license review hearings, the License Review Board shall issue
its report which may include recommendations to the licensee with regard to the
inadequacies identified through the hearing process and set a timetable for
licensee to institute and complete corrective measures.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2754, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0534   Design and Construction Requirements.
   (a)   Design and Construction. The cable television system and all license
property and appurtenances shall be designed, installed, constructed, and
maintained using the current industry standard regarding components, materials,
and methods. The licensee shall at all times comply with all current applicable
State, Federal, and County standards. All of the licensee’s plant and
equipment, including but not limited to, the antenna sites, head-end and
distribution system towers, dwelling connections, structures, poles, wires,
cables, coaxial cables, fixtures, and appurtenances shall be designed, located,
installed, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired,
operated, and maintained in accordance with good engineering practices and such
work shall be performed by experienced construction and maintenance personnel
so as not to endanger or interfere in any manner with the rights of any
property owner, or to hinder, or to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
The licensee shall additionally comply with all applicable County construction
codes and permit procedures. County shall be entitled to charge reasonable
permit and inspection fees to recover processing and inspection costs incurred
as a result of the construction of the cubic TV system. Notwithstanding the
granting of a license, the licensee shall not be authorized to do any work
under the license for which issuance of a permit is required unless and until
such permit is issued for such work. The licensee shall not have an absolute
right to the issuance of such permits.
   (b)   Sanitation Facilities. For all construction or maintenance projects by
licensee requiring the licensee and/or any subcontractor employed by the
licensee to be present on any work site continuously for four hours or more.
the licensee or its subcontractor shall provide portable toilets for the use of
the workers employed on such projects.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2754, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991;
Am. Ord. 3497, passed - -1992)
§ 42.0535   Technical Standards and Requirements.
   The cable television system shall be designed in accordance with the
following:
   (a)   Cablecasting Capability. The licensee shall provide cable-casting
capabilities and facilities in accordance with requirements of §
42.0532 of this Chapter and the license.
   (b)   Signal Quality. The signals produced by the system shall be of high
quality throughout the system using commonly accepted industry standards
whether in close proximity to the head-end or the farthest extension of the
trunk line. licensee shall distribute in color those television signals which
it receives in color. The system, as installed, shall be capable of passing
standard black-and-white and color video channels with associated audio signals
without material degradation and with no phase shift and no effect on color
fidelity.
   (c)   Safety Requirements. The licensee shall at all times utilize
professional care and shall design, install, and maintain in use, devices and
methods aimed at prevention of failures and accidents which may cause damage,
injury, or nuisance to the public. Construction practices shall be in
conformance with all applicable sections of Federal and State Occupational
Safety Acts and any amendments thereto, as well as other state and county
safety codes, where applicable.
   (d)   Interconnection. The County may request the licensee to interconnect
PEG channels of the cable television system with any and all other contiguous
and compatible cable systems. Interconnection of system shall permit
interaction transmission and reception of program material, and may be
accomplished by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite, or other
technically feasible method. Each system component, whether as a part of a new
system, as an extension of an existing system, or as a replacement for an
existing system shall be designed to provide bi-directional interconnecting
capability. Further, the system shall be designed to use the same broadcast
spectrum frequency allocations for commonly provided television signals within
the license area, so far as technically and economically feasible. In addition,
every reasonable effort shall be made to provide local origination and access
equipment which is compatible throughout the license area. The procedure
relating to interconnection is set forth below:
      (1)   Upon receiving request of the County to interconnect, the licensee
shall immediately initiate negotiations with other affected system(s), and
shall report to the County the results of such negotiations no later than 60
days after initiation.
      (2)   Licensee may be granted additional reasonable extensions of time to
interconnect, or the County may rescind its request to interconnect upon
petition of the licensee, if the County finds that the licensee has negotiated
in good faith and has failed to obtain approval from the system(s) of the
proposed interconnection, or that the cost of interconnection would cause an
unreasonable financial burden as determined by the License Review Board upon
the licensee and/or its subscribers.
      (3)   The licensee shall cooperate with any interconnecting corporation,
regional interconnection authority or city, County, State, or Federal
regulatory agency which may hereafter be established for the purpose of
regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for interconnection of cable
systems beyond the boundaries of the license area.
   (e)   Emergency Override. The licensee shall incorporate into its cable
television system the capability to permit the County in times of emergency to
override the audio portion of all channels simultaneously. In addition, the
licensee may be required to designate a channel, which may be a PEG channel, to
be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video. The licensee shall
cooperate with the County in the use and operation of the emergency alert
override system.
   (f)   Technical Documentation. Upon request of the Director, licensee shall
provide technical documentation of the cable television system as installed.
Such documentation shall include, but is not limited to, head-end equipment and
location, satellite receiving antenna location, and technical parameters, and
the primary cable routing, but need not include each subscriber drop.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2754, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0536   Undergrounding of Cable.
   The undergrounding and placement within conduits of all system cable is
encouraged, and the County reserves the right to require undergrounding and
placement of cable within conduit as a condition of the license. In any event,
cable shall be installed underground at licensee’s cost in all license areas
where utilities are already underground or where required by law. Previously
installed aerial cable shall be relocated and placed underground in concert
with all other utilities.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0537   Street Occupancy.
   (a)   Notification of County Department of Transportation. The licensee
shall notify the County Department of Transportation at least ten days prior to
the fact, of intention of the licensee to commence any construction in the
streets. The County shall cooperate with the licensee in granting any permits
required, provided such granting and subsequent construction by the licensee
shall not unduly interfere with the use of such streets, and that proposed
construction shall be accomplished in accordance with the County Code.
   (b)   Installation. All transmission lines, equipment, and structures shall
be located and installed so as to cause minimum interference with the rights
and reasonable convenience of property owners, and at all times shall be
maintained in a safe condition, and in good order and repair. Suitable
barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be used at such times
and places as are reasonably required for the safety of the public. Any poles
or other fixtures placed in any street by the licensee shall be placed in such
manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way.
   (c)   Pole Utilization. All pole construction and installation shall be in
accordance with California Public Utilities Commission General Order No. 95,
“Rules for Overhead Electric Line Construction.”
   (d)   Interference with Use of Streets. In installing, locating, laying, or
maintaining facilities, apparatus, or improvements, the licensee shall not
interfere with the use of any street to any greater extent than is necessary,
and shall leave the surface of any such street in as good condition as it was
prior to performance by licensee of such work. Any facility, apparatus, or
improvement under this license shall be laid, installed, located, or maintained
in conformance with instructions given by, and to the satisfaction of, the
Director of the County Department of Transportation or his deputy. In any
event, the licensee shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the
County, restore to County standards and specifications any damage or
disturbance caused to streets as a result of licensee’s construction or
operations.
   (e)   Tree Trimming and Landscaping. The licensee shall have the authority,
subject to the approval and supervision of the County Department of
Transportation, to trim trees on public property at its own expense, as may be
necessary to protect its wires and facilities. licensee shall make prompt
repairs and restoration to all landscaping within County rights-of-ways.
   (f)   Relocation/Removal. Upon receipt of 30 days prior written notice, the
licensee, at its own expense, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
relocate, or remove any of its property when, in the judgment of the Director,
the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, and/or
improvements by governmental agencies. Nothing herein shall be deemed a taking
of the property of the licensee, and licensee shall be entitled to no surcharge
by reason of this Section. After receipt of 30 days prior written notice, upon
failure of the licensee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by
the provisions of this Chapter to be performed on any street, within the time
prescribed and to the satisfaction of the County, the County may, at its
option, cause such work to be done, and the licensee shall pay to the County
the reasonable cost thereof, within 30 days after receipt of demand.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0538   Test and Compliance Procedures.
   Licensee shall obtain and submit upon request of the Director, the following
reports:
   (a)   FCC Signal Performance. Licensee shall comply with all FCC signal
performance standards, and as an aid to the County in monitoring the signal
strength and quality, the licensee shall provide the County with copies of all
FCC signal performance reports. Should the FCC no longer require signal
performance reports, the licensee shall make and submit such performance tests
and reports in response to written requests by the County.
   (b)   Special Tests. At any time after commencement of service to
subscribers, the County or any other governmental regulatory agency may require
additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or
tests involving a specific subscriber’s terminal. Copies of all such test
results shall be provided to the Director. Requests by the County for such
special tests will be made on the basis of complaints received or other
evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or significant noncompliance, and
such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in controversy.
   (c)   Costs of Tests. The costs of all tests required above, and retesting
as necessary, shall be borne by the licensee.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0539   Service to Applicants.
   Subject to the build-out requirements of §
42.0521 of the San Bernardino County Code, and upon receipt of a request for
basic service to any residence within the licensee’s service area, the licensee
shall promptly furnish requested service to such residents; such service shall
be provided to any residence passed by the licensee’s active distribution cable
within not more than 20 days following licensee’s receipt of any request for
service.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0540   Service Standards and Requirements.
   The licensee shall render such services to subscribers as will meet
technical and performance requirements of this Chapter and the license. At a
minimum, the licensee shall provide the broad category of services, and the
mix, quality, and level of programming represented to the County in the
application and made a part of the license agreement.
   (a)   Minimum Interruptions. The licensee shall render efficient service,
making repairs promptly and interrupting service only for good cause and for
the shortest possible time. Any scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible,
shall be preceded by notice given to subscribers by character generator or
other means at least 24 hours in advance and shall occur during periods of
minimum use of the system.
   (b)   Continuous Service. The licensee shall provide and maintain continuous
service to subscribers unless otherwise allowed. The licensee may petition the
License Review Board subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors to
authorize the suspension or abandonment of service upon such reasonable terms
and conditions as may be prescribed. Nonpayment for services and/or signal
piracy shall constitute grounds for termination of service without approval by
the Board of Supervisors.
   (c)   System Down Notification. The licensee shall promptly notify the
Director when the cable television system is down, due to technical
difficulties which may affect services to subscribers. The licensee shall
advise the Director, by telephone and/or in writing, of all scheduled
maintenance which will cause disruptions in service and of any planned outages
for more than four hours duration.
   (d)   Emergency Personnel. Licensee must retain and have available emergency
personnel capable of performing emergency repairs and maintenance at all times
(i.e., 24 hours a day, seven days a week).
   (e)   Identification Required. The licensee, its employees, agents,
contractors, and subcontractors shall be clearly identifiable to the public as
representatives of the licensee prior to and during any entry on public or
private property. Identification shall include the name and telephone number of
the licensee on all trucks and other vehicles used by installation and
maintenance personnel.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0541   Consumer Service Standards.
   The licensee shall provide the necessary facilities, equipment, and
personnel to comply with the following consumer standards under normal
conditions of operation:
   (a)   Local Business Office. The licensee shall maintain a local business
office within the County and provide the Director with the name, address, and
telephone number of the person(s) who will act as the licensee’s agent(s) for
general management of the system and to receive complaints regarding quality of
service, equipment malfunctions and other matters. The licensee shall advise
the County of any change of said agent(s) within five working days of such
change. The local office shall be open and staffed to receive inquiries or
complaints, either by telephone or personally, and process bill payments from
subscribers during normal business hours, Monday through Friday, State and
Federal holidays excepted.
   (b)   Telephone. A toll-free telephone number shall be available at all
times to all subscribers located within the license area for the reporting of
problems. Said toll-free number shall appear on all billing statements issued
by the licensee and the licensee shall also maintain, at licensee’s expense, a
listing of licensee’s toll-free telephone number in both the white and yellow
pages of a telephone directory serving the license area. The answering of all
business phones shall be in accordance with NCTA Customer Service Standards.
The licensee shall provide sufficient telephone lines, either adequately
staffed to answer all incoming calls or with mechanical answering capabilities,
providing, at a minimum, emergency referral information. During periods when an
answering machine is used, the licensee shall provide on-call personnel who
shall contact the answering machine every two hours at minimum to check on
requests for service and complaints; the licensee shall respond to all calls
for service or complaints received during normal business hours within four
business hours of receipt, and shall promptly investigate and resolve all calls
for service and complaints. The licensee shall maintain adequate telephone
lines to insure access by subscribers within the licensee’s area, and shall not
at any time incapacitate the system so as to prevent the receipt of telephone
calls to licensee’s office.
   (c)   Bills and Refunds. Bills will be clear, concise, and understandable.
Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than the earlier of 45 days
or the subscriber’s next billing cycle following the resolution of the request,
and return of the equipment supplied by the licensee if service is terminated.
   (d)   Appointments. Upon request of a subscriber or potential subscriber,
the licensee shall provide a service call or installation appointment within a
four hour time period, morning or evening. Should licensee be unable to keep
the appointment, the subscriber shall be notified at the earliest possible
opportunity, and shall be rescheduled on a priority basis.
   (e)   Repair Service. The licensee shall render efficient service, make
repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the
shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions shall be preceded by notice by
character generator or other means, and shall occur during periods of minimum
use of the system, preferably between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. A
written log, or equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and
reproduction, shall be maintained for all service interruptions and requests
for cable service. licensee shall provide a repair staff of technicians capable
of addressing the following problems within the following time frames:
      (1)   System Outage. Within two hours, including weekends, of receiving
subscriber calls;
      (2)   Isolated Outage. Within four hours, including weekends, of
receiving requests for service;
      (3)   Inferior Reception Quality. Within 24 hours, including weekends, of
receiving a request for service.
   (f)   Conduct Constituting a Response. The licensee shall be deemed to have
responded to a request for service under the provisions of this Section when a
technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In
the case of a subscriber not being at home when the technician arrives,
response shall be deemed to have taken place if the technician leaves a written
notification of arrival. No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any
service call unless the service request can be demonstrated to be both repeated
and nonsystem related in origin, or to involve subscriber negligence.
   (g)   Installation Staff. The licensee shall maintain an installation staff
capable of installing service to any subscriber.
   (h)   Verification of Compliance. Upon reasonable notice, the licensee shall
demonstrate to the Director compliance with all or any of the standards set
forth above. The licensee shall provide data in sufficient detail to permit the
County to verify the extent of compliance.
   (I)   Noncompliance with Standards. A repeated and verifiable pattern of
noncompliance with the consumer protection standards listed above, after
licensee receives due notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed a breach
of the license subject to any and all remedies as prescribed in §
42.0556 herein and applicable law.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 3497, passed - -1992)
§ 42.0542   Notice of Construction or Reconstruction.
   Prior to the commencement of construction or reconstruction of the system,
the licensee shall notify all residents and property owners, at the licensee’s
expense, of the intended construction activity. All notices shall be in writing
and shall be issued as follows:
   (a)   General Notice. At least 45 days prior to the intended construction, a
general notice indicating the type of construction, projected construction
schedule, and proposed construction area(s) shall be posted by first class
mail, postage prepaid, to all affected property owners and/or residents.
   (b)   Notice of Entry on Private Property. At least 24 hours prior to
entering private property or streets or public easements adjacent to or on such
private property, a notice indicating the nature and location of the work to be
performed shall be physically posted upon the affected property. The licensee
shall make a good faith effort to comply with the property owner/resident’s
preferences, if any, on location or placement of underground installations
(excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and existing cable
paths), consistent with sound engineering practices.
   (c)   Emergency Repairs. Notice requirements of Subdivisions (a) and (b)
above, are suspended for purposes of entry upon private property to perform
repairs at the subscriber’s request or in the event of system outage repairs or
other emergencies in which insufficient time is available to provide notice to
subscribers.
   (d)   Restoration of Property. After performance of work, licensee shall
restore private property as nearly as possible to its condition prior to
construction. Any disturbance of landscaping, fencing, or other improvements on
private property shall, at the sole expense of the licensee, be promptly
repaired and restored (including replacement of such items as shrubbery and
fencing) to the reasonable satisfaction of the property owner.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0543   Notices to Subscribers.
   As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the cable television system,
and at least once annually thereafter, the licensee shall provide each
subscriber with written information concerning the following:
   (a)   Inquiries and Complaints. The licensee shall provide written
information concerning procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including
the name, address, and local telephone number of the licensee’s employee(s) or
agent(s) to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed, and also
furnish information concerning the department’s responsibility for
administration of the license, including the Director’s name and the
department’s telephone number and address. The notice shall also indicate the
licensee’s business hours, and procedures for responding to inquiries after
normal business hours or during legal holidays that the licensee’s office is
not open. The licensee shall provide all subscribers and the Director written
notice not less than 30 days prior to any proposed change in these policies.
   (b)   Billing and Refund Procedures. A listing of all services, packages,
and rates available at the time, including billing options and dispute
procedures, refund procedures, and licensee policies with respect to
disconnection and reconnection services and charges shall be provided each
subscriber. If the licensee has elected to utilize line item charges for
license fees, copyright, and other fees as permitted under § 634 of Cable Act,
any such listings, whether written or oral, shall disclose to the subscriber
the total charges associated with receiving cable services. Any designation of
license fees as a separate line item on the statement shall use the term
“license fee.” Prior to the issuance of any such notices, a copy shall be
submitted to the Director for review and approval.
   (c)   Lock Boxes. Licensee shall provide notice of the availability of any
devices required by Federal, State, or local law such as, but not limited to,
parental lock box device and/or switching device (“A/B” switch), and any fees
or charges associated with receiving such devices.
   (d)   Subscriber Privacy Rights. A separate written notice containing the
information regarding protection of subscriber privacy rights as specified in §
631 of the Cable Act.
   (e)   Disconnect Notice. at least ten days in advance of any discontinuance
of service to subscriber for nonpayment, the licensee shall provide the
subscriber with a separate written notice. The notice shall contain the date,
time and place at which payment must be made in order to prevent disconnection
of service. In the event licensee has improperly or inadvertently disconnected
cable services to a subscriber, the licensee shall provide for restoration
without charge to the subscriber within not more than one business day of the
discovery of the disconnection.
   (f)   Forwarding of Notices. The notices required above (other than notices
required under §
42.0542) may be included in the mailing of the subscriber’s billing statement.
   (g)   Copies to County. Sample copies of all notices provided to subscribers
shall be filed annually with the Department.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2754, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0544   Termination of Subscriber Services.
   Upon termination of any subscriber, the licensee shall promptly remove all
of its facilities and equipment, excepting drop cable and internal wiring, from
the premises of such subscriber upon subscriber’s request, except as provided
in Subdivision (b), below.
   (a)   Charges upon failure to recover equipment, upon termination of
services, should the licensee not promptly collect its equipment from the
premises of the subscriber, the subscriber shall not be charged for continued
services, nor for failure to return any equipment.
   (b)   Equipment Returns. Should the licensee require the subscriber to
return the equipment, the licensee shall establish convenient hours including
convenient evening and weekend hours, for return of the equipment, and the
subscriber shall have a reasonable length of time in which to return the
equipment. The subscriber shall be advised of the date by which the equipment
must be returned before a charge may be imposed for failure to return
equipment.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2908, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0545   Subscriber Complaints to the Licensee.
   The licensee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon,
and resolving subscriber complaints. Such written procedures shall prescribe
the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in
writing to the licensee. A copy of these procedures shall be provided to all
subscribers upon application for service as required pursuant to §
42.0543. The procedures shall also inform the subscriber of the subscriber’s
right to file a complaint with the department in the event the subscriber is
dissatisfied with the licensee’s action. No proceedings to resolve subscriber
complaints shall be undertaken by the Department until the licensee’s complaint
resolution procedures have been exhausted.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0546   Subscriber Complaint Procedure Requirements.
   The licensee’s subscriber complaint procedures shall include, but not be
limited to the following:
   (a)   Response to Subscriber Complaints. Except as provided in §
42.0541(d), responses to subscriber complaints shall be initiated within one
business day of receipt. Resolution of the complaint, unless for good cause
shown, shall be accomplished by the licensee not later than five business days
after receipt of the complaint. If a subscriber has notified the licensee in
writing that a bill or any portion thereof is in dispute, the licensee shall
not terminate service pending resolution of the dispute, nor shall the account
be turned over or reported to a collection agency, provided that the remaining
balance of the bill is current. A bill shall not be considered in dispute
solely by reason of nonpayment by the subscriber.
   (b)   Subscriber Complaint Record. The licensee shall maintain a written
and/or computerized subscriber complaint record containing the following
information:
      (1)    Date and time of subscriber complaint;
      (2)   Identification of the complainant by name, address, and telephone
number;
      (3)   Description of the nature of the complaint; and
      (4)   A record of when and what action was taken by the licensee to
resolve the complaint.
      The complaint record shall be kept at the licensee’s local office for a
period of three years after receipt of any complaint. A copy of said subscriber
complaint record shall be made available in accordance with applicable
confidentiality laws by the licensee to the Director upon his request.
   (c)   Outage Log. The licensee shall maintain an outage log showing the
date, approximate time and duration, type, and probable cause of all head-end,
trunk, or distribution line service failures occurring within the calendar
year. Each log shall be kept for a minimum period of three years after the
close of that calendar year. The log shall also include information relating to
routine testing or scheduled maintenance outages. A copy of such outage log
shall be provided by the licensee to the Director upon request.
   (d)   Special Tests and Reports. When substantiated complaints result in an
unresolved controversy involving significant noncompliance with license
standards, or when circumstances exist which, in the judgment of the Director,
cast doubt upon the reliability or quality of cable service, the Director may
require the licensee, at the licensee’s cost, to test, analyze, and provide a
written report on the performance of the system as provided in §
42.0538. Said report shall be delivered to the Director, no later than 30 days
after the licensee is notified in writing of the required report. The Director
may require at licensee’s expense that these tests and analyses be supervised
by an independent professional engineer acceptable to the County. Test reports
shall be forwarded to the Director with interpretation of the test results and
recommending actions to be taken.
   (e)   Subscriber Terminal Tests. The licensee shall, upon reasonable request
or complaint by a subscriber, perform such tests as necessary at the
subscriber’s terminal to establish whether a signal of requisite quality is
being delivered to the subscriber’s premises. The results of such test(s) shall
be communicated to the subscriber as soon as the test is completed and
evaluated, and in no event later than ten days after the test has been
concluded.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0547   Subscriber Complaints to the County.
   A subscriber who is dissatisfied with the licensee’s proposed resolution of
a complaint, or who has not received a response from the licensee within the
five day period as required under §
42.0546(a), shall be entitled to have the complaint reviewed by the County. The
subscriber shall initiate the review process by filing a written complaint,
together with the licensee’s written decision, if any, with the Department, and
the Department shall notify the licensee of such filing.
   (a)   Review by Division of Consumer Affairs. Upon the Department’s receipt
of the subscriber’s complaint, the Department shall, within five days, forward
the complaint to the Division of Consumer Affairs, which shall review the
subscriber’s complaint and licensee’s decision, and shall attempt to mediate
the dispute. In the event resolution of the dispute is not possible, the
Division shall refer the matter back to the Department for hearing by the
License Review Board, which shall hear the dispute within not more than 90 days
following referral of the dispute from the Division.
   (b)   License Review Board Findings Final. Decisions of the License Review
Board with respect to consumer complaints shall be final.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0548   Rights Reserved to the County.
   The rights reserved to the County set forth below are in addition to all
other rights of the County, whether reserved herein or otherwise authorized by
law, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right shall affect any other
rights which may be held by the County. licensee, by acceptance of the license,
agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirement of the
County in its exercise of any such right or power.
   (a)   Delegation of Authority. The County may exercise or delegate its
regulatory power to a subordinate body of its officers, employees, agencies,
committees, or departments to insure the proper implementation of this Chapter.
   (b)   Governing Rules and Regulations. The County shall have the power and
right at all times for the duration of the license to require the licensee to
conform to the rules and regulations governing the operation of the cable
television systems now or hereafter adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
   (c)   Establishment of New Requirements. The County may establish additional
requirements for new licenses or license renewals, and may modify requirements
from time to time to reflect changing conditions and the industry standards.
   (d)   Waiver of Established Requirements. The County shall have the right to
waive any provision of the license, except those required by Federal or State
Regulation, if the Board of Supervisors, in their discretion, determines that
it is in the public interest to do so.
   (e)   County Inspections. The County shall have the right to inspect all
cable television system construction or installation, and to make such tests as
it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the license and
other applicable provisions of law.
   (f)   Intervention by County. The County shall have the right of
intervention in any suit or proceeding involving a cable system or license to
which a County licensee is a party.
   (g)   Street Improvements. The County reserves the right to improve any
street, or other public place, or other portions thereof, over and within which
the license is granted, including the widening, change of grade, change of
alignment, construction or reconstruction of such street, or any portion
thereof, and the County further reserves the right to construct, or
reconstruct, install, repair and maintain any such street, or other public
places, or any portions thereof.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0549   Rights of Subscribers.
   (a)   Discrimination by Licensee. The licensee shall not deny service, deny
access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, PEG channel users, or
general citizens on the basis of income, race, color, religion, national
origin, age or sex. The licensee shall comply at all times with all other
applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations, and all executive
and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination, which are hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this Chapter by reference.
   (b)   Rights of Tenants. Tenants shall not be discriminated against in the
ability to subscribe to cable services. Licensee shall be required to provide
tenants in individual units of multiple housing facilities with all services
offered to other dwelling units within the license area, so long as the owner
of the multiple housing facility consents in writing, if requested by the
licensee, to the following:
      (1)   The licensee’s providing service to units of the facility;
      (2)   Reasonable conditions and times for installation, inspection, and
maintenance of the system on the facility premises;
      (3)   Reasonable conditions promulgated by the licensee to protect
licensee’s equipment and to encourage widespread use of the system.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0550   Equal Employment Opportunities.
   The licensee shall strictly adhere to equal employment opportunity
requirements of Federal, State, and local laws and regulations in effect on the
date of the license grant, and as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0551   Continuity of Service.
   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service
insofar as their financial and other obligations to the licenser are honored.
In the event that the licensee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell
the system, or the County gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew
the license, the licensee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers
receive continuous, uninterrupted service.
   (a)   Change of Licensee. In the event of a change of licensee, or in the
event a new operator acquires the system, the original licensee shall cooperate
with the County and the new owner or operator in maintaining continuity of
service to all subscribers.
   (b)   County Operation. In the event the licensee fails to operate the
system for seven consecutive days without prior approval of the Director, or
without just cause, the County may, at its option, and in addition to any other
rights provided for in this Chapter, seek a court-appointed receiver to operate
and to collect all revenues from the system until such time as the licensee can
restore service under conditions acceptable to the County, or a replacement
operator is selected. The licensee shall reimburse the County for all
reasonable costs or damages that are the result of the licensee’s failure to
perform.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0552   Retention of Licensee’s Records.
   (a)   Retention Periods. The licensee shall establish, keep, and maintain
books, accounts, papers, maps, and other records which relate to the
operations, transactions, property, or financial condition of the licensee with
respect to its activities under the license issued pursuant to this Chapter for
a period in accordance with the following schedule:
      (1)   Fifteen Years. License, amendments to the license, license
applications and related materials, construction maps, documents filed or
presented to the License Review Board or Board of Supervisors, and records
relating to bonds or other security;
      (2)   Seven Years. Financial information, including, but not limited to,
annual reports of the licensee, license fee reports, records of gross receipts,
balance sheets, receipts, income, and disbursements; and
      (3)   Three Years. All other records required under this Chapter unless
otherwise specified.
   (b)   Inspection of Records. The County or its authorized representative,
upon reasonable notice, shall have the right to inspect at any time during
normal business hours the books, records, maps, plans, service complaint logs,
performance test results, and any other records of the licensee which relate to
the operations of the licensee and which are maintained at the local office
required by this Chapter. If any such books or records are not kept in the
local office, or if on reasonable request, are not made available to County
inspection within the County, and if the County shall determine that an
examination of such records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of
the County’s responsibilities hereunder, then all reasonable travel and
subsistence expense necessarily incurred in making such an examination by the
County shall be paid by the licensee.
   (c)   Confidentiality. County shall maintain the confidentiality of any
trade secrets or other proprietary information of licensee in the possession of
the County, and further, records shall be exempt from public inspection
pursuant to this Section to the extent such records are made except from public
disclosure by State or Federal statute and to the extent such records are
protected by State or Federal statute against discovery in civil litigation.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0553   Licensee Reporting Requirements.
   The licensee shall be responsible for the preparation and timely submission
to the Director of the following designated reports:
   (a)   Annual Reports. Within 120 days after the close of the licensee’s
fiscal year, the licensee shall submit a written annual report in such form as
established by the Director, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A summary of the previous year’s (or in the case of the initial
report year, the initial year) activities and development of the cable system,
including services begun or discontinued during the reporting year, and the
number of subscribers for each class of service;
      (2)   A revenue statement, audited by an independent certified public
account, or certified by an officer of the licensee;
      (3)   A statement of projected construction, if any, for the next two
years;
      (4)   A list of the licensee’s officers, members of its board of
directors, and other principals;
      (5)   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five
percent or more of the voting interest of the licensee and/or its parent
(unless its parent is a public corporation whose annual reports are publicly
available), affiliated corporations, and other entities, if any.
   (b)   Periodic Reports. The licensee shall furnish to the Director progress
reports and maps indicating in detail the location of existing construction of
the system. Such periodic reports and maps shall be furnished at six months
intervals beginning with the effective date of the license.
   (c)   License Payment Report. The licensee, during the entire term of the
license, within 60 days after the expiration of each license payment period,
shall file with the Treasurer/Tax Collector and the Department a license
payment report, verified by oath of the licensee or by the oath of a duly
authorized representative of the licensee, setting forth in detail the
computation of the amount of licensee payment due for the immediately preceding
payment period. The report shall be completed on a form provided by the
Director.
   (d)   Public Reports. If public reports are issued, a copy of each of the
licensee’s annual and other periodic public financial reports and those of its
parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporations and other entities, if any,
shall be submitted to the County within 30 days after receipt of the County’s
request.
   (e)   Federal and State Reports. The licensee may be required to submit to
the County copies of pleadings, applications, notifications, communications,
and documents of any kind, submitted by the licensee, and copies of all
decisions, correspondence, and actions by, any Federal, State, or local courts,
regulatory agencies, or other government entities relating to its cable
television operations within the license area. The licensee shall submit such
documentation to the County not later than 30 days after receipt of a County
request to do so.
   (f)   Cost of Reports. All reports and records according to this or any
other section of this Chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of the
licensee.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0554   Severability.
   If any provision of this Chapter, the license, or application of the license
to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction or is not in compliance with any requirement of the Public
Utilities Commission of the State of California, FCC, or any other Federal or
State body or agency having jurisdiction over licensee’s license activities,
the remainder of this Chapter or the license, or application of the license to
persons or circumstances, other than those to which it is held invalid or not
in such compliance, shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0555   Force Majeure.
   In the event licensee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions,
obligations, or requirements of its license is prevented or impaired due to
acts of God or civil emergencies, which are beyond licensee’s control and not
reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed excusable and
no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided the
licensee has notified the Department in writing within 30 days of discovery of
the occurrence of such an event. In the event licensee must suspend service as
the result of such force majeure, licensee shall make every reasonable effort
to effect repairs, and restore service to its subscribers as soon as possible
thereafter. In the event licensee cannot restore service to its subscribers
within 90 days following the occurrence of such an event, the Director may
initiate proceedings under §§
42.0523 or
42.0556 to modify or terminate licensee’s license.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
§ 42.0556   Civil Penalties, Default and Revocation Proceedings.
   If licensee fails to perform any obligation under the license, or under this
Chapter, or fails to do so in a timely manner, the Department may, at its sole
option, and at its sole discretion declare a default and seek the following:
   (a)   Notice of Default. Upon licensee’s breach of the terms of its license
or violation of this Chapter, the Department shall mail to the licensee’s last
known business address by first class mail, postage prepaid, a notice of
default. Said notice shall describe the nature of the licensee’s default and
specify such remedial action as may be necessary for the licensee to cure said
default. licensee shall have 90 days from the date of the notice of default’s
mailing in which to cure the default. In the event licensee has failed to cure
the default, the Department may submit the matter to the License Review Board
for further proceedings.
   (b)   License Review Board Hearings. In the event that a notice of default
is mailed to licensee as set forth in Subdivision (a) above, the Department
may, no earlier than 60 days following its mailing of a notice of default, file
a written accusation with the License Review Board with a copy to the licensee,
requesting a hearing and setting forth the grounds for such proceedings. The
licensee may, within 30 days following the Department’s mailing of the
accusation, file with the License Review Board a written response to said
accusation admitting and/or denying the allegations therein and setting forth
any affirmative defenses licensee may have. Not later than 60 days after any
such accusation has been received by it, a public hearing pursuant to §§
42.0513 and
42.0514 shall be held on the accusation by the License Review Board. The
License Review Board shall, within 30 days following the public hearing, either
dismiss the accusation, assess monetary sanctions, or recommend revocation of
the license to the Board of Supervisors, and shall notify the licensee in
writing of its decision by first class mail, postage prepaid. Determinations of
the License Review Board may be appealed to the Board of Supervisors within 30
days of the License Review Board’s decision.
   (c)   Monetary Sanctions. For any violation of the terms of this Chapter or
the terms of the license, and as an alternative to revocation of the license,
the License Review Board may assess against the licensee monetary sanctions in
an amount not to exceed 30 percent of the license fee paid for the preceding
year. Assessment of sanctions shall not constitute a waiver by the County of
any other right or remedy it may have under the license or under applicable
law, including without limitation, its right to recover from the licensee such
additional damages, costs and expenses, under this Chapter including actual
attorney fees, that may have been suffered or incurred by the County by reason
of or arising out of such breach of the license or this Chapter.
   (d)   License Revocation/Suspension. The County may revoke or suspend any
license for cause. For the purposes of this Section, any breach of the license
or this Chapter shall constitute cause. In the event the License Review Board
shall recommend revocation or suspension, the Board of Supervisors shall
conduct a public hearing within 45 days following its receipt of the License
Review Board’s recommendations, and shall within 30 days of the public hearing
make its determination either to: (1) dismiss the revocation proceedings; (2)
suspend the license subject to licensee’s performance of such condition(s)
consistent with this Chapter as the Board of Supervisors may impose; or (3)
revoke the license.
   (e)   Effect of Revocation. Upon revocation and during suspension of a
license by the Board of Supervisors, the licensee shall immediately cease all
operations under the license, and the license shall be considered null and
void. Any continued operations requiring a license under this Chapter, shall be
considered a violation of the County Code and subject the licensee to such
criminal and civil penalties, including injunctive relief, as may be
appropriate.
   (f)   No Limitation of County’s Rights. Any or all of the above enumerated
measures against licensee shall be in addition to any and all other legal or
equitable remedies the County has under the license or under applicable law.
(Ord. 1281, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 2053, passed - -1976; Am. Ord. 2667,
passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 2717, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 3440, passed - -1991)
CHAPTER 6: AIRPORTS AND HELISTOPS
Section
   
42.0601   Landings and Takeoffs—Exceptions.
   
42.0602   Penalty for Violations.
   
42.0603   Injunctive Relief.
   
42.0604   Exceptions.
   
42.0605   Nonliability of the County.
   
42.0606   Severability.
§ 42.0601   Landings and Takeoffs—Exceptions.
   It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to take off in or land
any aircraft within the unincorporated area of the County at any point except
airports and heliports, provided, that the prohibition of this Section shall
not apply to mechanical failure or flight operations emergency. The term
EMERGENCY, as used herein, shall be construed to include Sheriff, Rescue and
Ambulance missions and other flights conducted in the public interest, and
urgency flight operations of public utility companies occasionally utilizing
their own properties or, with prior permission, land owned by others, in
accordance with Federal and State regulations.
(Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978)
§ 42.0602   Penalty for Violations.
   Any person, association, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this Chapter or rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not
to exceed $500.00. Each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978)
§ 42.0603   Injunctive Relief.
   Any person, association, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this Chapter may be enjoined by a suit filed by the County in a Court of
competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any other
penalty provision.
(Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978)
§ 42.0604   Exceptions.
   None of the provisions of this Chapter shall be construed to apply to
facilities owned or activities conducted by Federal, State or municipal
governments or agencies thereof.
(Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978)
§ 42.0605   Nonliability of the County.
   The County in no event shall be liable for any personal injuries or property
damages occasioned in any way in connection with the construction,
establishment, maintenance or operation of any airport or heliport.
(Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978)
§ 42.0606   Severability.
   If any provisions or this Chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the
provisions or application of this Chapter which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
Chapter are declared to be severable.
(Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978)
DIVISION 3: GENERAL
CHAPTER 1: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
43.0101   Penalty.
   
43.0102   Enforcement.
   
43.0103   Suit for Recovery of License Fee.
§ 43.0101   Penalty.
   Where not otherwise provided any person violating any provision of Title 4
of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more
than $500.00 or imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six months,
or both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 1007, passed - -1962)
§ 43.0102   Enforcement.
   If no other officer is specified by the terms of the chapter concerned, a
chapter of this Code shall be enforced by the Sheriff, District Attorney, and
County Counsel. The Sheriff shall issue the license or permit, and the Tax
Collector shall receive the fee and all charges, penalties, and deposits,
except as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 1007, passed - -1962)
§ 43.0103   Suit for Recovery of License Fee.
   It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to cause suit to be brought in the
name of the County of San Bernardino as plaintiff for the recovery of any
license fee herein imposed against any person required by Title 4 of this Code
to first procure a license before engaging in any business, as herein defined,
who carries on or attempts to carry on such business without such license.
(Ord. 1007, passed - -1962)
CHAPTER 2: AMPITHEATER BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
Section
   
43.0201   License Required.
   
43.0202   Tax Rate.
   
43.0203   License Revocation.
§ 43.0201   License Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in the unincorporated areas
of the County of San Bernardino any permanent open air amphitheater with
permanent seating for a capacity of not less than 1,000 individuals, without
first having procured a license to do so from the Treasurer/Tax Collector of
the County of San Bernardino and thereafter having paid the required business
license tax when due.
(Ord. 3535, passed - -1993)
§ 43.0202   Tax Rate.
   For each business requiring a license under this Chapter, the licensee shall
pay to the County of San Bernardino the sum of seven and three-fourths percent
of the cost of each admission paid by each person attending any event being
conducted by a licensee under this Chapter. The business license tax shall be
due and payable semi-annually in accordance with the license.
(Ord. 3535, passed - -1993)
§ 43.0203   License Revocation.
   Any license issued pursuant to this Chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the Treasurer/Tax Collector when it shall appear that the business license tax
has not been paid when due, or that the business of the person to whom such
license was granted has been conducted in violation of any statute of the State
or Federal Government, or in violation of this Code, or is being used for a
purpose different from that for which the license was issued.
(Ord. 3535, passed - -1993)
CHAPTER 3: VALIDITY OF TITLE 4
Section
   
44.0301   Validity of Title 4.
§ 44.0301   Validity of Title 4.
   This Title and the various parts, divisions, chapters, sections and clauses
thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of
this Title shall not be affected thereby. The County Board of Supervisors
hereby declares that it would have passed this Title and each part thereof,
regardless of the fact that one or more parts thereof be declared
unconstitutional or invalid.
DIVISION 4: RESERVED
DIVISION 5: PERMIT REGULATIONS FOR EXPLOSIVES
CHAPTER 1: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
45.0101   Definitions.
§ 45.0101   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Division the following terms shall bear the
connotations set forth below:
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. A representative or agent or an association or
organization, who will act for such entity in being in charge of, and
responsible for, explosives. Such an authorized representative will share
liability jointly with such entity for all actions or instances proximately
related to the explosives.
   EMPLOYEE. An employee of a corporation who will act for the corporation in
being in charge of, and responsible for, explosives. Such an employee will
share liability jointly with such a corporation for all actions or instances
proximately related to the explosives.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any substance, or combination of substances the primary or common
purpose of which is detonation or rapid combustion and which is capable of a
relatively instantaneous or rapid release of gas and heat, or any substance,
the primary purpose of which, when combined with any other substance, is to
form a substance capable of a relatively instantaneous or rapid release of gas
and heat. The term EXPLOSIVES shall include, but shall not necessarily be
limited to, any of the following:
      (1)   Dynamite, nitroglycerin, picric acid, lead azide, fulminate of
mercury, black powder, smokeless powder, propellant explosives, detonating
primers, blasting caps, and or commercial boosters;
      (2)   Substances determined to be Class “A” and Class “B” explosives as
classified by the United States Department of Transportation;
      (3)   Nitro carbo nitrate substances (blasting agent) as classified by
the United States Department of Transportation;
      (4)   Any material designated as an explosive by the State Fire Marshal.
Such designation shall be made pursuant to the classification standards
established by the United States Department or Transportation. The State Fire
Marshal shall adopt regulations in accordance with the provisions of Government
Code §§ 11371 et seq. to establish procedures for the classification and
designation of explosive materials or explosive devices that are not under the
jurisdiction of the United Slates Department of Transportation;
      (5)   Certain Class “C” explosives as designated by the United States
Department of Transportation when listed in regulations adopted by the State
Fire Marshal.
   For the purposes of this part, the term EXPLOSIVES shall not include any
destructive device, as defined in Penal Code § 12301, nor shall it include
ammunition or small arms primers manufactured for use in shotguns, rifles, or
pistols.
   ISSUING AUTHORITY. The Sheriff of San Bernardino County, his or her deputies
or agents.
   MAGAZINE. Any building, structure, or container, other than an explosives
manufacturing building, authorized for the storage of explosives.
   PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Division.
   PERSON. Any individual, organization, firm, corporation or association.
(Am. Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
CHAPTER 2: PROHIBITION
Section
   
45.0201   Permit Required.
   
45.0202   Abandonment and Storage of Explosives.
   
45.0203   Permits Non-Transferable.
   
45.0204   Exemption: Public Safety Agencies.
   
45.0205   Exemption: Smokeless Powder for Private Hand-Loading.
§ 45.0201   Permit Required.
   No person shall do any one of the following without first having applied for
and received a permit in accordance with the provisions of this Division.
   (a)   Manufacture explosives;
   (b)   Sell, give, deliver, or otherwise dispose of explosives;
   (c)    Receive, store, or possess explosives;
   (d)   Transport explosives;
   (e)   Use explosives;
   (f)   Operate a terminal for handling explosives;
   (g)   Park or leave standing any vehicle carrying explosives, except when
parked or left standing in or at a safe stopping place designated as such by
the State Fire Marshal under the provisions of Vehicle Code §§ 31600 et seq.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0202   Abandonment and Storage of Explosives.
   No person shall abandon or otherwise dispose of any explosive in any manner
which might, as the result of such abandonment or disposal, create any danger
or threat of danger to life or property. Any person in possession or control of
explosives required in the performance of his or her duties shall, when the
need for such explosives no longer exists, either return the explosives to the
source from which the explosives were obtained, or to the issuing authority for
disposal or shall destroy the explosives in a safe manner so as not to make
them available to persons who might obtain them and use them in a manner
prejudicial to the safety of life and property. Magazines or temporary
magazines used for storage purposes in any area where blasting is required
shall, when the need for such storage no longer exists and the explosives have
been removed or disposed of as above required, be removed or demolished, or
signs indicating the presence of explosives in such magazines or on the
premises on which such magazines are located, shall be removed or effectively
obliterated, and the issuing authority who issued the storage permit shall be
immediately notified of the action taken.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0203   Permits Non-Transferable.
   No explosives permittee shall lend his permit or allow it to be used by
another person.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0204   Exemption: Public Safety Agencies.
   This Division does not apply to the transportation and use of explosives (by
representatives of the California Highway Patrol, the State Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation, local police departments, Sheriff’s
departments, and fire departments acting in their official capacity.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0205   Exemption: Smokeless Powder for Private Hand-Loading.
   This Division does not apply to any possession or use of 20 pounds or less
of smokeless powder, or one pound or less of black sporting powder, provided
that:
   (a)   Smokeless powder is intended only for handloading of small arms
ammunition of .75 caliber or less;
   (b)   Black sporting powder is intended for loading of small arms or small
arms ammunition of .75 caliber or less;
   (c)   All such powder is for private use and not for resale, and in the case
of black sporting powder there shall be no gift, delivery, or other disposition
to another person.
   (d)   The storage, use, and handling of such smokeless and black powder
conforms to rules, regulations, or ordinances of authorities having
jurisdiction for fire prevention and suppression in the area of such storage,
use, and handling of such explosives.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
CHAPTER 3: PERMIT
Section
   
45.0301   Written Permit Application Required.
   
45.0302   Permit Application: Contents.
   
45.0303   Permit Application: Investigation.
   
45.0304   Permit Application: Approval.
   
45.0305   Compliance Bond.
   
45.0306   Permit Fee.
   
45.0307   Waiting Period.
   
45.0308   Permit Terms.
   
45.0309   Permit Revocation.
§ 45.0301   Written Permit Application Required.
   Application for a permit shall be in writing; shall be presented to the
issuing authority; and shall be on a form supplied by the issuing authority.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0302   Permit Application: Contents.
   A permit application shall, when submitted to the issuing authority, prior
to the contemplated rise of the explosives, contain the following:
   (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (b)   The name and address of the employee or authorized representatives
designated by the applicant as being responsible for the use, handling,
storage, possession or transportation of explosives for the applicant;
   (c)   The place where, and the purpose for which, the explosives are
intended to be used, handled, stored or possessed;
   (d)   The type and amount of explosives for which application is made;
   (e)   The signature of the applicant;
   (f)   The number of times purchases may be made and the frequency of such
purchases;
   (g)   The routes, highways, and stopping places intended to be utilized in
transporting the explosives;
   (h)   Whether the applicant, or its employee or authorized representative
designated as being responsible for the use, etc., of the explosives:
      (1)   Is an alien;
      (2)   Has been convicted of a felony;
      (3)   Has been convicted of a violation of Health and Safety Code §
11550;
      (4)   Is a registered sex offender pursuant to the provisions of Penal
Code § 290;
      (5)   Has been adjudged at any time incompetent and/or insane.
   (i)   A recent photograph of the applicant, or the employee, or authorized
representative, known as a “mug shot;”
   (j)   A set of fingerprints of the applicant, or the employee or authorized
representative.
   A statement of the applicant’s or the employee’s or authorized
representative’s previous experience with explosives shall be submitted with
the application.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0303   Permit Application: Investigation.
   The issuing authority shall examine the application, and if deemed
necessary, require elaboration from the applicant on any subject matter
disclosed in the application, when such elaboration relates to the competency
of any person to be involved with the explosives. The issuing authority may
also visit and inspect the applicant’s premises, facilities, and/or vehicles
which will be employed with regard to any transportation, storage or use of the
explosives.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0304   Permit Application: Approval.
   After the issuing authority has weighed and studied all available
information pertaining to the applicant’s proposed use or the explosives, the
issuing authority shall grant the permit, or if he or she finds that any person
involved, lacks the necessary knowledge or planning with regard to ability to
perform the contemplated uses with explosives, or that the property involved
lacks the necessary characteristics from the standpoint of location of
facilities, all with regard to safety of the individuals involved, public
safety and security of private property, the issuing authority may deny the
application,
No application for such a permit shall be approved by the issuing authority
unless the storage facility is in strict compliance with the regulations
adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 12081.
   If the application is for a permit to transport 1,000 pounds or less or
explosives on a public road or highway, the application shall include the
following information:
   (a)   A description of the vehicle or vehicles which will be employed in the
transportation;
   (b)   The route to be taken for such transportation and any stopping places.
The description of such a vehicle shall include license number, make, model,
weight, and a maintenance record of such a vehicle. The route proposed shall be
subject to approval of the issuing authority.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0305   Compliance Bond.
   Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant shall post a bond in the
amount of $25,000.00 with the issuing authority to insure compliance with this
Division, or submit evidence of a public liability insurance policy providing
coverage for the activities proposed under the permit, for a minimum of the
above sum, when deemed necessary by the issuing authority for public safety.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0306   Permit Fee.
   A permit shall not be issued until after the payment of a fee of $10.00,
unless the quantity of explosives is 100 pounds or less, in which case the fee
shall be $2.00.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0307   Waiting Period.
   Except in a case in which the issuing authority determines that the
explosives are necessary because of an emergency involving a danger to persons
or property, no permit shall be issued until one week has elapsed after
application is made. If no affirmative action is taken on the application
within 14 days after application is made, the issuing authority shall explain
the cause for such delay to the applicant.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0308   Permit Terms.
   A permit shall remain valid only until such time as the act or acts
authorized by the permit are performed, but in no event shall the permit remain
valid for a period longer than one year from the date of issuance of the
permit.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0309   Permit Revocation.
   A permit may be suspended or revoked, after reasonable notice by the issuing
authority, if the person to whom the permit was issued sells, uses, stores, or
handles the explosives in a manner which is unlawful or which creates an
unreasonable hazard to life and property, or in violation of the conditions of
the permit as indicated on the application.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
45.0401   Permit Revocation: Appeal Rights.
   
45.0402   Supplementary to State Law.
§ 45.0401   Permit Revocation: Appeal Rights.
   Any decision or action of the issuing authority made pursuant to Division 5
of this Code may be appealed in writing by letter addressed to the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors, within ten days of the decision or action from which such
appeal is taken. Within ten days of such appeal the Board of Supervisors shall
hear and determine such appeal; the matter may be continued for reasonable
cause. The burden shall be on the permittee or person, to prove that the
decision or action in question was arbitrary or capricious or an abuse of
discretion. The hearing before the Board of Supervisors shall be noticed in
writing to the permittee and the issuing authority five days in advance of such
hearing. That Board may reverse the decision or action of the issuing authority
or may affirm it.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
§ 45.0402   Supplementary to State Law.
   The provisions of Division 5 of this Code are intended to apply in addition
to, and to be supplementary to, the provisions of Health and Safety Code §§
12000 et seq., Vehicle Code §§ 31600 et seq., and the Administrative Code §§
1500 et seq.
   The Board of Supervisors finds that the provisions of Division 5 of this
Code are not in conflict with the aforementioned State law, and each of the
provisions of the laws mentioned in this Section shall be operative in such a
manner that is consistent and reasonable with each and every other provision of
law hereof.
(Ord. 1604, passed - -1970)
Editor’s note:
   Administrative Code §§ 1500 has been partially repealed. Code users should
now refer to Administrative Code Title 19, Chapter 10, Subchapter 2 (commencing
with § 1550).
DIVISION 6: SOLID WASTE HANDLING FRANCHISES
CHAPTER 1: PURPOSES AND REQUIRED AUTHORIZATIONS
Section
   
46.0101   Purposes.
   
46.0102   Required Authorizations.
§ 46.0101 Purposes.
   The purposes of Division 6 are set forth below (all terms are as defined in
Chapter 2):
   (a)   To allow for the establishment of solid waste handling franchises
within the unincorporated portion of San Bernardino County, pursuant to
authority cited in Government Code § 25827, in Public Resources Code §§ 40057
through 40059 or 49200 through 49205, in Code of Regulations, Title 14, §§
17332 and 17333, and any other applicable State or local law. The
implementation of franchises through entering into franchise agreements with
grantees will assist the County:
      (1)   In meeting its obligation to provide solid waste handling services
as required in Public Resources Code § 40057;
      (2)   In meeting the requirements of AB 939, as may be amended, and all
subsequent State laws and regulations which mandate that the County reduce the
amount of solid waste disposed in County landfills by certain numerical
thresholds by providing its citizens with source reduction, recycling and
composting programs and opportunities;
   (b)   To help ensure that residents of the unincorporated County receive the
similar quality of waste collection and recycling services as do those
residents in the incorporated cities and towns of San Bernardino County;
   (c)   To ensure that programs and service Levels for solid waste handling
within the unincorporated spheres of influence of incorporated cities and towns
will replicate, to the extent possible, programs and service levels of adjacent
cities and towns;
   (d)   To minimize, to the extent possible, disruption of programs and
services to unincorporated residents in the event of annexations;
   (e)   To help quantify the waste stream from the unincorporated County in
order to comply with Diversion requirements of AB 939, as may be amended;
   (f)   To provide by agreement, an opportunity for predictable levels of
waste at County landfills to ensure adequate funding for closure/post-closure
activities; and
   (g)   To ensure compliance with the mandatory organic waste disposal
reduction requirements of SB 1383.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460,
passed - -2023)
§ 46.0102 Required Authorizations.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subdivisions (b) and (c) of this
section, no person shall engage in, solicit, contract for or provide, in the
unincorporated County, solid waste handling services without such person having
and maintaining:
      (1)   A health and safety permit authorizing the collection, transfer or
removal of refuse (within the meaning of
Article 2 of Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code); and
      (2)   (A)   With respect to a franchise area, a franchise agreement
authorizing the person to provide the specified solid waste handling service
being provided; or
         (B)   With respect to a refuse collection area, or any portion thereof
which is not a franchise area subject to a franchise agreement, a Class A
permit or temporary permit as provided for in
Article 2.1 of Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code.
   (b)   (1)   Notwithstanding Subdivision (a), above, any person may engage in
or provide, in the unincorporated County, those solid waste handling services
related to performing as a garbage hauler (within the meaning of
Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code), without such person being
required to have or maintain a franchise agreement or the Class A permit or
temporary permit provided for in
Article 2.1 of Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Subdivision (a), above, any person may engage in or
provide, in the unincorporated County, those solid waste handling services
which are related solely to one of the types of solid waste set forth below,
without such person being required to have or maintain a franchise agreement or
the Class A permit or temporary permit provided for in
Article 2.1 of Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code.
         (A)   Abandoned vehicles and parts thereof.
         (B)   Ashes.
         (C)   Dewatered, treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge.
         (D)   Self-generated waste or waste generated and hauled by the
property owner.
         (E)   Green waste or yard trimmings generated as an incidental part of
providing gardening, landscaping or landscape maintenance as a professional
gardener or landscaper.
         (F)   Inert materials or demolition waste from remodeling jobs which
are generated as an incidental part of providing such remodeling services,
provided that the construction contractor is not a hauling service or solid
waste enterprise, does not separately or additionally charge for the incidental
service of removing, transporting or disposing (except for the tipping fee) of
the inert materials or demolition waste, and utilizes only his or her own
employees and equipment to collect, transport, and dispose of same.
         (G)   Recyclables that are sold or donated by the generator of such
materials to a party other than the grantee of a franchise. A mere discount or
reduction in price of the hauler's charges for the handling of such materials
is not a sale or donation within the meaning of Division 6.
         (H)   Food waste used as animal feed. Food waste or other organic
waste diverted from disposal by delivery to hog farms or otherwise used as
animal feed, pursuant to the provisions of Public Resource Code § 40059.4
         (I)   Edible food recovered for human consumption. Edible food that is
collected from a generator by other person(s), such as a person from a food
recovery organization or food recovery service, for the purposes of food
recovery; or that is transported by the generator to another person(s), such as
a person from a food recovery organization, for the purposes of food recovery,
regardless of whether the generator donates, sells, or pays a fee to the other
person(s) to collect or receive the edible food from the generator.
         (J)   Exempt persons. A person or entity that has been given an
exemption by the County from the uniform handling collection ordinance.
      (3)   Subdivision (b)(1), above, shall have no application in any
franchise area to the extent that the County provides in the franchise
agreement(s) establishing such franchise area that any or all of the solid
waste handling services related to either performing as a garbage hauler or to
the types of solid waste enumerated in Subdivision (b)(2) are to be provided
pursuant to a franchise agreement or agreements; so long as the person and/or
the solid waste handling service being provided do not otherwise fit within one
or more of the exemptions provided in Subdivision (c) of this Section. The
Division shall maintain a list of all areas of the County within which a
franchise agreement is required in order to provide any of the solid waste
handling services which are related to performing as a garbage hauler or solely
to a type of solid waste enumerated in Subdivision (b)(2).
   (c)   The provisions of Subdivisions (a) and (b)(3) of this Section shall
not apply to those persons and/or solid waste handling services specified in §
33.0843 of this Code.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460,
passed - -2023)
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
46.0201   Definitions.
§ 46.0201 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Division 6, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth in this section:
   (a)   AB 341. The Assembly Bill approved by the Governor of the State of
California on October 5, 2011, which amended §§ 41730, 41731, 41734, 41735,
41736, 41800, 42926, 44004, and 50001 of, and added §§ 40004, 41734.5, and
41780.01 and Chapter 12.8 (commencing with § 42649) to Part 3 of Division 30
of, and added and repealed § 41780.02 of, the Public Resources Code, relating
to solid waste.
   (b)   AB 827. The Assembly Bill approved by the Governor of the State of
California on October 2, 2019, which amended §§ 42649.1, 42649.2, 42649.8, and
42649.81 of the Public Resources Code, relating to solid waste.
   (c)   AB 939. The California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989,
beginning at California Public Resources Code §§ 40000, et seq., as it may be
amended from time to time.
   (d)   AB 1594. The Assembly Bill approved by the Governor of the State of
California on September 28, 2014, which amended §§ 40507 and 41781.3 of the
Public Resources Code, relating to solid waste.
   (e)   AB 1826. The Organic Waste Recycling Act of 2014 (Chapter 727,
Statutes of 2014 modifying Division 30 of the California Public Resources
Code), also commonly referred to as "AB 1826."
   (f)   ALTERNATIVE FACILITY.  A facility other than designated facilities
approved by County for temporary use.
   (g)   APPLICABLE LAW. All Federal, State, County, and local laws,
regulations, rules, orders, judgments, decrees, permits, approvals, or other
requirement of any governmental agency having jurisdiction over the collection,
transportation, processing, and disposal of discarded materials. Applicable law
includes, but is not limited to, AB 939, AB 341, AB 1826, and SB 1383.
   (h)   BACK-HAUL. Generating and transporting recyclables and/or organic
waste to a destination owned and operated by the generator using the
generator's own employees and equipment, or as defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(66)
(A).
   (i)   BIN. A container with capacity of approximately one to eight cubic
yards with a hinged lid and with wheels (where appropriate) that is serviced by
a front end-loading collection vehicle. This includes bins with compactors
attached to increase the capacity of the bin.
   (j)   BLUE CONTAINER. A container that is defined in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(5)
and shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated
recyclable materials or source separated blue container organic waste.
   (k)   BOARD.  The San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors.
   (l)   BROWN CONTAINER. The same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a) and shall
be used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated food
waste.
   (m)   BULKY WASTE. Discarded furniture (including but not limited to chairs,
sofas, mattresses, and area rugs); appliances (including but not limited to
refrigerators, ranges, washers, dryers, water heaters, dishwashers, plumbing,
small household appliances, and other similar items, commonly known as "white
goods") ; discarded stereos, televisions , computers, VCRs, and other similar
items (commonly known as "electronic-waste"); wood waste (excluding treated
wood), tree trunks, large branches, and scrap wood that can be reasonably
handled by two employees and complies with the maximum size requirements of the
designated facility. Bulky waste does not include C&D, waste tires, or large
items such as car bodies, Jacuzzi tubs or spas, or other items that cannot be
handled by two persons. In addition, bulky waste does not include waste tires.
   (n)   CART. A plastic container with a hinged lid and wheels that is
serviced by an automated or semi-automated collection vehicle.
   (o)   CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS or CCR. The State of California Code of
Regulations. CCR references in this Chapter are preceded with a number that
refers to the relevant Title of the CCR (e.g. "14 CCR" refers to Title 14 of
CCR).
   (p)   CALRECYCLE. The California Department of Resources Recycling and
Recovery, which is the Department designated with the responsibility for
developing, implementing and enforcing State law and regulations on
jurisdictions (and others).
   (q)   CHANGE IN LAW. The imposition (or removal), after the establishment of
a total rate relative to a franchise agreement, of any duty or burden imposed
upon the grantee in the performance of the solid waste handling services
required of it under its franchise agreement which is or becomes additional to
(or is subtracted from) or different from those duties required or contemplated
in its franchise agreement, or which must be performed in a different manner
from that in which it is initially contemplated to be performed, and which
results from any of the following:
      (1)   The enactment, issuance, adoption, repeal, amendment or
modification of any Federal, State or local law, statute, ordinance or
regulation.
      (2)   A regulatory agency or other administrative agency interpreting a
regulation, a judicial decision of a Federal court interpreting Federal law or
statute, or a judicial decision of a court having jurisdiction within
California interpreting a Federal, State or local law, statute, ordinance or
regulation, in a manner different from the interpretation which had previously
been generally relied upon in California within the solid waste collection and
hauling industry.
      (3)   CHANGE IN LAW does not include any of the items noted in
Subdivisions (1) or (2) above, which relate to any tax, [other than a business
license tax imposed by the County on a grantee's performance of solid waste
handling services under its franchise agreement] including without limit, any
tax based or measured on net or gross income, any business, payroll or
franchise tax or any employment tax.
   (r)   CHANGE IN LAW ADJUSTMENT. The adjustment to total rate in the event of
a change in law.
   (s)   CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP. Occurs when either a single transaction or event
or the cumulative effect of more than one transaction or event, results in 50
percent or more of the beneficial ownership of the grantee being different than
such ownership as of the date of the approval by the County of the franchise
agreement or, if applicable, as of the date of the most recent consent of the
County to a change in ownership. The owners of the beneficial ownership of
grantee on the date of the approval of the franchise agreement or, if
applicable, on the date of the most recent consent of the County to a change in
ownership, shall be referred to in this Subdivision as an "initial owner". A
CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP will be determined by application of the following:
      (1)   Any beneficial interest owned by an individual related by blood or
marriage to an initial owner shall be considered as owned by an initial owner
in determining if a CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP has occurred.
      (2)   Any public offering of stock where the stock is offered for sale to
the general public and does not constitute a private placement shall be
disregarded in determining if a CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP has occurred.
      (3)   Sales, transfers, issuances or pledges of non-voting shares of
stock will not be considered in determining if a CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP has
occurred, until and unless and only to the extent that such stock is converted
into voting shares of stock.
      (4)   The pledge of, or any other action taken relative to, voting shares
of stock which results in any voting rights of such stock being exercised by
other than an initial owner shall be considered to be a transfer of such stock
for the purposes of determining if a CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP has occurred.
   (t)   CHANGE IN SERVICE LEVEL ADJUSTMENT. The adjustment to total rate in
the event of a change in service level and as described in the franchise
agreement.
   (u)   COLLECT or COLLECTION. The act of taking physical possession of
discarded materials at single-family premises, multi-family premises, or
commercial businesses within the County, and transporting the discarded
materials to a designated facility for processing, transfer, or disposal.
   (v)   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS. A firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint stock
company, corporation, or association, whether for profit or nonprofit, strip
mall, industrial facility, or a multi-family residential dwelling with five
dwellings or more, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(6).
   (w)   COMMUNITY COMPOSTING. Any activity that composts green material,
agricultural material, food material, and vegetative food material, alone or in
combination, and the total amount of feedstock and Compost on-site at any one
time does not exceed 100 cubic yards and 750 square feet as specified in 14 CCR
§ 17855(a)(4); or as otherwise defined by 14 CCR § 18982(a)(8).
   (x)   COMPLIANCE REVIEW. A review of records by the County to determine
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
   (y)   COMPOST. Defined in 14 CCR § 17896.2(a)(4) which states, as of the
effective date of this Chapter, the product resulting from the controlled
biological decomposition of organic solid wastes that are source separated from
the County solid waste stream, or which are separated at a centralized
facility.
   (z)   COMPOSTABLE PLASTICS. Plastic materials that meet the ASTM D6400
standard for compatibility, or as otherwise described in 14 CCR §§ 18984.1(a)
(1)(A) or 18984.2(a)(1)(C).
   (aa)   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS or C&D. The nonhazardous waste
building material, inerts, soil, packaging, yard trimmings, rubble, and other
used or discarded materials resulting from construction or demolition.
   (bb)   CONSUMER PRICE INDEX. All Urban Consumers, Los Angeles-Long Beach-
Anaheim, CA, all items less food and energy, as published by the U.S.
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Series ID. CUURS49ASAOLE, or
the most similar successor index if the index is no longer published.
   (cc)   CONTAINER CONTAMINATION or CONTAMINATED CONTAINER. A container,
regardless of color, that contains prohibited container contaminants, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(55).
   (dd)   COUNTY.  San Bernardino County, State of California.
   (ee)   COUNTY SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. At any particular time, the then-
existing landfill disposal facilities which the County owns, leases or has a
contractual right to use.
   (ff)   DELINQUENT FEES. The fees under the total rate which are due for
uniform handling service rendered to an owner's property (or which have been
attempted to be rendered, if uniform handling service is not allowed to be
provided by action of the owner or tenant) but which have not been paid for 90
days or more after the mailing of the invoice related to such service.
   (gg)   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH, DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
SERVICES. The County division of that name or such County department, division
or office which is the successor thereto.
   (hh)   DESIGNATED DISPOSAL FACILITY. A disposal facility that is approved
for use by the Division.
   (ii)   DESIGNATED FACILITY(IES). Any one of or any combination of the
following: Designated C&D processing facility; designated disposal facility;
designated high diversion organic waste processing facility; designated organic
waste processing facility, designated SSR processing facility; and, designated
transfer facility, and is approved for use by the Division.
   (jj)   DESIGNATED HIGH DIVERSION ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY. A high
diversion organic waste processing facility that is approved for use by the
Division.
   (kk)   DESIGNATED ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY. An organic waste
processing facility that is approved for use by the Division.
   (ll)   DESIGNATED ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY FEE. The fee charged for
use of a designed organic waste processing facility.
   (mm)   DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY. As defined in 14
CCR § 18982(14.5), a solid waste facility that accepts a source separated
organic waste collection stream as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(26.6) and
complies with one of the following:
      (1)   The facility is a "transfer/processor," as defined in 14 CCR §
18815.2(a)(62), that is in compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR
§ 18815.5(d), and meets or exceeds the annual average source separated organic
content recovery rate of 50 percent between January 1, 2022 and December 31,
2024 and 75 percent on or after January 1, 2025 as calculated pursuant to 14
CCR § 18815.5(f) for organic waste received from the source separated organic
waste collection stream.
         (A)   If a transfer/processor has an annual average source separated
organic content recovery rate lower than the rate required in Paragraph 1 of
this definition for two (2) consecutive reporting periods, or three (3)
reporting periods within three (3) years, the facility shall not qualify as a
"designated source separated organic waste facility."
      (2)   The facility is a "composting operation" or "composting facility"
as defined in 14 CCR § 18815.2(a)(13), that pursuant to the reports submitted
under 14 CCR § 18815.7 demonstrates that the percent of material removed for
landfill disposal that is organic waste is less than the percent specified in
14 CCR § 17409.5.8(c)(2) or § 17409.5.8(c)(3), whichever is applicable, and if
applicable, complies with the digestate handling requirements specified in 14
CCR § 17896.5.
         (A)   If the percent of material removed for landfill disposal that is
organic waste is more than the percent specified in 14 CCR section 17409.5.8(c)
(2) or 17409.5.8(c)(3), for two consecutive reporting periods, or three
reporting periods within three years, the facility shall not qualify as a
"designated source separated organic waste facility." For the purposes of this
Chapter, the reporting periods shall be consistent with those defined in 14 CCR
§ 18815.2(a)(49).
   (nn)   DESIGNEE. An entity that the County contracts with or otherwise
arranges to carry out any of the County's responsibilities of this Chapter as
authorized in 14 CCR § 18981.2. A designee may be a government entity, a
hauler, a private entity, or a combination of those entities.
   (oo)   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works or the
designee of such individual.
   (pp)   DISCARDED MATERIALS. Material deemed to have been discarded, without
regard to whether they are destined for recycling or disposal, and whether or
not they have been source separated, in all cases where a fee or other
compensation, in any form or amount, is directly or indirectly solicited from,
or levied, charged, or otherwise imposed on, or paid by, the generator or
subscriber in exchange for solid waste handling services. As used herein, solid
waste handling services include, without limitation, the provision of
containers for the collection, removal, transportation, delivery, and
processing and/or disposal of the material. Discarded materials do not include
edible food that is recovered for human consumption. For the purposes of this
Chapter, discarded materials include SSR, SSBCOW, SSGCOW, SSBRCOW, solid waste
or mixed waste, and C&D.
   (qq)   DISPOSE or DISPOSAL. The final disposition of any solid waste
collected by the grantee at a permitted landfill or other permitted solid waste
facility.
   (rr)   DIVERT OR DIVERSION. To divert from disposal facilities or
transformation facilities (including incineration, pyrolysis, distillation,
gasification or biological conversion) through source reduction, recycling and
composting, as provided in § 41780 of California Public Resources Code as such
act may be hereafter amended or superseded provided that divert or diversion
shall include delivery to transformation facilities if the overall diversion
achieved by the County is at a level where delivery to such facilities shall be
considered diversion pursuant to the Act.
   (ss)   DIVISION. The County Department of Public Works Solid Waste
Management Division or such County department, division or office which is the
successor thereto.
   (tt)   DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT. Any individual living unit in a single-
family or Multi-Family structure or building, a mobile home, or a motor home
located on a permanent site intended for, or capable of being utilized for,
residential living other than a hotel or motel.
   (uu)   EDIBLE FOOD. Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(18). Edible food is not solid waste if it is
recovered and not discarded. Nothing in this Chapter or in 14 CCR Division 7,
Chapter 12 requires or authorizes the recovery of edible food that does not
meet the food safety requirements of the California Retail Food Code.
   (vv)   ELECTRONIC WASTE. Electronic waste materials generated by residential
or commercial subscribers that render the items hazardous depending upon their
condition and density, such as, but not limited to, televisions, computer
monitors containing cathode ray tubes (CRTs), cell phones, scanners, fax
machines and other items as determined by applicable laws and regulations.
   (ww)   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. An action of the County to address noncompliance
with this Chapter including, but not limited to, issuing administrative
citations, fines, penalties, or using other remedies.
   (xx)   EXCLUDED WASTE. Hazardous substance, hazardous waste, infectious
waste, volatile, corrosive, medical waste, infectious, regulated radioactive
waste, and toxic substances or material that facility operator(s), which
receive materials from the County and its generators, reasonably believe(s)
would, as a result of or upon acceptance, transfer, processing or disposal, be
a violation of local, State or Federal law, regulation or ordinance, including:
land use restrictions or conditions, waste that cannot be disposed of in Class
III landfills or accepted at the facility by permit conditions, waste that in
County's or its designee's reasonable opinion would present a significant risk
to human health or the environment, cause a nuisance or otherwise create or
expose the County, or its designee, to potential liability; but not including
de minimis volumes or concentrations of waste of a type and amount normally
found in single-family or multifamily solid waste after implementation of
programs for the safe collection, processing, recycling, treatment, and
disposal of batteries and paint in compliance with California Public Resources
Code §§ 41500 and 41802. Excluded waste does not include used motor oil
filters, household batteries, universal wastes, and/or latex paint when such
materials are defined as allowable materials for collection through the
County's collection programs and the generator or customer has properly placed
the materials for collection pursuant to instructions provided by the County
for collection services.
   (yy)   FOOD RECOVERY. Actions to collect and distribute food for human
consumption which otherwise would be Disposed, as defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(24).
   (zz)   FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION. An entity that primarily engages in the
collection or receipt of edible food and distributes that edible food to the
public for food recovery either directly or through other entities, including,
but not limited to:
      (1)   A food bank as defined in § 113783 of the Health and Safety Code;
      (2)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in § 113841 of the
Health and Safety Code; and
      (3)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in §
113842 of the Health and Safety Code.
   (aaa)   FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE. A person or entity that collects and
transports edible food to a food recovery organization or other entities for
food recovery.
   (bbb)   FOOD SCRAPS. All food such as, but not limited to, fruits,
vegetables, meat, poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones, rice, beans, pasta,
bread, cheese, and eggshells. Food scraps excludes fats, oils, and grease when
such materials are source separated from other solid waste food scraps.
   (ccc)   FOOD-SOILED PAPER. Compostable paper material that has come in
contact with food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper
plates, paper coffee cups, napkins, pizza boxes, and milk cartons.
   (ddd)   FOOD WASTE. Source separated food scraps, food-soiled paper, and
compostable plastics. Food waste is a subset of organic waste.
   (eee)   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. The agreement entered into between the County
and the grantee under the provisions of § 46.0301 which authorizes/requires the
grantee to provide solid waste handling services in a specified franchise area.
   (fff)   FRANCHISE AREA. The geographic territory in the unincorporated
County for which the Grantee has been granted a franchise to provide solid
waste handling services, as specified in each franchise agreement.
   (ggg)   FRANCHISE FEE. The fee paid to the County by the grantee in
consideration of the granting of a franchise pursuant to this Division.
   (hhh)   GARBAGE HAULER. Any person or entity who collects garbage, unmixed
with rubbish, and transports it to a commercial garbage-feeding hog ranch or to
a commercial establishment for processing for use in livestock feeding pursuant
to the requirements in Public Resources Code § 40059.4(b)(1-5).
   (iii)   GENERATOR. Any person who first discards materials, and by that act
makes discarded materials subject to regulation under federal, State, or local
regulations.
   (jjj)   GRANTEE. A person granted a franchise pursuant to a franchise
agreement.
   (kkk)   GRAY/BLACK CONTAINER. The same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a) and
shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of gray/black container
waste or mixed waste.
   (lll)   GRAY/BLACK CONTAINER WASTE. Solid waste that is collected in a gray/
black container that is part of a three-container organic waste collection
service that prohibits the placement of organic waste in the gray/black
container as specified in 14 CCR §§ 18984.1(a) and (b) or as defined in 14 CCR
§ 17402(a)(6.6). For the purposes of this franchise agreement, gray/black
container waste includes carpet and textiles.
   (mmm)   GREEN CONTAINER. The same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a) and
shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of SSGCOW.
   (nnn)   GREEN WASTE. Discarded materials consisting of grass clippings,
leaves, branches, tree trunks and other vegetative matter not more than six
inches in diameter or four feet in length.
   (ooo)   GROSS RECEIPTS. All monies received by grantee for providing the
solid waste handling services specified in its franchise agreement.
   (ppp)   GROSS RECEIPTS LESS DISPOSAL CHARGES. Gross receipts less that part
of the monies received by the grantee that are collected from subscribers for
payment of the fee imposed for disposing of the solid waste at a landfill
disposal facility and the fee imposed for other operations.
   (qqq)   GROSS RECEIPTS FOR COMMERCIAL FOOD WASTE SERVICES. All monies
received by grantee for providing the food waste handling services specified in
its franchise agreement.
   (rrr)   GROSS RECEIPTS FOR COMMERCIAL FOOD WASTE SERVICES LESS PROCESSING
COSTS. Gross receipts for commercial food waste services less that part of the
monies received by the grantee that are collected from subscribers for payment
of the fee imposed for processing of the food waste at an organic waste
processing facility.
   (sss)   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any hazardous or toxic substance, material or waste
which is or becomes regulated by any local governmental authority, the State of
California, or the United States Government. The term "hazardous waste"
includes, without limitation, any material or substance which is: (i) petroleum
or oil or gas or any direct or derivate product or byproduct thereof; (ii)
defined as a "hazardous waste," "extremely hazardous waste" or "restricted
hazardous waste" under §§ 25115, 25117 or 25122.7, or listed pursuant to §
25140, of the California Health and Safety Code, Division 20, Chapter 6.5
(Hazardous Waste Control Law); (iii) defined as a "hazardous substance" under §
25316 of the California Health and Safety Code, Division 20, Chapter 6.8
(Carpenter-Presley-Tanner Hazardous Substance Account Act); (iv) defined as a
"hazardous waste," "hazardous substance," or "hazardous waste" under §§ 25501
(j) and (k) and 25501.1 of the California Health and Safety Code, Division 20,
Chapter 6.95 (Hazardous Wastes Release Response Plans and Inventory); (v)
defined as a "hazardous substance" under § 25281 of the California Health and
Safety Code, Division 20, Chapter 6.7 (Underground Storage of Hazardous
Substances); (vi) "used oil" as defined under § 25250.1 of the  California
Health and Safety Code; (vii) asbestos; (viii) listed under Chapter 11 of
Division 4.5 of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, or defined as
hazardous or extremely hazardous pursuant to Chapter 10 of Division 4.5 of
Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations; (ix) defined as waste or a
hazardous substance pursuant to the Porter-Cologne Act, § 13050 of the
California Water Code; (x) designated as a "pollutant" pursuant to the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1317; (xi) defined as "
Hazardous Waste" pursuant to the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901, et seq. (42 U.S.C. § 6903); (xii) defined as a
"hazardous substance" pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901); (xiii) defined as "hazardous
waste" pursuant to the Hazardous Wastes Transportation Act 29 U.S.C. §§ 5101,
et seq.; or (xiv) defined as such or regulated by any "superfund" or
"superlien" law, or any other federal, State or local law, statute, ordinance,
code, rule, regulation, order or decree regulating, relating to, or imposing
liability or standards of conduct concerning hazardous wastes and/or oil wells
and/or underground storage tanks and/or pipelines, as now, or at any time
hereafter, in effect.
   (ttt)   HEALTH AND SAFETY PERMIT. A current permit issued by the Department
of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health Services to a refuse
collection operator, garbage hauler or nondomestic waste hauler (all as defined
in § 33.0802 of this Code), in accordance with Title 14 of the Code of
Regulations and Title 3 of the County Code. The HEALTH AND SAFETY PERMIT
evidences, for a specified period of time, the health and safety inspection and
the approval of vehicles, facilities and equipment utilized by a refuse
collection operator, garbage hauler or nondomestic waste hauler.
   (uuu)   HIGH DIVERSION ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY.  A high diversion
organic waste processing facility as defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(33). Per SB
1383, the High Diversion Processing facility is a facility that is in
compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR § 18815.5(d) and meets or
exceeds an annual average mixed waste organic content recovery rate of fifty
percent between January 1, 2022 and December 31, 2024, and seventy-five percent
after January 1, 2025 as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR § 18815.5(e) for organic
waste received from the mixed waste.
   (vvv)   INCOMPATIBLE WASTE OR INCOMPATIBLES. Human-made inert material,
including, but not limited to, glass, metal, plastic, and also includes organic
waste that the receiving end-user, facility, operation, property, or activity
is not designed, permitted, or authorized to perform organic waste recovery
activities as defined in 14 CCR § 18983.1(b), or as defined by 14 CCR § 17402
(a)(7.5).
   (www)   LANDFILL DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any County owned/operated facility that
is designed to manage any type of solid waste and includes, but is not limited
to, disposal, transfer, processing, composting and transformation.
   (xxx)   LANDFILL DISPOSAL FACILITY FEE. The fee charged for use of a
landfill disposal facility.
   (yyy)   LARGE EVENT. An event, including, but not limited to, a sporting
event or a flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a
local agency, and serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals per day of
operation of the event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a
public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street
system, or other open space when being used for an event. If the definition in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(38) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(38) shall apply to this Chapter.
   (zzz)   LARGE VENUE. A permanent venue facility that annually seats or
serves an average of more than two thousand (2,000) individuals within the
grounds of the facility per day of operation of the venue facility. For
purposes of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 and this Chapter, a venue facility
includes,  but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or
operated stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or
civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts
center, fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For
purposes of 14 CCR, Division 7 Chapter 12 and this Chapter, a site under common
ownership or control that includes more than one large venue that is contiguous
with other large venues in the site, is a single large venue. If the definition
in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR
§ 18982(a)(39) shall apply to this Chapter.
   (aaaa)   MATERIALS RECOVERY FACILITY or MRF. A facility designed to remove
recyclables and other valuable materials from the waste stream collected
through a residential, commercial or industrial solid waste handling program
that is approved to operate by the appropriate State and local agencies.
   (bbbb)   MIXED WASTE. Organic waste collected in a container that is
required by 14 CCR §§ 18984.1, 18984.2, or 18984.3 to be taken to a high
diversion organic waste processing facility, as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)
(11.5).
   (cccc)   MULCH. A layer of material applied on top of soil, and, for the
purposes of the franchise agreement, mulch shall conform with the following
conditions, or conditions as specified in 14 CCR § 18993.1(f)(4):
      (1)   Meets or exceeds the physical contamination, maximum metal
concentration, and pathogen density standards for land applications specified
in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(24.5)(A)(1) through (3).
      (2)   Was produced at one or more of the following types of facilities:
         (A)   A compostable material handling operation or facility as defined
in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(12), that is permitted or authorized under Division 7 of
Title 14 of the CCR, other than a chipping and grinding operation or facility
as defined in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(10);
         (B)   A transfer/processing facility or transfer/processing operation
as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(30) and (31), respectively, that is permitted
or authorized under 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12; or,
         (C)   A solid waste landfill as defined in Public Resources Code §
40195.1 that is permitted under 27 CCR, Division 2.
   (dddd)   MULTI-FAMILY. Any residential premises, other than a single-family
premises, with five or more dwelling units used for residential purposes
(regardless of whether residence therein is temporary or permanent, vacant or
occupied), that receive centralized, shared, collection service for all units
on the premises which are billed to one customer at one address. Customers
residing in townhouses, mobile homes, condominiums, or other structures with
five or more dwelling units who receive individual service and are billed
separately shall not be considered multi-family.
   (eeee)   MULTI-JURISDICTION LOAD/DETAIL REPORT. A report which sets out the
amount, and place of collection, of discarded materials delivered to the
landfill disposal system.
   (ffff)   NON-ORGANIC RECYCLABLES. Non-putrescible and non-hazardous
recyclable wastes including, but not limited to, bottles, cans, metals,
plastics, and glass, or as defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(43). Non-organic
recyclables are a subset of source separated recyclables.
   (gggg)   ONSITE WASTE ASSESSMENT. An in-person visit by the grantee to a
customer to collect and evaluate information on the types and quantities of
discarded materials generated by the customer, as well as identify
opportunities for additional processing of solid waste.
   (hhhh)   ORGANIC WASTE. Solid wastes containing material originated from
living organisms and their metabolic waste products including, but not limited
to, food waste, green waste, organic textiles and carpets, lumber, wood, paper
products, printing and writing paper, manure, biosolids, digestate, and
sludges, or as defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(46). Biosolids and digestate are as
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(4) and 14 CCR § 18982(a)(16.5), respectively.
   (iiii)   ORGANIC WASTE HANDLING SERVICE.
      (1)   The collection of organic waste from a commercial, residential,
construction, or industrial source; and
      (2)   The transportation of such organic waste to an organic waste
processing facility. Organic waste handling services is a subset of solid waste
handling services.
   (jjjj)   ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY. A permitted facility where
organic waste are sorted, mulched or separated for the purposes of recycling,
reuse or composting.
   (kkkk)   ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY FEE. The fee charged for use of
an organic waste processing facility.
   (llll)   OTHER OPERATIONS. All operational cost categories that are not
included in fuel, service, and landfill disposal; other operations may include,
but are not limited to, non-County facilities for transfer, processing,
composting and transformation.
   (mmmm)   PERSON. Without limitation, individuals, associations, clubs,
societies, firms, partnerships, joint ventures, sole proprietorships,
corporations, limited liability companies, schools, colleges and all
governmental agencies and entities.
   (nnnn)   PROCESSING. The reduction, separation, recovery, conversion or
recycling of discarded materials.
   (oooo)   PROHIBITED CONTAINER CONTAMINANTS. Excluded waste placed in any
container.
      (1)   Option 1, three-container collection service (blue container, green
container, and gray/black container): "prohibited container contaminants" means
the following: (i) discarded materials placed in the blue container that are
not identified as acceptable source separated recyclables for the County's Blue
Container; (ii) discarded materials placed in the green container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated green container organic waste for the
County's green container; (iii) discarded materials placed in the gray/black
container that are acceptable source separated recyclables and/or source
separated green container organic waste to be placed in County's blue container
and/or green container; and (iv) excluded waste placed in any container.
      (2)   (A)   Option 2a: Two-container collection service for SSGCOW and
mixed waste (green container and gray container) "prohibited container
contaminants" means the following: (i) discarded materials placed in the green
container that are not identified as acceptable SSGCOW for the County's green
container; (ii) discarded materials placed in the gray container that are
identified as acceptable SSGCOW, which are to be separately collected in
County's green container; and, (iii) excluded waste placed in any container.
         (B)   Option 2b: Two-container collection service for SSR and mixed
waste (blue container and gray container) "prohibited container contaminants"
means the following: (i) discarded materials placed in the blue container that
are not identified as acceptable SSR for jurisdiction's blue container; (ii)
discarded materials placed in the gray container that are identified as
acceptable SSR, which are to be separately collected in jurisdiction's blue
container; and, (iii) excluded waste placed in any container.
      (3)   Option 3: One-container collection service "prohibited container
contaminants" means excluded waste placed in any container.
   (pppp)   PUTRESCIBLE WASTE. Wastes that are capable of being decomposed by
micro-organisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances because of
odors, gases, or other offensive conditions, and includes materials such as,
but not limited to food waste, offal, and dead animals; or as defined in 14 CCR
§ 17402(a)(21).
   (qqqq)   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS OR RECYCLABLES. For purposes of this Division
6 only, discarded materials which may be sorted, cleansed, treated, processed,
and/or reconstituted, and which is segregated for the purpose of reuse or
recycling, including, but not limited to, separated paper, glass, cardboard,
plastic, ferrous materials or aluminum.
   (rrrr)   RECYCLE or RECYCLING. The process of collecting, sorting,
cleansing, treating, and reconfiguring materials for the purpose of returning
them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or
reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in
the marketplace. Recycling includes processes deemed to constitute a reduction
of landfill disposal pursuant to 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 2.
Recycling does not include gasification or Transformation as defined in Public
Resources Code § 40201.
   (ssss)   REFUSE COLLECTION AREA. That area of the unincorporated County as
provided for in Article 2.1 of Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code.
   (tttt)   RENEWABLE NATURAL GAS (RNG). Gas derived from organic materials
that has been diverted from a landfill and processed at an in-vessel digestion
facility that is permitted or authorized by 14 CCR to recover organic waste, or
as defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(62).
   (uuuu)   RESIDENTIAL. A single-family premises or multi-family premises
including single-family homes, apartments, condominiums, townhouse complexes,
mobile home parks, and cooperative apartments.
   (vvvv)   RESIDUAL SOLID WASTE. The solid waste destined for disposal,
transformation, or further transfer/processing as defined in 14 CCR §§ 17402
(a)(30) or (31), as it currently exists or may be amended, which remains after
processing has taken place.
   (wwww)   ROLL-OFF. An open-top container with a capacity of seven to 40
cubic yards that is serviced by a roll-off collection vehicle.
   (xxxx)   SB 1383. Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor on
September 19, 2016, which added §§ 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7, and 39730.8 to
the Health and Safety Code, and added Chapter 13.1 (commencing with § 42652) to
Part 3 of Division 30 of the Public Resources Code, establishing methane
emissions reduction targets in a statewide effort to reduce emissions of short-
lived climate pollutants as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced
from time to time.
   (yyyy)   SECURITY. A corporate surety bond, a letter of credit or other
Security device acceptable to the Division, as described in the franchise
agreement and County Code § 46.0904.
   (zzzz)   SELF-HAUL. The transportation of solid waste, organic waste, or
recyclables from any premises by the owner or occupant using his or her own
employee(s) and equipment to a facility lawfully allowed to receive solid
waste, organic waste, or recyclables in accordance with State and Federal Laws.
   (aaaaa)   SINGLE-FAMILY. Any detached or attached house or residence
designed or used for occupancy by one (1) family, provided that collection
service feasibly can be provided to such premises as an independent unit, and
the owner or occupant of such independent unit is billed directly for the
collection service. Single-family includes townhouses, and each independent
unit of duplex, tri-plex, or four-plex residential structures, regardless of
whether each unit is separately billed for their specific service level.
   (bbbbb)   SOLID WASTE. Except as provided in Subdivisions (1), (2), (3) and
(4), all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes,
including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes,
demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof,
discarded home and industrial appliances (subject to salvage and other special
handling requirements under applicable law and regulation), dewatered, treated,
or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure,
vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and
semisolid. Solid waste may include recyclables and organic waste that has been
discarded and has not been source separated into the designated container for
such source separated material.
      (1)   SOLID WASTE does not include hazardous waste and does not include
low-level radioactive waste regulated under Health and Safety Code §§ 114960 et
seq., as it currently exists or may be amended.
      (2)   SOLID WASTE does not include medical waste (except treated medical
waste) which is regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act under
Health and Safety Code §§ 117600 et seq., as it currently exists or may be
amended.
      (3)   SOLID WASTE does not include petroleum or a petroleum product or
fraction thereof at reasonably detectable levels, asbestos and, with respect to
a particular solid waste facility, any waste or material which a regulatory
agency, the facility's solid waste facility permit or County policy, does not
allow to be accepted for transfer, processing, composting, transformation or
disposal at that facility.
      (4)   SOLID WASTE does not include items which would be considered
recyclables but for the fact that they are personally separated from other
solid waste by the generator thereof and are donated or sold to third parties.
For purposes of this Division 6, no donation or sale shall be deemed to have
occurred in any instance where a generator directly or indirectly pays the
third party any sum regardless of form or amount (including without limit as a
consulting fee, container rental, broker or other fees or tangible
consideration) either: (i) in lieu of being directly charged for collecting,
transporting, processing or recycling such item; or (ii) to offset the payment
to the generator for the purported sale of such item to the third party. Nor
shall the receipt of a discount of, or reduction in, the disposal service rate
on unsegregated solid waste containing an item which would be recyclables, if
separated, be deemed to be the donation or sale of such an item to a third
party.
   (ccccc)   SOLID WASTE FACILITY. Any facility that is designed to manage any
type of solid waste and includes transfer, processing, composting,
transformation and disposal facilities.
   (ddddd)   SOLID WASTE FACILITY FEE. The fee charged for use of a solid waste
facility.   
   (eeeee)   SOLID WASTE HANDLING SERVICES. The following: (1) the collection
of discarded materials from a commercial, residential, construction or
industrial source; (2) the transportation of such discarded materials to a
solid waste facility; and (3) the processing, composting, transformation or
disposal of such discarded materials at the solid waste facility.
   (fffff)   SOURCE SEPARATED OR SOURCE SEPARATION. Materials, including
commingled Recyclables, that have been separated or kept separate from the
solid waste stream, at the point of generation, for the purpose of additional
sorting or processing of those materials for recycling or reuse in order to
return them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new,
reused, or reconstituted products that meet the quality standards necessary to
be used in the marketplace, or as defined in 14 CCR § 17402.5(b)(4). For the
purposes of the Ordinance, source separated shall include separation of
materials by the generator, property owner, property owner's employee, property
manager, or property manager's employee into different containers for the
purpose of collection such that source separated materials are separated from
gray/black container waste/mixed waste and other solid waste for the purposes
of collection and processing.
   (ggggg)   SOURCE SEPARATED BLUE CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE (SSBCOW). Source
separated organic waste that can be placed in a blue container that is limited
to the collection of those organic wastes and non-organic recyclables as
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(43); or as defined by 14 CCR § 17402(a)(18.7).
SSBCOW is a subset of organic waste.
   (hhhhh)   SOURCE SEPARATED BROWN CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE (SSBRCOW). Source
separated food waste that can be placed in a brown container that is
specifically intended for the separate collection of food waste by the
generator, excluding SSBCOW, carpets, non-compostable paper, and textiles.
   (iiiii)   SOURCE SEPARATED GREEN CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE (SSGCOW). Source
separated organic waste that can be placed in a green container that is
specifically intended for the separate collection of organic waste by the
generator, excluding SSBCOW, carpets, non-compostable paper, and textiles.
SSGCOW is a subset of organic waste.
   (jjjjj)   SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLES (SSR). Source separated non-organic
recyclables and SSBCOW.
   (kkkkk)   STATE. The State of California.
   (lllll)   SUBSCRIBER. Any person receiving solid waste handling services
pursuant to a franchise agreement.
   (mmmmm)   TOTAL RATE. The inclusive rate schedule attached to each franchise
agreement which provides the rates to be paid to grantee by subscribers in
consideration of the solid waste handling services provided by grantee under
its franchise agreement.
   (nnnnn)   TRANSFER. The act of transferring discarded materials collected by
grantee from grantee's collection vehicles into larger vehicles at a designated
transfer facility for transport to other facilities for processing or disposing
of such materials. Transfer allows for removal of materials excluded or
prohibited from handling at the transfer facility (e.g., removal of hazardous
waste).
   (ooooo)   TRANSFORMATION. The same meaning as set forth in Public Resources
Code § 40201, as it may be amended from time to time.
   (ppppp)   TRANSPORTATION OR TRANSPORT. The act of conveying collected
materials from one location to another.
   (qqqqq)   UNIFORM HANDLING AREAS. A franchise area, or a specified portion
of a franchise area, in which uniform handling service has been imposed, as
specified in a franchise agreement.
   (rrrrr)   UNIFORM HANDLING SERVICE. The mandatory subscription to solid
waste handling service required of owners of single-family, multi-family, and/
or commercial businesses in a uniform handling area.
   (sssss)   UNINCORPORATED COUNTY. Any community or other area within the
County which is outside the boundaries of all incorporated cities and towns.
   (ttttt)   UNIVERSAL WASTE. Any of the following waste that are conditionally
exempt from classification as hazardous wastes pursuant to Title 22 of the
California Code of Regulations (22 CCR), § 66261.9: (i) batteries as described
in 22 CCR § 66273.2; (ii) thermostats as described in 22 CCR § 66273.4; (iii)
lamps as described in 22 CCR § 66273.5; and (iv) cathode rate tube materials as
described in 22 CCR § 66273.6.
   (uuuuu)   VISUAL WASTE AUDIT.  An in-person visual inspection of solid waste
containers to estimate and document the composition of solid waste placed in
each container and identify opportunities for processing and contamination
minimization.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460,
passed - -2023)
CHAPTER 3: FRANCHISE
Section
   
46.0301   Franchise Formation and Terms.
   
46.0302   Franchise Fee.
   
46.0303   Assignment and Change of Ownership.
   
46.0304   Title to Solid Waste.
§ 46.0301 Franchise Formation and Terms.
   (a)   The award by the Board of a franchise for solid waste handling shall
be evidenced by approval and execution of a franchise agreement. The Board may
award exclusive or non-exclusive solid waste handling franchises in the
unincorporated County, with or without competitive bidding, through individual
franchise agreements. A franchise agreement shall be granted by the Board when
it determines that public convenience and necessity are served by the award of
the franchise, and where a partially or wholly exclusive franchise is awarded
without competitive bidding, that the granting of such a franchise is in the
best interests of County residents based on the health, safety and well-being
of residents in the franchise area where the partially or wholly exclusive
franchise is awarded. Each franchise agreement shall specify the specific solid
waste handling services to be provided by grantee; a different grantee may be
granted a franchise to provide the same, or different, solid waste handling
services in the same franchise area.
   (b)   In order to qualify for the award of a franchise, an applicant must:
      (1)   Have, or obtain prior to the approval of the franchise agreement by
the County, and maintain for the term of its franchise agreement, a current
health and safety permit to the extent such a permit is required under the
provisions of
Article 2 of Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code in order to
provide the solid waste handling services to be provided under the franchise
agreement; and
      (2)   Demonstrate a minimum of three years' experience in providing
substantially the same type, class and extent of services as those for which
the franchise is sought; and
      (3)   Provide to the Director the information which is required of an
applicant for a health and safety permit pursuant to §
33.0825 of this Code.
   (c)   (1)   The terms and conditions by which the grantee shall be obligated
to provide solid waste handling services shall be as set forth in this
Division 6 and, with respect to the items set forth in this Subdivision (c), as
set forth in the franchise agreement.
         (A)   The franchise area, including any uniform handling area.
         (B)   The specific solid waste handling services to be provided by
grantee, including appropriate operating requirements.
         (C)   The total rates related to the specified solid waste handling
services to be provided by grantee and the method of billing its subscribers.
      (2)   (A)   If the County and the grantee so agree, the franchise
agreement may specify the solid waste facility or facilities to which the
grantee will transport the solid waste collected pursuant to solid waste
handling services provided under the franchise agreement.
         (B)   If the County and the grantee so agree, the franchise agreement
may allow the County to specify a different or additional solid waste facility
to which the grantee will transport the solid waste collected pursuant to the
solid waste handling services provided under the franchise agreement. In such
event, the franchise agreement may contain a cost per ton mile figure which
sets forth the increase in the grantee's demonstrable costs related to such a
change.
         (C)   If the County and the grantee so agree, the franchise agreement
may specify that upon the effective date of the franchise agreement the grantee
waives and forgoes any other rights it might have to provide solid waste
handling services in other specified portions of the unincorporated County,
including any rights it might otherwise have under Public Resources Code §
49520 or other law to receive advance notice of the cancellation of any permit
or other authorization to provide such services.
   (d)   (1)   The franchise agreement shall establish the initial term and any
extensions. Notwithstanding the forgoing, the County reserves the right to
increase the term or any extension if it believes that such an increase is in
the best interests of the subscribers being serviced by the grantee under the
franchise agreement.
      (2)   A franchise agreement may provide for automatic extensions;
however, the Board may determine in its sole discretion that a franchise
agreement shall not be extended. The action to not extend a franchise agreement
must be taken no later than 60 days prior to the automatic renewal date of the
franchise agreement. Such action shall terminate the automatic renewal and
extension provision only and such franchise agreement shall remain in effect
for the balance of the term then outstanding.
   (e)   The franchise agreement shall set forth the total rate (i.e., the
inclusive schedule of rates to be paid to grantee for solid waste handling
services provided to subscribers under its franchise agreement). The total rate
shall be subject to review and adjustment pursuant to the provisions of this
Division 6. If and when adjustments to the total rate are made pursuant to the
provisions of this Division 6, the Director shall cause a certification of each
such adjustment to be lodged with the County's official copy of the franchise
agreement. No total rate or adjustment to same shall be implemented until
approved by the Board or by the Director, as provided in this
Division 6.
   (f)   Non-performance by grantee of the terms and conditions contained in
this Division 6 or in its franchise agreement, or the occurrence of one or more
of the events set forth in §
33.0827 of this Code, shall provide grounds for the loss of or limitation upon
the grantee's right to provide solid waste handling services pursuant to its
franchise agreement and for the termination of its franchise agreement. Grantee
shall perform no solid waste handling services under its franchise agreement
without possessing the required health and safety permit.
   (g)   Except when otherwise required by applicable Federal, State or local
law, the terms and conditions of this Division 6 shall prevail over any
inconsistent provisions of a franchise agreement.
   (h)   The grantee under any franchise agreement is an independent contractor
and not an officer, agent, servant, or employee of County. Grantee is solely
responsible for the acts and omissions of its officers, agents, and employees,
if any. Nothing in any franchise agreement shall be construed as creating a
partnership or joint venture between County and grantee. Neither grantee nor
its officers, agents, or employees, shall obtain any rights to retirement or
other benefits which accrue to County employees.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460,
passed - -2023)
§ 46.0302 Franchise Fee.
   (a)   Pursuant to §
16.0222A of the San Bernardino County Code, except as set forth in Subdivision
(b), below, each grantee under a franchise agreement shall pay to the County a
franchise fee set forth in the individual franchise agreement for the specified
area or in the County Schedule of Fees, currently found at
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code, whichever
is greater. The payment of a franchise fee shall not limit the County's ability
to establish and levy a business license tax, fees, charges, assessments,
penalties, fines, and other requirements for monetary payment by the grantee to
the County. Payment of franchise fee shall be made monthly. The franchise fee
shall constitute a cost which grantee may recover as a part of the compensation
due grantee under the franchise agreement.
   (b)   In the event that a grantee under a franchise agreement in a uniform
handling area offers a fee waiver program as set forth in §
46.0505 of this code, then such grantee will not be required to pay a franchise
fee to the county in an amount proportionate to that waived pursuant to the
Code.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460,
passed - -2023)
§ 46.0303 Assignment and Change of Ownership.
   (a)   Neither any franchise agreement nor any right or privilege granted in
any such agreement shall voluntarily or involuntarily be transferred, sold,
hypothecated, sublet, assigned or leased, in whole or in part, nor shall title
thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest, or property therein
(all collectively referred to herein as "transfer"), pass to or vest in any
person, except the grantee, either by act of the grantee or by operation of
law, without the prior written consent of the Board. Any attempt by grantee,
either by act of grantee or by operation of law, to transfer any franchise
agreement without the prior written consent of the Board shall be void.
   (b)   If the grantee requests that the County consider and consent to a
transfer or a change in ownership of grantee, the grantee or the proposed
transferee, as applicable, shall at a minimum meet each of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The grantee shall pay the County its reasonable expenses for
attorney's fees and investigation costs necessary to determine the suitability
of any proposed transferee or proposed new owners, and to review and finalize
any documentation required as a condition for approving any such transfer or
change in ownership.
      (2)   The grantee shall furnish the County with independently audited
financial statements of the proposed transferee's operations for the
immediately preceding three operating years.
      (3)   The grantee shall furnish the County with satisfactory proof:
         (A)   That the proposed transferee or the proposed management of the
grantee under the proposed new owner has at least three years of solid waste
management experience of a scale equal to or exceeding the scale of operations
conducted by grantee under its franchise agreement;
         (B)   That in the last five years, the proposed transferee or any
company managed by the proposed new owner (or by the proposed management of the
grantee under the proposed new owner) has not received any citations, notice of
violations or other censure from any Federal, State or local agency having
jurisdiction over its waste management operations due to any failure to comply
with Federal, State or local waste management laws, where such failure either:
(i) evidences a pattern of disregard for such Federal, State or local waste
management laws; or (ii) involves actions which endangered the lives or
property of any person. Grantee shall supply the County with a complete list of
such citations, notices of violations and censures, if any;
         (C)   That the proposed transferee or any company managed by the
proposed new owner (or by the proposed management of the grantee under the
proposed new owner) has at all times conducted its operations in an
environmentally safe and conscientious fashion;
         (D)   That the proposed transferee or any company managed by the
proposed new owner (or by the proposed management of the grantee under the
proposed new owner) conducts its solid waste management operations in
accordance with sound waste management standards and practices and in full
compliance with all Federal, State and local laws regulating the collection and
disposal of waste;
         (E)   Of the adequate financial strength of proposed transferee or of
the grantee under the proposed new ownership; and
         (F)   Of the ability of the proposed transferee or of the grantee
under the proposed new ownership to obtain and maintain required insurance and
bonds.
   (c)   The County may impose reasonable new conditions of approval on a
franchise agreement transfer, or consent to a change in ownership of grantee,
including, but not limited to, conditions requiring acceptance of amendments to
the relevant franchise agreement.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0304 Title to Solid Waste.
   Ownership of solid waste shall transfer to grantee at such time as the solid
waste is abandoned and discarded by the solid waste handling service subscriber
of grantee in the location provided in §
33.0808 of this Code.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 4: GRANTEE COMPENSATION
Section
   
46.0401   Compensation.
   
46.0402   Adjustment to Total Rate.
   
46.0403   Notice to Subscribers Regarding Certain Adjustments.
   
46.0404   Discontinuance of Service for Non-Uniform Handling Service.
§ 46.0401 Compensation.
   (a)   Charges for solid waste handling services (including, without limit,
for use of a solid waste facility) provided to grantee's subscribers shall be
paid by such service subscribers in accordance with the total rate approved by
the Board in its approval or extension of the franchise agreement with grantee,
as such total rate is adjusted pursuant to §
46.0402.
   (b)   All charges for services rendered by a given grantee shall be uniform
and non-discriminatory for the type of service provided and reasonably based
upon the type and/or number of containers, type of solid waste, whether
compacted or loose, number of separate pick-up points at any place of
collection, placement of container(s) or distance of carry-out, frequency of
collection, remote location, terrain, disposal costs, and whether residential,
commercial, construction or industrial collection.
   (c)   (1)   In cases where grantee includes a solid waste handling services
amount as a separate listing on a subscriber's bill, the County shall prescribe
the amount consistent with waste generation factors established in the
franchise agreement and the applicable solid waste handling services.
      (2)   Grantee shall refund to each subscriber, on a pro rata basis, any
advance service payments made by such subscriber for service not provided when
service is discontinued by timely written notification to grantee by the
subscriber. Grantee may not require written notice to be given more than 15
working (waste collection) days prior to the date on which service is desired
to be discontinued.
      (3)   On a quarterly basis, the County shall be allowed to furnish, for
inclusion with grantee's billing, a message for the purpose of public education
regarding waste disposal, recycling, or other environmental issues. If grantee
mails its billing in an envelope, two of the four County messages may be in the
form of a one page insert, provided the insert is: print ready copy which
conforms to grantee's billing, is delivered to grantee by the Division 15
working (waste collection) days in advance of grantee's billing date and does
not cause an increase in the postal rates payable by grantee for mailing its
billing. If the message is not in the form of an insert, it shall be printed by
grantee on its bills. Such message shall not exceed 25 characters and shall be
delivered to grantee by the Division 15 working (waste collection) days in
advance of grantee's billing date. Grantee shall include such insert in, or
print such message on, each subscriber's next billing.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460,
passed - -2023)
§ 46.0402 Adjustment to Total Rate.
   The following annual and special rate adjustments shall be made to the total
rate provided for in a franchise agreement. However, no rate adjustment shall
be implemented for or during any period of time when the affected grantee is
not in substantial compliance with all material provisions of the County Code
or the franchise agreement.
   (a)   Cost of Living Adjustment. A cost of living adjustment set forth in a
franchise agreement should be based on appropriate consumer or product price
indices and the adjustment shall be a pass through of 100 percent of any
increase or decrease as a part of the total rate.
   (b)   Landfill Disposal Facility Fee. The landfill disposal facility fee
adjustment shall be the pass through of 100 percent of any increase or decrease
in the fee charged to the grantee for use of a landfill disposal facility
approved for use by the Division, calculated on a per subscriber basis, and
shall be effective as of the date of the change to such fee.
   (c)   Franchise Fee Adjustment. The franchise fee adjustment shall be the
pass through of 100 percent of any increase or decrease in the franchise fee
and shall be effective as of the date the franchise fee increase or decrease is
payable by the grantee.
   (d)   Extraordinary Adjustment. The franchise agreement may allow for
adjustments to the total rate to account for infrequent extraordinary events
which, although they do not prevent either party from performing and do not
implicate force majeure provisions, they nevertheless increase the cost of
providing service such that grantee's compensation and the rate adjustment
mechanism provided in the franchise agreement result in grantee's suffering
losses which are substantially outside the commercially reasonable expectations
of the parties. In no event shall any extraordinary adjustment be effective
prior to the Board's approval of an amendment to the applicable franchise
agreement.
   (e)   Change in Service Level Adjustments.
      (1)   The total rate shall be increased (or decreased) by 100 percent of
the increase (or decrease) or incremental increase (or incremental decrease),
as the case may be, in the demonstrable costs (i.e., on any direct or indirect
cost, whether fixed or variable) associated with the change in the level of the
solid waste handling services which may be required of, or agreed to by, a
grantee. A change in service level adjustment shall be effective on and after
the actual date of the requirement to or agreement to change operations which
results from the change in service, but, absent the consent of the division,
not sooner than the effective date of the change in service. In no event shall
any change in service level adjustment be effective prior to the Board's
approval of an amendment to the applicable franchise agreement.
      (2)   In the event that the Division and the grantee claiming to be
affected by the change in service level cannot agree on either the existence,
or the effect on demonstrable costs, of a change in service level, the dispute
resolution provisions of the franchise agreement shall apply.
   (f)   Change in Law Adjustments.
      (1)   The total rate shall be increased (or decreased) by 100 percent of
the increase (or decrease) or incremental increase (or incremental decrease),
as the case may be, in the demonstrable costs (i.e., on any direct or indirect
cost, whether fixed or variable) associated with the change in the manner or
nature of conducting solid waste handling services necessitated by a change in
law. A change in law adjustment shall be effective on and after the actual date
of the change in operations which resulted from the change in law, but, absent
the consent of the Division, not sooner than the effective date of the change
in law. In no event shall any change in law adjustment be effective prior to
the Board's approval of an amendment to the applicable franchise agreement.
      (2)   In the event that the Division and the grantee claiming to be
affected by the change in law cannot agree on either the existence, or the
effect on demonstrable costs, of a change in law, the dispute resolution
provisions of the franchise agreement shall apply.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460,
passed - -2023)
§ 46.0403 Notice to Subscribers Regarding Certain Adjustments.
   No change in service level adjustment increase or change in law adjustment
increase which applies to 500 or more solid waste handling service subscribers
or to subscribers cumulatively generating 1,500 or more cubic yards of solid
waste per month may be implemented until at least ten days after completion of
publication of a notice of the proposed increase as set forth in the franchise
agreement.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0404 Discontinuance of Service for Non-Uniform Handling Service.
   Where a waiver from uniform handling service has been granted, grantee may
discontinue service for non-payment of subscriber's billing or subscriber's
failure to substantially comply with the requirements of the applicable
provisions of state or local law which govern use, storage and collection of
solid waste. After the grantee has given 15 days' written notice to subscriber
for non-payment, grantee shall notify the Director in writing of any service
termination including a written copy of the notice to the subscriber. Upon
payment of the delinquent fees, if applicable, grantee shall resume collection
on the next regularly scheduled collection day. Any grantee operating in a
uniform handling area shall not discontinue service except as allowed in §
46.0507.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 5: UNIFORM HANDLING SERVICE
Section
   
46.0501   Uniform Handling Service.
   
46.0502   Owner Responsible for Payment for Uniform Handling Service.
   
46.0503   Failure to Provide Sufficient Solid Waste Containers.
   
46.0504   Self-Haul Exemption from Uniform Handling Service.
   
46.0505   Temporary Suspension of Service or Waiver of Fees.
   
46.0506   Handling of Delinquent Accounts.
   
46.0507   Discontinuance of Service.
   
46.0508   Penalties for Violations.
   
46.0509   Illegal Dumping Retrieval Services.
§ 46.0501 Uniform Handling Service.
   (a)   Uniform handling service shall be implemented in every franchise area,
and imposed on the owners of all classes of dwellings or commercial or
industrial units within a given uniform handling area, unless otherwise
specified within a franchise agreement. All owners of a dwelling or a
commercial or industrial unit within the uniform handling area who are required
to have uniform handling service shall, upon notice thereof, be required to
accept uniform handling service from the grantee (or one of the grantees)
holding a franchise agreement for the uniform handling area and pay the rate
for such services currently in effect under the total rate of the applicable
franchise agreement.
   (b)   Uniform handling service shall not be imposed on the owner of any
class of dwelling or commercial or industrial unit located in an Agricultural
Preserve Overlay District within the sphere of influence of the City of Chino
or of the City of Ontario, as designated upon the land use district maps of the
County General Plan.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0502 Owner Responsible for Payment for Uniform Handling Service.
   (a)   The owner of each dwelling or commercial or industrial unit subject to
uniform handling service shall be required to accept, and pay the applicable
rate set out in the total rate for, the uniform handling service rendered to
such unit by a grantee and shall place at a location accessible to the grantee,
a container(s) of adequate capacity and functional design in accordance with
this
Division 6 of Title 4 and with
Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code for the storage of solid waste generated on
the premises. Such owner shall be responsible to provide such container(s)
unless the franchise agreement requires the grantee to provide such container
(s).
   (b)   Nothing in this Section is intended to prevent the entering into of an
arrangement, or the continuance of an existing arrangement, approved in writing
by the grantee, under which statements or invoices for uniform handling service
are billed to and payments are made by a tenant or tenants, or any agent, on
behalf of the owner. However, unless otherwise provided therein, any such
arrangement shall not lessen or substitute for the owner's obligation to the
grantee or, unless separately approved in writing by the Division, to the
County under this
Division 6.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0503 Failure to Provide Sufficient Solid Waste Containers.
   When in the judgment of the Director (whether or not at the request of the
grantee or owner) additional solid waste container(s) compatible with the solid
waste handling system are required, they must be provided by the owner, or by
the grantee if the franchise agreement requires the grantee to provide
container(s), upon written notification by the Director. All containers shall
conform to the requirements of §§
33.0806 and
33.0807 of this Code.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0504 Self-Haul Exemption from Uniform Handling Service.
   (a)   Dwellings.
      (1)   The owner of any dwelling may apply to the Division for an
exemption from uniform handling service by submitting a uniform handling
exemption request form to the Director or designee accompanied by required
documentation identified in the form and a non-refundable application fee
requesting a permit to provide self-haul solid waste handling. The owner may be
granted an exemption provided he/she can adequately document that all solid
waste generated at the dwelling is transported in a safe and sanitary manner to
a landfill disposal facility owned by San Bernardino County and to proper
recycling and organic processing facilities (pursuant to conditions listed on
exemption application). Upon approval of the exemption request, the Director
will notify the owner and the grantee of the exemption. Exemptions are issued
on an annual basis, July 1 through June 30. Exemptions that are not obtained or
renewed prior to July 1 of each year will not be effective until the next
billing period in accordance with the franchise agreement applicable to the
owner's dwelling.
      (2)   The exemption and renewal applications shall be made on forms
approved by the Director or designee.
      (3)   The application fee shall include an administrative fee, if any, as
determined by the Board, in addition to the pre-payment of the average annual
landfill disposal cost for County residents as determined by the Director. Each
application for annual renewal of such an exemption shall be accompanied by the
administrative fee plus the applicant's required pre-payment of the average
annual landfill disposal cost. This pre-payment will be retained by the
Division as a pre-payment for one year's weekly solid waste disposal. The pre-
payment requirement shall be waived with respect to residences located within
those land use areas for which parcel fees are collected for the operation of
County Solid Waste Disposal System.
      (4)   The Director shall provide the owner who pays the pre-payment of
the average annual landfill disposal cost with a card or other document which
attests to such pre-payment and which allows weekly disposal privileges at all
facilities within the County Solid Waste Disposal System in a manner consistent
with the disposal rights of a resident who has paid a parcel fee for the
operation of County Solid Waste Disposal System.
      (5)   Should the owner violate any provisions of
Division 6 of Title 4 or of any provision of
Chapter 7 or
Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, the
Director may, upon advance written notice to the owner, revoke the exemption
and require the owner to subscribe to and pay for uniform handling service as
described in this Chapter.
   (b)   Commercial/Industrial Units.
      (1)   The owner of any commercial or industrial unit may apply for
exemption from uniform handling service by submitting a written application to
the Director on a form issued by the Director, accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee, requesting a permit to provide self-haul solid waste handling
and transportation. This permit, if approved, shall be valid for one year, and
must be renewed annually thereafter at the discretion of the Director upon
submittal of application and application fees to the Director.
      (2)   The exemption and renewal applications shall be on a form approved
by the Director.
      (3)   The owner may be granted an exemption provided he or she can
establish to the satisfaction of the Director that he or she can properly
transport all solid waste generated on the premises, to an approved solid waste
facility and recycling and organic processing facilities (pursuant to
conditions listed on exemption application), in a safe and sanitary manner in
accordance with each of the following conditions:
         (A)   The vehicles and equipment to be used for transporting the solid
waste shall be identified in the application by the owner;
         (B)   The vehicles used shall meet all the standards, if any,
prescribed for such use by the California Vehicle Code; and
         (C)   A credit account with the Division must be maintained in good
standing.
      (4)   The Director may require the owner to furnish evidence of such
delivery of solid waste.
      (5)   The application fee shall include an administrative fee, if any, as
determined by the Board.
      (6)   Should the owner violate any provision of this
Division 6 of Title 4 or any provision of
Chapter 7 or
Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of the San Bernardino County Code, the
Director may, upon advance written notice to the owner, revoke the exemption
and require the owner to subscribe to and pay for Uniform Handling Services as
described in this Chapter.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0505 Temporary Suspension of Service or Waiver of Fees.
   (a)   Any residential owner may suspend uniform handling service by a
grantee up to 45 consecutive days during a given fiscal year (i.e., July 1 -
June 30).
   (b)   The owner shall give written notification to the grantee at least 15
working (waste collection) days prior to the first day of the period for which
suspension of service is requested pursuant to this Section.
   (c)   Should an owner, after suspending service, request that service be re-
established, the grantee may charge a resumption fee not to exceed 50 percent
of the cost of one month's regular uniform handling service as specified in the
applicable franchise agreement. In no event shall a resumption fee exceed
$50.00.
   (d)   Any suspension of service established pursuant to this Section shall
be canceled if the Director determines that the conditions cited in subsection
(a) of this section no longer exist.
   (e)   In addition, the Director and/or each grantee servicing a franchise
area is authorized to waive the total rate established in the applicable
franchise agreement for an individual owner under circumstances approved by the
Director or designee, including but not limited to infrequent use of the
dwelling or when the property does not require regular collection service.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0506 Handling of Delinquent Accounts.
   (a)   The total rate owed by the owner of a dwelling or commercial or
industrial unit for uniform handling service rendered to such owner's property
(or which have been attempted to be rendered, if uniform handling service is
not allowed to be provided by action of the owner or tenant) shall be a civil
debt owed to the grantee providing the uniform handling service.
   (b)   Any delinquent fees, and the related penalties and interest and costs
of collection, shall be considered a debt owed to the County.
   (c)   Annually each grantee shall provide a list to the Division of all
accounts which have delinquent fees. This list shall set out the amount of the
delinquent fees, the time period for which the services related to the
delinquent fees were provided, the identity of the property to which the
service has been provided and the owner of such property.
   (d)   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code §§ 5473 through 5473a, the County
elects to have delinquent fees, and the related penalties and interest and
costs of collection, collected on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same
person, and at the same time as, together with but not separately from, its
general taxes. This election shall remain in effect until June 30, 2035.
      (1)   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 5473.10 the County hereby
imposes:
         (A)   A basic penalty of 10 percent of the delinquent fees, which
shall be assessed and shall be due and owing at the same time and in the same
manner as the delinquent fees; and
         (B)   Simple interest on the delinquent fees of one and one-half
percent per month, which interest shall be assessed and shall be due and owing
at the same time and in the same manner as the delinquent fees.
      (2)   The County shall cause a written report to be prepared each year
and filed with the Clerk of the Board. The report shall contain a description
of each parcel of real property receiving uniform handling service for which
delinquent fees exist, and the amount of the delinquent fees (and the
associated basic penalty and interest and costs of collection) related to that
real property.
      (3)   After providing any statutorily required notice and holding any
statutorily required hearing, and following the final determination of the
Board as to the delinquent fees detailed in the report, pursuant to Health and
Safety Code § 5473.4, the Clerk of the Board shall, on or before August 10 of
each year, file with the County Auditor/Controller-Recorder a copy of the
report with a statement endorsed thereon over his or her signature that the
report has been finally adopted by the Board. The Auditor/Controller-Recorder
shall then enter the amounts of the delinquent fees (and the associated basic
penalty and interest and costs of collection) against the respective lot or
parcel of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. Pursuant to
Health and Safety Code §§ 5473.5 and 5473.6, the amount of charges shall
constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which the charge
has been imposed and the tax collector shall include the amount of charges on
bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land.
   (e)   Any delinquent fees (and the associated basic penalty and interest and
costs of collection) which are collected by the County shall be allocated as
follows:
      (1)   First, to the County up to the amount of the County's costs of
collection;
      (2)   Next, to the grantee which provided the uniform handling service
which gave rise to the delinquent fees, up to the amount of the delinquent fees
and the associated interest provided for in Subdivision (d)(1)(B); and
      (3)   The remainder, if any, to the County.
   (f)   As used herein, the County's costs of collection include, but are not
limited to, any staff time and related expenses or Division charges involved in
preparing the report, placing the Delinquent Fees on the tax roll, collecting
or distributing the delinquent fees and determining which monies received by
the Division from the tax collector relate to which delinquent fees account.
   (g)   The County has no liability to pay the grantee any amount or sum for
any delinquent fees and/or the associated interest to the extent same are not
collected by the County.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4485,
passed - -2025)
§ 46.0507 Discontinuance of Service.
   Unless grantee is otherwise directed by Director, grantee shall not refuse
to provide, or discontinue the providing of, solid waste handling service to
any subscriber in a uniform handling area required to subscribe for uniform
handling service.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0508 Penalties for Violations.
   Except as otherwise allowed in §§ 46.1401, 46.1402, 46.1403, and 46.1404, it
shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to subscribe or pay for
uniform handling service implemented under this Chapter. Such a failure or
refusal to subscribe or pay for required uniform handling service shall subject
such person to the penalties provided in §
46.1601.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4485,
passed - -2025)
§ 46.0509 Illegal Dumping Retrieval Service Fee.
   Within uniform handling areas, at the direction of the County, grantee
agrees to bill subscribers for and collect an illegal dumping retrieval service
fee as established from time to time by the Board as part of the County Code.
Such fee may be changed by the Board, by providing 60 days written notice of a
change to grantee. The grantee, as directed in writing by the County, shall
either remit the fee collected to the County or provide mutually agreed upon
specified illegal dumping retrieval and disposal services.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 6: COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE AND ORGANIC WASTE RECYCLING PROGRAM
Section
   
46.0601   Purpose.
   
46.0602   Definitions.
   
46.0603   Commercial Solid Waste Recycling.
   
46.0604   Commercial Organics Recycling/Diversion.
   
46.0605   Donate or Sell of Recyclables.
§ 46.0601 Purpose.
   This Chapter shall apply to Businesses subject to the AB 341 and AB 1826
laws.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0602 Definitions.
   For purposes of this Chapter the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth in this Section:
   (a)   BUSINESS. A commercial or public entity, including, but not limited
to, a firm, partnership, proprietorship, joint stock company, corporation, or
association that is organized as a for-profit or nonprofit entity, or a
multifamily residential dwelling with five or more units, located within the
unincorporated County.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0603 Commercial Solid Waste Recycling.
   (a)   The County's commercial solid waste recycling program consists of the
requirements contained in Division 6 and education, outreach and monitoring of
businesses, including notification to businesses if they are not in compliance.
   (b)   A business that generates four or more cubic yards of commercial solid
waste per week or is a multifamily residential dwelling of five units or more
shall arrange for recycling services, consistent with State and local laws by
taking at least one of the following actions:
      (1)   Source separate recyclables from the solid waste being discarded
and subscribe to the grantee for the location of the business, for the pickup
and diversion of the recyclables separately from the discarded solid waste.
      (2)   Source separate recyclables from the solid waste being discarded
and self-haul the recyclables to a permitted materials recovery facility,
recycling facility, or other mixed waste processing facility for diversion from
disposal in a landfill.
      (3)   Subscribe, with the grantee for the location of the business, to a
recycling service that includes mixed waste processing that specifically
includes the diversion of the recyclables from disposal in a landfill.
      (4)   Sell or donate recyclables to the grantee or a third party in
compliance with the franchise agreement.
   (c)   Commercial recycling collection containers:
      (1)   Each business subject to this Section that provides customers
access to the business shall provide customers with a commercial solid waste
recycling bin or container to collect material purchased on the premises and
that meets the following requirements:
         (A)   Is adjacent to each bin or container for trash other than
recyclable commercial solid waste, except in restrooms.
         (B)   Is visible and easily accessible.
         (C)   Is clearly marked with education signage indicating what is
appropriate to place in the commercial solid waste recycling bin or container.
      (2)   Full-service restaurants are exempt from the requirement to provide
customers with a commercial solid waste recycling bin or container if the full-
service restaurant provides its employees with a commercial solid waste
recycling bin or container to collect material purchased on the premises and
implements a program to collect recyclable commercial solid waste.
   (d)   Each business subject to this Section that does not subscribe with the
grantee for the location of the Business shall be responsible for ensuring and
demonstrating its compliance with the requirements of this Section to the
Division with satisfactory proof of acceptable levels of waste Diversion as
determined by the Director or designee and requested by the Division.
   (e)   To comply with this Chapter, property owners of multifamily
residential dwellings of five units or more may require tenants to source
separate their recyclables. Tenants must source separate their recyclables as
required by property owners of multifamily residential dwellings of five units
or more.
   (f)   Within 30 days, all businesses are required to complete and return to
grantee or Division all commercial solid waste recycling surveys sent to
business. If grantee or Division request additional information from business,
business shall respond within 15 days.
   (g)   The County may grant, on a case by case basis and subject to the
discretion of the Director or the Director's designee, an exemption (which
exemption may be revoked by the Director or the Director's designee upon 30
days written notice to business) to a business from compliance with this
section for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Lack of sufficient space in the business to provide additional
recycling bins.
      (2)   The current implementation by a business of actions that result in
the recycling of a significant portion of its commercial waste.
      (3)   The business does not generate at least one-half of a cubic yard of
recyclables per week.
      (4)   Lack of viable markets or recycling facilities available for
recyclables generated by the business.
      (5)   Any other reason that is authorized by the State of California.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0604 Commercial Organics Recycling/Diversion.
   (a)   The County's commercial organic waste recycling program consists of
the requirements contained in
Division 6 and education, outreach and monitoring of businesses, including the
notification to businesses if they are not in compliance.
   (b)   A business generating two cubic yards or more of commercial solid
waste per week shall arrange for recycling services specifically for organic
waste, consistent with State and local laws, by taking one, or any combination,
of the following actions:
      (1)   Source separate organic waste from other solid waste and subscribe
to the grantee for the location of the business, for the collection and
recycling of the organic waste.
         (A)   If the grantee for the location of the business does not offer a
program for the collection and recycling of the organic waste, a business may
contract with another entity for the service. That a hauler that is not a
grantee may provide the collection and recycling of organic waste at a lower
cost to business does not authorize a business to use the hauler that is not a
grantee, if the grantee provides a collection and recycling of organic waste
program to business.
      (2)   Recycle its organic waste onsite or self-haul its own organic waste
for recycling.
      (3)   Subscribe, with the grantee for the location of the business, to an
organic waste recycling service that may include mixed waste processing that
specifically recycles organic waste.
      (4)   Sell or donate recyclable organic waste to the grantee or a third
party in compliance with the franchise agreement.
   (c)   Commercial organic waste collection containers:
      (1)   Each business subject to this Section that provides customers
access to the business shall provide customers with an organic waste recycling
bin or container to collect material purchased on the premises for immediate
consumption and that meets the following requirements:
         (A)   Is adjacent to each bin or container for trash other than
recyclable organic waste, except in restrooms.
         (B)   Is visible and easily accessible.
         (C)   Is clearly marked with education signage indicating what is
appropriate to place in the organic waste recycling bin or container.
      (2)   Full-service restaurants are exempt from the requirement to provide
customers with an organic waste recycling bin or container if the full-service
restaurant provides its employees with an organic waste recycling bin or
container to collect material purchased on the premises for immediate
consumption and implements a program to collect recyclable organic waste.
   (d)   When arranging for gardening or landscaping services, the contract or
work agreement between a Business subject to this Section and a gardening or
landscaping service shall require that the organic waste generated by those
services be managed in compliance with this Section.
   (e)   A business that is a multifamily residential dwelling is not required
to arrange for the organic waste recycling services specified in this Section
for food waste that is generated by the business.
   (f)   Each business subject to this Section that does not subscribe with the
grantee for the location of the business shall be responsible for ensuring and
demonstrating its compliance with the requirements of this Section to the
Division with satisfactory proof of acceptable levels of organic waste
recycling as determined by the Director and requested by the Division, or its
designee.
   (g)   To comply with this Chapter, property owners of multifamily
residential dwellings of five units or more may require tenants to source
separate their organic waste. Tenants must source separate their organic waste
as required by property owners of multifamily residential dwellings of five
units or more.
   (h)   The County may grant, on a case by case basis and subject to the
discretion of the Director or the Director's designee, an exemption (which
exemption may be revoked by the Director or the Director's designee upon 30
days written notice to business) to a business from compliance with this
section for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Lack of sufficient space in the business to provide additional
organic waste recycling bins.
      (2)   The current implementation by a business of actions that result in
the recycling of a significant portion of its organic waste.
      (3)   The business does not generate at least one-half of a cubic yard of
organic waste per week.
      (4)   Limited-term exemptions for extraordinary or unforeseen events.
      (5)   Any other reason that is authorized by the State of California.
   (i)   Within 30 days, all businesses are required to complete and return to
grantee or Division all commercial organic waste recycling surveys sent to
business. If grantee or Division request additional information from business,
business shall respond within 15 days.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0605 Donate or Sell of Recyclables.
   Nothing in this Chapter is intended to limit the right of any business to
donate or sell its recyclables or organic waste as provided by §§ 41952,
42649.84 and 42649.5 of the Public Resources Code.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 7: RESERVED
CHAPTER 8: GRANTEE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, FINANCIAL INFORMATION AND AUDIT
RIGHTS
Section
   
46.0801   General.
   
46.0802   Types of Reports.
   
46.0803   County Right of Audit.
§ 46.0801 General.
   (a)   Each grantee shall keep, maintain, and furnish copies of such
operating records and reports as may be requested by the Division to ascertain
compliance with Division 6 and as set forth in the franchise agreement. The
Division reserves the right to request that additional information be provided
to it, as necessary to meet its needs, including but not limited to AB 939, AB
341, AB 1826 and SB 1383, as may be amended, and other applicable reporting
requirements.
   (b)   All information required to be kept, maintained or furnished to County
shall be maintained a minimum of seven years after the entry of the most recent
item therein.
   (c)   The grantee's financial and accounting records required to be
maintained under the provisions of this Division 6 shall be maintained on an
accrual basis in accordance with the most current edition of Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles published by the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants. Unless inconsistent with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles,
gross receipts must be recorded as revenues.
   (d)   Data and information pertaining to services performed under any
franchise agreement become the property of the County upon submittal to the
Division.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0802 Types of Reports.
   Each franchise agreement shall require the grantee to provide specific
information to the County related to the operation of the franchise, including
but not limited to the following types of reports:
   (a)   Each month the grantee shall complete report forms provided by the
Division containing sufficient information to identify the source of
generation, e.g., residential, commercial, and multi-jurisdictional reports
that contain accurate source information collected from the driver of the
refuse truck at each landfill and split source and tonnage information, for
Solid Waste loads from more than one community.
   (b)   Each quarter, except as otherwise directed in writing by the Director,
each grantee shall submit quarterly reports identified as the collection
information reports, service performance report, the program implementation,
and a report summarizing calculation of the franchise fee. To the extent
permitted by applicable law, financial information submitted to County by the
grantee pursuant to this Subdivision will be kept confidential and will be
available to County personnel only on a need-to-know basis.
   (c)   Each year, the grantee shall submit reports to the Division, covering
operations for each calendar year, including a summary of information contained
in the quarterly reports required to be provided quarterly pursuant to
Subdivision (b) above ("summary reports"), a complete inventory of collection
equipment and other major equipment which is or may be used in its operations
("equipment inventory report"), a report that identifies all future programs
and facilities that may be needed but have not been planned for ("future
programs report"), declarations of the current status of all pending criminal
or civil litigation, if any, against the grantee and its parent company, and
all other subsidiaries of such parent company that may have an effect on the
grantee's ability to meet the obligations of its agreement or provide a
satisfactory level of service ("litigation information report").
   (d)   Within 120 days following the close of grantee's fiscal year, grantee
shall furnish a summary of the reports required to be provided quarterly
pursuant to subdivision (b), above. The summary must be reviewed by the
grantee's independent certified public account, in accordance with the
standards of the accounting industry, and include the appropriate statement
from said accountant relative to his or her review.
   (e)   Within 120 days following the close of grantee's fiscal year, grantee
shall organize, summarize and make available for review full and complete
financial information, consistent with the preparation of the grantee's
financial statements, with respect to the operations necessary to provide the
services required under its franchise agreement, including revenues, costs and
expenses. Such information is not required to be certified by an independent
certified public accountant. The grantee shall make the financial information
available for the review by the Division, or its designee, at the local office
of grantee.
   (f)   Periodic revenue, cost and expense information reports are required
from grantees as soon as possible in advance of the negotiations on a proposed
franchise agreement, and again at least three months prior to the date that a
decision would be made under §
46.0301(d)(2) of this code regarding the denial of an extension of the term of
a franchise agreement. Such reports shall organize, summarize and make
available for review full and complete financial information, consistent with
the preparation of the grantee's financial statements, with respect to the
operations necessary to provide the services required under its franchise
agreement, including revenues, costs and expenses. Such information is required
to be certified by an independent certified public accountant. The grantee
shall make the financial information available for the review by the Division,
or its designee, at the local office of grantee. Notwithstanding the forgoing,
if grantee and any company which is within a "controlled group of corporations"
with grantee (within the meaning of 26 U.S.C. § 1563) have, in the aggregate,
15 or fewer full time employees, and grantee petitions the Director that the
cost of required certification would pose an undue hardship, the Director may
waive the certification requirement and may, at Division expense, engage a
certified public account of his or her choice to conduct the necessary
certification.
   (g)   Grantee shall be required to provide audited financial statements upon
120 days advance written notice by the Division, for its most recently
completed fiscal year, together with the related opinion of the independent
certified public accountant who certified such audited financial statement. The
grantee shall make the audited financial statement and related opinion
available for the review by the division, or its designee, at the local office
of grantee. If grantee is a subsidiary of another corporation, grantee shall
provide the audited financial statement of such parent corporation and need
only provide a copy of the financial statement of grantee utilized in the
preparation of the audited financial statement of the parent corporation.
Notwithstanding, the forgoing, if grantee and any company which is within a
"controlled group of corporations" with grantee (within the meaning of 26
U.S.C. § 1563) have, in the aggregate, 15 or fewer full time employees, and
grantee petitions the Director that the cost of an audited financial statement
would pose an undue hardship, then Director may waive the requirement to
provide an audited financial statement and may, at Division expense, engage an
auditor of his or her choice to conduct a financial audit.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0803 County Right of Audit.
   Grantee shall make its subscriber base and business, operational and
financial records available to the Division, or its designee, for audit at
reasonable times for purposes relevant to review of performance and rate
adjustment issues relevant to the grantee's franchise agreement. In the event
an audit is undertaken and shows that the franchise fee paid by grantee to the
County (relative to any period of time in excess of three months) has been
understated by at least $50,000 or two percent, whichever is less, then grantee
shall reimburse County for the cost of such audit and shall, in addition, pay
the County the amount of the understated franchise fee, plus simple interest on
such understated amount at the rate of 10 percent per annum from the date
originally due until paid.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 9: GRANTEE INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE AND BONDING
Section
   
46.0901   Indemnification of County.
   
46.0902   Hazardous Waste Indemnification.
   
46.0903   Insurance Requirements.
   
46.0904   Performance Bonds or Other Security.
   
46.0905   Liquidated Damages Deposit.
   
46.0906   Modification.
§ 46.0901 Indemnification of County.
   Separate and distinct from the insurance provisions required by this
Division 6, each franchise agreement shall require each grantee to appear and
defend (with counsel approved by County) all actions against the Division and
the County, and the grantee agrees to defend (with counsel approved by County),
indemnify, and hold the County and/or its officers, agents, volunteers and
employees harmless from and against, any and all claims and demands, causes of
action of every kind and description, damages, liabilities, costs or expenses
for any damages or injuries to any person or property, including, but not
limited to, injury to grantee's officers, agents, or employees which arise
directly or indirectly from or are connected with or are caused or claimed to
be caused by acts, errors or omissions of grantee, or its officers, agents, or
employees, in exercising its rights or in performing its duties under its
franchise agreement or under this Division 6, and all costs and expenses of
investigating and defending against same, except to the extent such
indemnification is prohibited by law.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0902 Hazardous Waste Indemnification.
   Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, if grantee has negligently
or willfully acted or failed to act with respect to the collection, handling or
transportation of hazardous waste, grantee shall indemnify, defend (with
counsel approved by County), protect and hold harmless the County and its
respective officers, employees, agents, volunteers, assigns, and any successor
or successors harmless from and against all claims, actual damages (including,
but not limited to, special and consequential damages), natural resources
damage, punitive damages, injuries, costs, response remediation and removal
costs, losses, demands, debts, liens, liabilities, causes of action, suits,
legal or administrative proceedings, interest, fines, charges, penalties, and
expenses (including, but not limited to, attorneys and expert witness fees and
costs incurred in connection with defending against any of the foregoing or in
enforcing this indemnity) of any kind whatsoever paid, incurred or suffered by,
or asserted against, County or its respective officers, employees, agents, or
grantees arising from or attributable to any repair, cleanup or detoxification,
or preparation and implementation of any removal, remedial response, closure or
other plan (regardless of whether undertaken due to governmental action)
concerning any hazardous waste which grantee has negligently or willfully acted
or failed to act with respect to its collection, handling or transportation at
any place where grantee stores, handles, transports or disposes of solid waste
pursuant to its franchise agreement. The foregoing indemnity is intended to
operate and shall operate as an agreement pursuant to § 107(e) of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, "CERCLA"
42 U.S.C. § 9607(e) and Health and Safety Code § 25364, to insure, protect,
indemnify, and hold the County harmless from liability.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0903 Insurance Requirements.
   (a)   In order to accomplish the indemnifications provided above, but
without limiting the duty, each grantee shall secure and maintain at its sole
cost throughout the term of its respective franchise agreement, insurance
issued by companies acceptable to the County's Risk Manager with limits as may
be reasonably prescribed by the County's Risk Manager as a reflection of the
County's risk in respect to operations under a particular franchise agreement,
and with such terms and provisions as may be required from time to time by the
County's Risk Manager. At a minimum such insurance policies include, but are
not limited to:
      (1)   Workers compensation.
      (2)   Comprehensive general and automobile liability insurance.
      (3)   Environmental liability.
   (b)   Prior to commencing operations under a franchise agreement, grantee
shall furnish to the Division certificates of insurance evidencing the required
insurance coverage. Each such certificate shall provide that the insurance
coverage evidenced thereby shall not be expired, canceled, terminated or
reduced in amount without at least 30 days advance written notice to the
Division. Within 60 days after the effective date of a franchise agreement, the
grantee shall furnish to the Division certified copies of all of the policies
and endorsements required by this Section. Proofs of renewal or of substitution
of carriers shall be provided to the Division promptly as such events occur.
   (c)   All insurance requirements are subject to annual review by the County,
with the results of such review to be provided to a grantee on or before the
anniversary of the effective date of its franchise agreement. If the County's
Risk Manager determines at any annual review that heretofore unreasonably
priced or unavailable types of insurance coverage or coverage limits become
reasonably priced or available, the County's Risk Manager is authorized, but
not required, to change the above insurance requirements to require additional
types of insurance coverage or higher coverage limits, provided that any such
change is reasonable in light of past claims against the County, inflation, or
any other item reasonably related to the County's risk. Any such change shall
be treated as a change in law adjustment, under the provisions of
Division 6.
   (d)   Grantee shall not be required to maintain separate policies of
insurance for any type of insurance required under both this section and
Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code. However, grantee must maintain
the level of insurance which is the higher of that required in this Section and
Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code, and must obtain and maintain
insurance coverage which satisfies all of the provisions of this Section and
Chapter 8 of Division 3 of Title 3 of this Code, including without limit,
providing certificates of insurance to all specified departments of the County
and requiring notification of the cancellation or termination of any insurance
policy be given by the insurance company to all specified departments of the
County.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0904 Performance Bonds or Other Security.
   Grantee shall furnish to the County, without additional charge, a corporate
surety bond, a letter of credit or other Security device acceptable to the
Division, as security for performance under its franchise agreement
(collectively "security"). The amount of the security shall be the average of
one month's expected gross receipts less disposal charge. Adequate proof of the
existence of the security shall be provided (e.g., a certificate from the
surety showing that the bond premiums have been paid in full shall accompany
the bond and each renewal thereof). The surety on the bond, the bank on which
the letter of credit is drawn and the surety for any other security device
shall be a company or financial institution acceptable to the County and shall
be authorized to do business in the State of California. A surety company shall
be as defined in Code of Civil Procedure § 995.120 or any successor section.
The surety must be acceptable to the County and may be subject to objection to
sufficiency pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure §§ 995.660 et seq., or any
successor sections.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0905 Liquidated Damages Deposit.
   Each grantee shall be required to maintain a bank account from which the
Division will have the ability to remove, on the sole signature of the
Director, sums of money equal to any liquidated damages assessed against
grantee under the provisions of § 46.1002 of this code.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.0906 Modification.
   The requirements of this Chapter may be modified or waived in writing by the
Board upon the request of grantee, provided the Board reasonably determines
such modification or waiver is in the best interest of County and of the public
welfare, considering all relevant factors, including acceptable financial
guarantees provided by Grantee or by a parent company of grantee.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 10: FRANCHISE ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
Sections
   
46.1001   Administration, Enforcement and Remedies.
   
46.1002   Liquidated Damages.
   
46.1003   Resolution of Subscriber Complaints.
   
46.1004   Notices.
§ 46.1001 Administration, Enforcement and Remedies.
   (a)   If the Director determines at any time that the grantee's performance
of the solid waste handling services authorized or required in its franchise
agreement, or any of its other actions, are not in conformity with the
provisions of the franchise agreement, the provisions of this Code, the
requirements of the CalRecycle, or its successor agency, including but not
limited to, requirements for source reduction and recycling (as to the waste
stream subject to the franchise agreement) or any other applicable Federal,
State, or local law or regulation, including but not limited to, the laws
governing collection, transfer, storage and/or disposal of solid waste, the
Director will notify grantee in writing of such deficiencies ("notice of
deficiency") as shall be defined in the franchise agreement with the grantee.
   (b)   The notice of deficiency may provide a reasonable time within which
correction of all noted deficiencies is to be made. Some deficiencies are by
their nature not curable, and no time period to correct or remedy such
deficiency shall be given in the notice of deficiency.
   (c)   The Director shall review the grantee's response to the notice of
deficiency. If the Director determines that the grantee has not cured the
deficiency, or if there is no cure period provided in the notice of deficiency
given the nature of the deficiency, the Director shall either:
      (1)   Refer the matter directly to the Board for decision pursuant to
Subdivision (d); or
      (2)   Decide the matter and notify the grantee of that decision, in
writing.
         (A)   The decision of the Director may be to terminate the franchise
agreement or may be to impose some lesser sanction;
         (B)   The decision of the Director shall be final and binding on
grantee unless the grantee files a "notice of appeal" with the Director within
30 days of receipt of the Director's decision. The notice of appeal shall be in
writing, shall contain a detailed and precise statement of the basis for the
appeal, and shall be accompanied by the fee, if any, which is applicable to the
filing of such an appeal.
         (C)   Within ten working days of receipt of a notice of appeal, the
Director shall either refer the appeal to the Board for proceedings in
accordance with subdivision (d), or refer the matter to a hearing officer for
proceedings pursuant to
Chapter 27 of Division 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (d)   (1)   Should the Director refer the notice of deficiency to the Board
in the first instance, or if the matter reaches the Board pursuant to a notice
of appeal, the Board shall either:
         (A)   Refer the matter to a hearing officer for proceedings pursuant
to
Chapter 27 of Division 2 of Title 1 of this Code; or
         (B)   Set the matter for hearing.
      (2)   If the Board sets the matter for hearing:
         (A)   The Board shall give grantee, and any interested person
requesting the same, 14 days written notice of the time and place of the public
hearing. At the hearing, the Board shall consider the report of the Director
indicating the deficiencies, and shall give the grantee, or its representatives
and any other interested person, a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
         (B)   Based on the evidence presented at the public hearing, the Board
shall decide the appropriate action to be taken. If, based upon the record, the
Board determines that as noted in the notice of deficiency, the grantee's
performance of the solid waste handling services authorized or required in its
franchise agreement, or any of its other actions, are not in conformity with
the provisions of the franchise agreement, the provisions of this Code, the
requirements of the CalRecycle, or its successor agency, including but not
limited to, requirements for source reduction and recycling (as to the waste
stream subject to the franchise agreement) or any other applicable Federal,
State, or local law or regulation, including but not limited to the laws
governing collection, transfer, storage and/or disposal of solid waste, then
the board, in the exercise of its sole discretion, may terminate the franchise
agreement immediately or impose such lesser sanction as it deems appropriate.
The decision of the Board shall be final and conclusive.
   (e)   Grantee's performance under its franchise agreement is not excused
during the period of time prior to the Director's or the Board's final
determination, as the case may be, regarding the validity of, and appropriate
response to, the deficiencies noted in the notice of deficiency.
   (f)   In the event grantee: (i) has received a notice of deficiency and
fails to perform solid waste handling services; or (ii) has had its franchise
agreement terminated; the County, acting through the Division, reserves the
right, in addition to all other rights available to the County, to take any one
or combination of the following actions:
      (1)   To rent or lease from grantee, at its respective fair and
reasonable rental value, all or any part of the grantee's equipment (including
collection containers utilized by subscribers and office equipment and billing
programs), equipment yard and office utilized by grantee in providing the solid
waste handling services required under its franchise agreement. The County may
rent or lease such equipment and real property for a period not to exceed six
months, for the purpose of performing the solid waste handling services, or any
part thereof, which grantee is (or was) obligated to provide pursuant to its
franchise agreement. The County may use said rented equipment and real property
to directly perform such solid waste handling service or to assign it to some
other grantee or person to act on the County's behalf. Grantee shall be held
responsible for the costs to insure the County or its assignee from all
liability resulting from the operation of grantee's equipment. In the case of
equipment or real property not owned by grantee, grantee shall assign to the
County, to the extent grantee is permitted to do so under the instruments
pursuant to which grantee possesses such equipment or real property, the right
to possess the equipment or real property.
      (2)   As used in this Subdivision, means the rate for such equipment as
listed in the State Department of Transportation publication, Labor Surcharge
and Equipment Rental Rates, in effect at the time the County leases the
equipment. If a particular piece of equipment is not listed in said publication
or if said publication is not current, the reasonable rental value may be
established by the Director by any equitable alternative method. For real
property, the REASONABLE RENTAL VALUE means its market rental rate as
established by the Director using an equitable method.
      (3)   If the County exercises its rights under this Subdivision, the
County shall pay or owe grantee the reasonable rental value of the equipment
and real property so used for the period of the County's possession thereof.
The County may offset any amounts due to grantee pursuant to this provision
against any amounts due to County from grantee.
      (4)   All revenues owed by Subscribers which are attributable to services
performed by or at the direction of the County during County's assumption of
grantee's solid waste handling duties shall be billed by and paid to the
County. To the extent grantee receives such revenue after County's assumption
of grantee's solid waste handling duties, Grantee shall pay such revenue to
County promptly after receipt thereof (or promptly after County has performed
the services related to such revenue, if the revenue was received by the
grantee prior to the County's assumption of duties) and grantee shall be deemed
to have assigned to County all of grantee's right and interest to any such
revenues.
   (g)   The County rights set forth in this Section are in addition to, and
not in limitation of, any other powers or rights available to the County upon
failure of grantee to perform its obligations under Division 6 or its franchise
agreement. Further, by entering into its franchise agreement issued pursuant to
Division 6 each grantee acknowledges that its violation of the terms of
Division 6 or its breach of the terms of its franchise agreement shall cause
the County to suffer irreparable injury and damages sufficient to support
injunctive relief to enforce the provisions of the franchise agreement, and to
enjoin the breach thereof.
   (h)   This Section shall not apply to violations or deficiencies which fall
within the sole jurisdiction of the County's Department of Public Health,
Division of Environmental Health Services under Grantee's required Health and
Safety Permit and which are not, and do not become, violations or deficiencies
under
Division 6.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460,
passed - -2023)
§ 46.1002 Liquidated Damages.
   (a)   Each franchise agreement shall provide for a process to establish that
grantee has met its service obligations under the franchise agreement and shall
provide a schedule of liquidated damages for each violation or breach which has
been verified to the satisfaction of the Division.
   (b)   A high level of collection service quality and subscriber satisfaction
and therefore consistent and reliable service is of utmost importance to the
County and the solid waste handling services subscriber. County will have
considered and relied on grantee's representations as to its quality of service
commitment in approving any franchise agreement, and any violation or breach by
grantee of its solid waste handling service obligations referenced in this
Section represents a loss of bargain to the County. The grantee further
acknowledges that quantified standards of performance are necessary and
appropriate to ensure such consistent and reliable collection service, and if
grantee fails to meet service obligations referenced in this Section, County
will suffer damages (including but not limited to, its subscribers
inconvenience; complaints by subscribers; lost Board and staff time; and loss
of bargain) and that it is and will be impracticable and extremely difficult to
ascertain and determine the value thereof. Therefore, the County and grantee
acknowledge that the liquidated damages established by schedules to each
franchise agreement, represent a reasonable estimate of the amount of such
damages, considering all of the circumstances, including the relationship of
the amount of the liquidated damages to the range of harm to County that
reasonably could be anticipated and the anticipation that proof of actual
damages would be extremely costly and inconvenient for both the grantee and
County. By entering into its franchise agreement, the grantee will specifically
affirm the accuracy of the statements made relating to liquidated damages and
the fact that grantee will have had ample opportunity to consult with legal
counsel and obtain an explanation of the liquidated damage provision contained
therein.
   (c)   The rights of the County set forth in this Section are in addition to,
and not a limitation on, any other rights which County may have against grantee
for the failure to observe any condition or term of
Division 6 or its franchise agreement, including the violations or breaches of
same set forth in this Section for which liquidated damages are provided.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460,
passed - -2023)
§ 46.1003 Resolution of Subscriber Complaints.
   Procedures for resolution of complaints and other disputes shall be as
follows:
   (a)   A Subscriber dissatisfied with grantee's decision regarding a
complaint may ask the Director to review the complaint. To obtain this review,
the Subscriber may request County review within 30 days of receipt of grantee's
response to the complaint, or within 45 days of submitting the complaint to the
grantee, if the grantee has failed to respond to the complaint. The Director
may extend the time to request the County's review for good cause.
   (b)   Before reviewing the complaint, the Director shall refer it to the
grantee. If the grantee fails to cure the complaint within ten days after such
referral, the Director shall review the complaint and determine if further
action is warranted. The Director may request written statements from the
grantee and subscriber, or oral presentations or both written and oral
presentations.
   (c)   The Director shall determine if the subscriber's complaint is
justified, and if so, what remedy, if any, shall be applied. The remedy
provided to the subscriber under this Section shall be limited to a refund of
subscriber charges related to the period of violation of any of the terms of
Division 6 or of the breach of any term of the applicable franchise agreement.
In addition to any other remedy of County contained in this Section, County may
impose liquidated damages of up to $100.00 payable to the County for any single
event or series of related events, or actual damages as demonstrated during the
resolution procedure.
   (d)   The Director may delegate the duties under this Section to a designee.
The decision of the Director or a designee shall be final on any matter of
$5,000.00 or less. In the event of a decision on a matter awarding more than
$5,000.00, grantee may seek review pursuant to the notice of appeal procedure
contained in §
46.1001.
   (e)   This Section shall not apply to disputes involving the implementation
of the total rate approved by the Board or the adjustments thereto specifically
authorized by Division 6.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4485,
passed - -2025)
§ 46.1004 Notices.
   Except as otherwise required by governing law, any notice, information,
request or reply ("notice") required or permitted to be given under the
provisions of Division 6 shall be in writing and shall be given or served
either personally or by mail. If given or served by mail, such notice shall be
deemed sufficiently given if: (1) (i) deposited in the United States mail,
certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, or (ii) sent by
express mail, Federal Express, or other similar overnight service, provided
proof of service is available; and (2) addressed to (i) the grantee at its most
recent address of record with the Division or (ii) to the Director at the then-
current address of the Division, as the case may be.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 11: GRANTEE SB 1383 ORGANIC WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES IMPLEMENTATION
Section
   
46.1101   Requirements for Grantees.
   
46.1102   Education, Equipment, Monitoring and Reporting.
§ 46.1101 Requirements for Grantees.
   Grantees providing SB 1383-compliant residential, commercial, or industrial
organic waste collection services to generators within the County's boundaries,
except in a franchise area that has been granted a waiver from SB 1383 organic
waste collection services, shall meet the following requirements and standards
as a condition of approval of a contract, agreement, or other authorization
with the County to collect organic waste:
   (a)   Through written notice to the County, identify facilities to which
they will transport organic waste including facilities for source separated
recyclables, source separated green container organic waste, source separated
brown container organic waste, and mixed waste.
   (b)   Transport source separated recyclables, source separated green
container organic waste, source separated brown container organic waste, and
mixed waste to a facility, operation, activity or property that recovers
organic waste as defined in 14 CCR Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 2.
   (c)   Obtain approval form the County to haul organic waste, unless it is
transporting source separated organic waste to a community composting site or
lawfully transporting construction and demolition debris in such a manner that
complies with 14 CCR § 18989.1 and § 63.1501 of the County Code.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.1102 Education, Equipment, Monitoring and Reporting.
   Grantee shall comply with education, equipment, signage, container labeling,
container color, contamination monitoring, and reporting, and other
requirements contained within its franchise agreement.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 12: COMMERCIAL BUSINESSES SB 1383 ORGANIC WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES
IMPLEMENTATION
Section
   
46.1201   Purpose.
   
46.1202   Requirements for Commercial Businesses.
   
46.1203   Donate or Sell of Recyclables.
§ 46.1201 Purpose.
   This Chapter shall apply to commercial businesses subject to the organic
waste collection services requirements of the SB 1383 Regulations.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.1202 Requirements for Commercial Businesses.
   Generators that are commercial businesses, including multi-family
residential dwellings with five or more units, shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (a)   Subscribe to the County's collection services and comply with the
requirements of those services as described below in Subsection (b), except for
those that meet the self-hauler requirements of this Chapter. The County shall
have the right to review the number and size of a generator's containers and
frequency of collection to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type
of collection service for proper separation of materials and containment of
materials; and, commercial businesses shall adjust their service level for
their collection services as requested by the County.
   (b)   Except for those that meet the self-hauler requirements of this
Chapter, participate in the County's organic waste collection services by
placing designated materials in designated containers as described below and
specified in the franchise agreement.
      (1)   Option 1: A three and three-plus-container collection service (blue
container, green container, brown container, and/or gray container).
         (A)   Option 1a: Generator shall place source separated green
container organic waste, including food waste, in the green container; source
separated recyclables in the blue container; and gray container waste in the
gray container. Generator shall not place materials designated for the gray
container into the green or blue containers.
         (B)   Option 1b: Generator shall place source separated green
container organic waste, except food waste, in the green container; source
separated recyclables in the blue container; and mixed waste, including food
waste, in the gray container. Generator shall not place materials designated
for the green container or blue container in the gray container.
         (C)   Option 1c: Generator shall place source separated green
container organic waste, except food waste, in the green container; source
separated brown container organic waste in the brown container; source
separated recyclables in the blue container; and gray container waste in the
gray container. Generator shall not place materials designated for the gray
container into the green, brown, or blue containers.
      (2)   Option 2: Two-container collection service (green container/gray
container system or blue container/gray container system).
         (A)   Option 2a: Green container/gray container: generator shall place
only source separated green container organic waste in a green container.
Generator shall place all other materials (mixed waste) in a gray container.
         (B)   Option 2b: Blue container/gray container: generator shall place
only source separated recyclables in a blue container. Generator shall place
all other materials (mixed waste) in a gray container.
      (3)   Option 3: An unsegregated single container (one-container)
collection service.
         (A)   Generator shall place all materials (mixed waste) in a gray
container.
   (c)   Supply and allow access to adequate number, size and location of
collection containers with sufficient labels or colors for employees,
contractors, tenants, and customers, consistent with County's container
collection systems.
   (d)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, shall provide containers
for the collection of source separated green container organic waste, source
separated brown container organic waste, and source separated recyclables in
all indoor and outdoor areas where disposal containers are provided for
customers, for materials generated by that commercial business. Such containers
do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a commercial business does not
generate any of the materials that would be collected in one type of container,
then the commercial business does not have to provide that particular container
in all areas where disposal containers are provided for customers. Pursuant to
14 CCR § 18984.9(b), the containers provided by the commercial business shall
have either:
      (1)   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by the County, with either lids
conforming to the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color
requirements, or both lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A
commercial business is not required to replace functional containers, including
containers purchased prior to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the
requirements of the subsection prior to the end of the useful life of those
containers, or prior to January 1, 2036, whichever comes first.
      (2)   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or both,
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container. Pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.8, the container labeling requirements
are required on new containers commencing January 1, 2022.
   (e)   Multi-family residential dwellings are not required to comply with
container replacement requirements or labeling requirement in Subsection (d)
above pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b).
   (f)   To the extent practical through education, training, inspection, and/
or other measures, excluding multi-family residential dwellings, shall prohibit
employees from placing materials in a container not designated for those
materials per the county's blue container, green container, brown container,
and gray container collection service.
   (g)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, shall periodically
inspect blue containers, green containers, brown containers, and gray
containers for contamination and inform employees if containers are
contaminated and of the requirements to keep contaminants out of those
containers pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b)(3).
   (h)   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants, and
customers about organic waste recovery requirements and about proper sorting of
source separated green container organic waste, source separated brown
container organic waste, and source separated recyclables.
   (i)   Provide education information before or within 14 days of occupation
of the premises to new tenants that describes the requirements to keep source
separated green container organic waste, source separated brown container
organic waste, and source separated recyclables separate from gray container
waste (when applicable) and the location of containers and the rules governing
their use at each property.
   (j)   Provide or arrange access for County or its agent to their properties
during all inspections conducted in accordance with this Chapter to confirm
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
   (k)   Nothing in this section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing organic waste on site, or using a community
composting site pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c).
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.1203 Donate or Sell of Recyclables.
   Nothing in this Chapter is intended to limit the right of any commercial
business to donate or sell its recyclables or organic waste as provided by §§
41952, 42649.84 and 42649.5 of the Public Resources Code.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 13: SINGLE-FAMILY GENERATORS SB 1383 ORGANIC WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES
IMPLEMENTATION
Section
   
46.1301   Purpose.
   
46.1302   Requirements for Single-Family Generators.
§ 46.1301 Purpose.
   This Chapter shall apply to single-family generators subject to the organic
waste collection services requirements of the SB 1383 Regulations.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.1302 Requirements for Single-Family Generators.
   Single-family organic waste generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (a)   Shall subscribe to the County's organic waste collection services for
all organic waste generated as described in Subsection (b) below. The County
shall have the right to review the number and size of generator's containers to
evaluate adequacy of capacity provided by each type of collection service for
proper separation of materials and containment of materials; and a single-
family generator shall adjust its service level for its collection services as
requested by the County. Generators may additionally manage their organic waste
by preventing or reducing their organic waste, managing organic waste on site,
and/or using a community composting site pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c).
   (b)   Shall participate in the County's organic waste collection services by
placing designated materials in designated containers as described below and
shall not place prohibited container contaminants in collection containers.
      (1)   Option 1: A three- and three-plus container collection service
(blue container, green container, and gray container).
         (A)   Option 1a: Generator shall place source separated green
container organic waste, including food waste, in the green container; source
separated recyclables in the blue container; and mixed waste in the gray
container. Generator shall not place materials designated for the green
container or blue container in the gray container.
         (B)   Option 1b: Generator shall place source separated green
container organic waste, except food waste, in the green container; source
separated recyclables in the blue container; and mixed waste, including food
waste, in the gray container. Generator shall not place materials designated
for the green container or blue container in the gray container.
      (2)   Option 2: Two-container collection service (green container/gray
container system or blue container/gray container system).
         (A)   Option 2a: Green container/gray container: generator shall place
only source separated green container organic waste in a green container.
Generator shall place all other materials (mixed waste) in a gray container.
         (B)   Option 2b: Blue container/gray container: generator shall place
only source separated recyclables in a blue container. Generator shall place
all other materials (mixed waste) in a gray container.
      (3)   Option 3: An unsegregated single container (one-container)
collection service.
         (A)   Generator shall place all materials (mixed waste) in a gray
container.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 14: SB 1383 WAIVERS FOR GENERATORS
Section
   
46.1401   Purpose.
   
46.1402   De Minimis Waivers.
   
46.1403   Physical Space Waivers.
   
46.1404   Collection Frequency Waivers.
   
46.1405   Review and Approval of Waivers.
§ 46.1401 Purpose.
   This Chapter shall apply to generators subject to the organic waste
collection services requirements of the SB 1383 Regulations.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.1402 De Minimis Waivers.
   The County may waive a commercial business' obligation (including multi-
family dwellings with five or more units) to comply with some or all of the SB
1383 organic waste requirements of this Chapter if the commercial business
provides documentation or the County has evidence demonstrating that the
commercial business generates below a certain amount of organic waste material
as described below in subsection (a). Commercial businesses granted a de
minimis waiver shall:
   (a)   Either provide documentation or confirm that the County has evidence
demonstrating that:
      (1)   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
two cubic yards or more per week and organic waste subject to collection in a
blue container, green container, or brown container comprises less than 20
gallons per week per applicable container of the business' total waste; or
      (2)   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
less than two cubic yards per week and organic waste subject to collection in a
blue container, green container, or brown container comprise less than ten
gallons per week per applicable container of the business' total waste.
   (b)   Notify the County if circumstances change such that the commercial
business' organic waste exceeds the threshold required for a de minimis waiver,
in which case the waiver will be rescinded.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460, passed - -2023)
§ 46.1403 Physical Space Waivers.
   The County may waive a commercial business' or property owner's obligations
(including multi-family residential dwellings with five or more units) to
comply with some or all of the SB 1383 recyclables and/or organic waste
collection service requirements if the County has evidence from its own staff,
a hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer demonstrating that the
premises lacks adequate space for the Collection containers required for
compliance with the SB 1383 organic waste collection requirements of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460, passed - -2023)
§ 46.1404 Collection Frequency Waiver.
   The County, at its discretion and in accordance with 14 CCR § 18984.11(a)
(3), may allow the owner or tenant of any residence, premises, business
establishment or industry that subscribes to the County's three-, three-plus,
or two-container SB 1383 organic waste collection service to arrange for the
collection of their blue container, gray container, or both once every 14 days
rather than once per week.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
§ 46.1405 Review and Approval of Waivers.
   The Director, or designee, shall have the authority to issue all waivers.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4460, passed - -2023)
CHAPTER 15: REQUIREMENTS FOR FACILITY OPERATORS AND COMMUNITY COMPOSTING
OPERATIONS
Section
   
46.1501   Requirements for Facility Operators and Community Composting
Operations.
§ 46.1501 Requirements for Facility Operators and Community Composting
Operations.
   (a)   Owners of facilities, operations, and activities that recover organic
waste, including, but not limited to, compost facilities, in-vessel digestion
facilities, and publicly owned treatment works shall, upon County request,
provide information regarding available and potential new or expanded capacity
at their facilities, operations, and activities, including information about
throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes. Entities
contacted by the County shall respond within 60 days.
   (b)   Community composting operators, upon County request, shall provide
information to the County to support organic waste capacity planning,
including, but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of organic waste
anticipated to be handled at the community composting operation. Entities
contacted by the jurisdiction shall respond within 60 days.
(Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 16: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
Section
   
46.1601   Penalties for Violation.
§ 46.1601 Penalties for Violation.
   A violation of this Division is an infraction punishable as provided in §
11.0201 of this Code. Each and every day constitutes a separate violation of
this provision.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 17: AMENDMENT
Section
   
46.1701   Amendment.
§ 46.1701 Amendment.
   The County retains the right to amend
Division 6 in any respect, notwithstanding the existence of one or more
franchise agreement. Until the commencement date of any extended term of a
franchise agreement, including its extension pursuant to the terms of §
46.0301(d) of this Code, the grantee shall be subject to and bound by the terms
of
Division 6 as same exists on the date of the granting of its franchise
agreement by the County. Each Grantee shall be subject to and bound by the
terms of
Division 6, as amended, upon the commencement date of any extension of the term
of the franchise agreement of the grantee, including its extension pursuant to
the terms of §
46.0301(d) of this Code. The amendments to
Division 6 to which a grantee shall be subject upon the commencement date of
its franchise agreement or of the extension of its franchise agreement shall be
those amendments which have been adopted by the Board (whether or not the
amendment is effective) prior to the following date, as applicable: (i) the
date the Board acts to grant grantee its franchise agreement; (ii) the date by
which the Board is required to determine that the grantee's franchise agreement
shall not be extended, as provided in §
46.0301(d) of this Code, in the event that the franchise agreement is extended
pursuant to the terms of §
46.0301(d) of this Code; or (iii) the date the Board acts to extend the term of
grantee's franchise agreement, if the agreement is extended other than pursuant
to the provisions of §
46.0301(d) of this Code.
(Ord. 4385, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4434, passed - -2022)
TITLE 5: HIGHWAYS, TRAFFIC
Chapter
DIVISION 1: HIGHWAY PERMIT
   
1.   General Provisions
   
2.   Excavation Permits
   
3.   Construction Permits
   
4.   Moving Permits
   
5.   Banner Permits
DIVISION 2: TRAFFIC
   
1.   Vehicle Regulations
   
2.   Boating Regulations
   
3.   Ski Zone Regulations
   
4.   Fishing Zone Regulations
   
5.   Frozen Bodies of Water
   
6.   Water Vehicle Speed and Wake Restrictions on Lake Havasu
   
7.   Regulation of Access by Time of Day and Emergency Rules and Regulations on
the Colorado River
DIVISION 3: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
   
1.   Injury to Roads
   
2.   Signs and Billboards
   
3.   Parking Regulations in Mountain Areas
   
4.   Blinker Lights upon and Adjacent to Public Highways
   
5.   Littering Highways
   
6.   County Parking Lots
   
7.   Sale of Motor Vehicle Fuels
   
8.   Powers of County Road Commissioner to Close or Restrict Use of County
Highways
   
9.   Truck Routes and Parking Regulations in the Chino Hills Community
   
10.   Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund
   
11.   Citation of Vehicles Parked Without Permission of Owner of Private Real
Property for Purposes of Sale of Vehicle
DIVISION 4: VALIDITY OF TITLE 5
 
Editor's Note:
   Ordinance 4046, passed April 8, 2008, repealed and reenacted Title 5.
DIVISION 1: HIGHWAY PERMIT
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
51.0101   Scope of General Provisions.
   
51.0102   Delegation of Authority.
   
51.0103   References to Ordinances or Statutes.
   
51.0104   Terms and Genders.
   
51.0105   Definitions.
   
51.0106   Issuance of Permits by Commissioner.
   
51.0107   Violation.
   
51.0108   Application—Issuance Fee
   
51.0109   Requirement of Plans.
   
51.0110   Performance of Work to Satisfaction of Commissioner.
   
51.0111   Fees, Deposits and Bonds.
   
51.0112   Permits.
   
51.0113   Holding County Harmless.
   
51.0114   Notice of Completion of Work.
   
51.0115   Relocation of Structures—Removal of Encroachment.
   
51.0116   Placement of Material or Obstruction on Highway.
   
51.0117   Interference with Commissioner.
   
51.0118   Invalid Provisions.
   
51.0119   Highway Permit Code.
   
51.0120   Compliance with Housemoving Rules and Regulations.
§ 51.0101   Scope of General Provisions.
   These general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern
the construction of this Division, unless the provision or the context provides
otherwise.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0102   Delegation of Authority.
   Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer,
the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the
officer or by a person authorized, pursuant to law or ordinance, by the
officer, unless this Division expressly provides otherwise.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0103   Reference to Ordinances or Statutes.
   Whenever reference is made to any portion of this Division or any other
ordinance or statute, such reference applies to all amendments and additions
now or hereafter made.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0104   Terms and Genders.
   The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future, the
present. The masculine gender includes the feminine. The singular number
includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0105   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BANNER. In addition to the meanings ordinarily ascribed thereto, shall
include any article of display, advertising or decorative matter, including but
not limited to Christmas, Easter and other holiday festoons on, over, along or
across any highway or highway right-of-way.
   BUILDING and/or STRUCTURE. In addition to the meanings ordinarily ascribed
thereto, includes any machine, implement, device, article of manufacture, tree,
derrick, stage or other setting, lumber, sash or door, structural steel,
dynamo, transformer, generator, press, industrial tooling, agitator, object or
thing having a width of more than eight feet, other than any implement of
husbandry or any special mobile equipment, as defined in the California Vehicle
Code having a width of ten feet or less. The term also includes a vehicle or
load exceeding the maximum permitted by the California Vehicle Code.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino, State of California.
   COMMISSIONER. The Road Commissioner of the County of San Bernardino.
      (1)   COMMISSIONER and ROAD COMMISSIONER OF THE COUNTY OF SAN BERNARDINO
are synonymous with the term DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION OF THE COUNTY OF SAN
BERNARDINO.
   ENCROACHMENT. Includes any tower, pole, pole line, pipe, pipeline, fence,
billboard, stand, or building, or any structure or object of any kind or
character not particularly mentioned in this Division, which is placed in,
under, or over any portion of the highway.
   HIGHWAY. Any public roadway, public street, public way, or public place in
the unincorporated territory of the County, owned or maintained by the County,
or dedicated to the public for the purpose of travel.
   MOVING CONTRACTOR. Any person who for himself, herself or for another, moves
or causes to be moved, any building or structure, over, upon, along or across
any highway.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, this State, any
county, including this County, and all departments and bureaus thereof, city
and county, municipality, district or other political subdivision thereof, or
any other group or combination acting as a unit. Provided, however, that the
above enumeration shall not include the Transportation Department of this
County.
   SECTION. A Section of this Division unless some other ordinance or statute
is specifically mentioned.
   WIDTH. That dimension measured at right angles to the anterior-posterior
axis of the conveyance upon which the building or structure or portion thereof
is, or is to be, loaded or moved, or to the median line of the highway over
which the same is being, or is to be moved.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0106   Issuance of Permits by Commissioner.
   The Commissioner may issue permits, as provided in this Chapter, authorizing
the permittee to do any of the following acts:
   (a)   Make or cause to be made any excavation or opening, fill or
obstruction in, over, along, on, across or through any highway for any purpose,
excepting, however, for or in connection with the installation of poles, guys
and anchors constructed for use under a franchise for public utility purposes
where such poles, guys and anchors are located outside of the paved or traveled
portion of the highway;
   (b)   Construct or repair, or cause to be constructed or repaired any curb,
sidewalk, gutter, driveway, roadway surface, retaining wall, storm drain or
culvert, or work of any nature, or place, change or renew an encroachment in,
over, along, on, across or through any highway, excepting, however, for or in
connection with the installation of poles, guys and anchors constructed for use
under a franchise for public utility purposes where such poles, guys and
anchors are located outside of the paved or traveled portion of the highway;
   (c)   Move or cause to be moved over, upon, along or across any highway, any
building or structure;
   (d)   Place any banner over, across, on, or along any highway;
   (e)   Plant, remove, cut, cut down, injure or destroy any tree, shrub, plant
or flower growing within any highway excepting necessary pruning or trimming to
protect persons or property.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0107   Violation.
   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who violates any provision of this
Chapter or any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, or who
fails or neglects to comply with any requirement of this Chapter, or who does
any of the acts specified in §
51.0106 of this Chapter for which a permit is required, without first obtaining
a permit from the Commissioner so to do.
   Such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during
any part of which any such violation or noncompliance occurs, and is punishable
by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for
not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 2377, passed
- -1979)
§ 51.0108   Application—Issuance Fee.
   An application for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this Division
shall be made in writing and filed with the Commissioner, accompanied by any
deposit required by this Division and an issuance fee of $2.50. Provided,
however, that the United States, the State of California, the County of San
Bernardino, or any other county in the State of California, any municipal
corporation, school district, or other public district or public body, upon
filing a written guarantee of payment of all costs for which they may become
liable to San Bernardino County, shall not be required to make said deposit or
issuance fee. The filing of an application or the issuance of a permit pursuant
to this Section shall not be deemed a waiver of any right or claim of right by
the applicant or permittee.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0109   Requirement of Plans.
   If, in the opinion of the Commissioner, the work proposed to be done
requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the
Commissioner may require the application to be accompanied by the necessary
plans, which plans shall be prepared by a competent engineer.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0110   Performance of Work to Satisfaction of Commissioner.
   The permittee shall perform all work in accordance with plans, if plans are
made, and specifications referred to in the permit, to the satisfaction of and
under the supervision of the Commissioner.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0111   Fees, Deposits and Bonds.
   (a)   Payment. Except as otherwise provided in this Division, the
Commissioner shall not issue any permit until all deposits and issuance fees
have been paid.
   (b)   Issuance Fees Not Refundable. The issuance fees required by the
provisions of this Division are for the purpose of defraying the cost of
issuing the requested permit. No part of any issuance fee may be refunded to
any applicant.
   (c)   Deposit in Funds. Issuance fees and charges for repairs, inspection,
or engineering collected under the provisions of this Division shall be
deposited in the respective funds from which the corresponding disbursements
are made.
   (d)   Waiver of Issuance Fees. At the request of permittee who maintains
with the Commissioner a general deposit as provided in
Chapter 2 or
Chapter 4 of this Division, the Commissioner may waive the requirements
covering prepayment of the issuance fees and bill said permittee for issuance
fees covering permits issued subsequent to such request, provided that the
amount of said deposit is sufficient to cover said fees and to provide for the
other contingencies for which it is given. The Commissioner may revoke such
waiver at any time and must revoke the waiver if the permittee fails to pay his
bill for fees within the required time.
   (e)   General Deposit. In lieu of making any special deposit required by
this Division, the applicant may make and maintain with the Commissioner a
general deposit in an amount estimated by the Commissioner to be sufficient to
pay for the cost of permit issuance fees and expected repairs or costs
occasioned by the future acts of the applicant for which a permit has been
issued. The general deposit shall be held and used for the same purposes as any
special deposit prescribed by this Division would have been used.
   (f)   Undertaking in Lieu of General or Special Deposits. In lieu of making
either a general or special deposit, or to supplement a general deposit not
sufficient in amount, the applicant may file an undertaking with the
Commissioner in a penal sum of not less than $1,000.00. Said undertaking to be
in compliance with Code of Civil Procedure §§ 995.120, 995.260, 995.310,
995.350, 995.529, 995.610, 995.630, 995.660, 996.010 and Penal Code § 1276.
      (1)   Alternative. In lieu of filing an undertaking under the terms set
forth in this Section and Subdivision, an applicant under
Chapter 4 herein may post with the Commissioner forms approved by the County
Counsel consisting of:
         (A)   An endorsement to any policy of insurance naming the applicant,
the County of San Bernardino, State of California, as named insured, and
insuring the same against at least the same contingencies against which the
said bonds would be security, and in an amount not less than $10,000.00; and
         (B)   A certificate by which the insurer certifies that a policy
exists covering the said objects.
Wherever the term UNDERTAKING is used in
Chapter 4 of this Division it includes the forms referred to in §
51.0111(f)(1) herein.
   (g)   Waiver of Special Deposit. While a general deposit is maintained, or
while an undertaking is filed, either or both of which are of an amount
sufficient to cover the amount of any special deposit required by this
Division, the applicant need not make any special deposit.
   (h)   Extra Deposits and Bonds. If, in the opinion of the Commissioner, any
special or general deposit, or any undertaking or any combination thereof is
not sufficient for the proper protection of the public interest in the highways
including any trees thereon, the Commissioner may require either an additional
deposit, or an increase in the amount of the bond in such amount as he or she
determines will be sufficient to protect such public interest.
   (i)   Insufficient Deposits. Where any deposit is determined to be
insufficient to pay all fees and costs provided for in this Division, the
permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the Commissioner an amount equal to the
deficiency.
   Where the permittee fails or refuses to pay the deficiency upon demand, the
Commissioner may recover said deficiency by appropriate action in any court of
competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, no permit shall
be issued to such permittee.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0112   Permits.
   (a)   Issuance of Permit Public Record. If the applicant for a permit
complies with every provision of this Division and with all applicable
provisions of all other ordinances and statutes, the Commissioner shall issue
to the applicant a written permit to perform the work set forth in the
application. Upon the issuance of such permit the application shall become a
public record.
   (b)   Monthly Billing for Permits Issued. Where the Commissioner grants the
waiver provided in §
51.0119(d) of this Chapter, he or she shall bill the permittee at the end of
each month for all permits issued during that month, and the permittee shall
pay said bill not later than the last day of the following month. The
Commissioner may in his or her discretion accept a personal check in payment of
such bill, provided the check is received by the Commissioner not later than
the fifteenth day of the month following the month covered by the billing. The
acceptance of the check constitutes a payment of such bill when, but not
before, the check is duly paid. All such checks shall be deposited daily by the
Commissioner with the County Treasurer.
   (c)   Imposition of Conditions or Changes by Commissioner. Any permit
authorized under any of the provisions of this Division may be issued subject
to such conditions, changes and limitations as are, in the discretion of the
Commissioner, necessary for the protection of the highways, or to prevent undue
interference with traffic, or to protect both persons and property within, upon
or adjacent to said highways from damage or danger.
   The Commissioner may issue a single permit for any number of excavations
which are part of a single project and may also issue a single annual permit
for service connections. Either permit may be exercised by giving not less than
48 hours notice of the Commissioner on a form to be prescribed by the
Commissioner before work is commenced.
   (d)   Reservation of the Power to Change the Conditions after Permit Issued.
Any permit issued by the Commissioner under any of the provisions of this
Division, or the conditions to which it has been made subject, may be amended
or changed if the Commissioner deems such amendment or change to be necessary
for the protection of the highways, or to prevent undue interference with
traffic, or to protect both persons and property within, upon or adjacent to
said highways from damage or danger. Notification of the amendment or change
shall be made by the Commissioner either by mailing written notice to the
permittee at the address indicated on his or her application for the permit, or
by making personal service of said written notice upon the permittee. The
amendment or change shall be effective either 24 hours after said written
notice is deposited in the United States mail, or immediately upon completion
of personal service.
   (e)   Commencement and Completion of Work. Every permittee shall complete
the work within the time required by the permit. Permits issued hereunder shall
be valid only for the period of time specified in the permits, unless the
County Highway Engineer grants a time extension.
   (f)   Refusal to Issue Permit. The Commissioner may refuse to issue permits
or may revoke any outstanding permits heretofore or hereafter issued, or any
portion thereof, where the work has not been started, when the work authorized
by the permits, or such portions thereof is included in the proposed work to be
done, by any existing assessment district, or by any proposed assessment
district for which formation proceedings have been instituted by the Board of
Supervisors.
   (g)   Non-transferability of Permits. Permits issued pursuant to this
Division are non-transferable.
   (h)   Permits Subject to the Use of the Highway by Others. Every permit
granted pursuant to the provisions of this Division, shall be granted subject
to the right of the County or of any other person entitled thereto, to use that
part of such highway for any purpose for which such highway may lawfully be
used.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1937, passed
- -1974)
§ 51.0113   Holding County Harmless.
   On each application the applicant shall sign a statement that he or she
agrees to preserve and save harmless the County and each officer and employee
thereof, from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage
to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of his or
her negligence or the negligence of his or her agents, servants, employees or
contractors in the design or performance of any work undertaken under any
permit granted pursuant to the application.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0114   Notice of Completion of Work.
   Upon completion of any work or act for which a permit has been granted, the
permittee shall notify the Commissioner in writing on a form prescribed by the
Commissioner.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0115   Relocation of Structures—Removal of Encroachment.
   The Commissioner may require any person who, pursuant to a duly issued
permit under this Division, has performed construction work or placed and
maintained any encroachment, to move the same at his or her own cost and
expense to such different location as is specified in a written demand of the
Commissioner, whenever the move is necessary to insure the safety of the
traveling public or to permit the improvement of the highway and may require
the application to contain a signed statement by the applicant to this effect;
provided, however, that the foregoing requirement shall not apply to any right
which has been continuously exercised since a time prior to the date when such
portion of the highway became part of a public highway, or which right exists
by virtue of a document recorded prior to such date in the Office of the County
Recorder of San Bernardino County, California, provided that such right has not
(in either case) been subordinated by a document recorded in such office to the
right of the public to maintain such portion of the highway. The Commissioner
shall not require the applicant to move or change the location of construction
work or encroachments for a temporary purpose. The Commissioner shall specify
in the demand a reasonable time within which the work of relocation must be
commenced, and the permittee must commence such location within the time
specified in said demand and thereafter diligently prosecute the same to
completion.
   In the event the permittee fails to comply with any such demand, the
construction work or encroachment specified in the demand may be removed by the
Commissioner, and the cost thereof may be recovered from the permittee.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0116   Placement of Material or Obstruction on Highway.
   No person shall place or pile any material in or upon any highway or leave
any obstruction or impediment to travel in or upon any highway without a permit
to do so.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0117   Interference with Commissioner.
   A person shall not prevent or obstruct the Commissioner, or his or her duly
authorized representative, in making any inspection authorized by this Division
or in taking any sample or in making any test.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 2377, passed
- -1979)
§ 51.0118   Invalid Provisions.
   If any provision of this Division, or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Division, and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be
affected thereby.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0119   Highway Permit Code.
   This Division shall be known as and may be cited as the “Highway Permit
Code.”
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0120   Compliance with Housemoving Rules and Regulations.
   The permittee shall comply with the Housemoving Rules and Regulations,
County of San Bernardino, as amended, except to the extent that such rules and
regulations are expressly modified or deleted in the permit.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
CHAPTER 2: EXCAVATION PERMITS
Section
   
51.0201   Purpose of Chapter.
   
51.0202   Application.
   
51.0203   Proof of Right to Use Highway.
   
51.0204   Special Deposit for Surface Repairs.
   
51.0205   Specification in Permit for Warning Signs.
   
51.0206   Precautionary Warning Measures.
   
51.0207   Refilling Excavation or Removal of Obstruction.
   
51.0208   Resurfacing of Highway.
   
51.0209   Deductions From Deposits and Refund of Excess Deposit.
   
51.0210   Additional Highway Repairs and Placing of a Bond for That Purpose.
   
51.0211   Necessity as Permissive Delay in Obtaining Permit.
   
51.0212   Certificate of Acceptance.
   
51.0213   Removal of Material and Debris.
§ 51.0201   Purpose of Chapter.
   The provisions of this Chapter apply to the making of applications for and
the granting and control of permits for the making of excavations, openings,
fills or obstructions in any highway.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0202   Application.
   An applicant for an excavation permit shall complete and file with the
Commissioner an application in duplicate conforming with the provisions of §
51.0108 of this Division which shall contain, in addition thereto, the
following:
   (a)   The location, dimensions, purpose, extent and nature of the work to be
performed;
   (b)   The proposed date and time of day when said work will be commenced;
   (c)   The proposed date and time of day when said work will be completed;
   (d)   Such other information as the Commissioner may require; and shall file
with the application a plat in quadruplicate clearly showing the highways
affected and the exact locations and dimensions of the proposed excavations, as
well as any other details that the Commissioner prescribes. Provided, however,
that when excavations are made for service connections or for the location of
trouble in conduits or pipes, or for making repairs thereto, the Commissioner
may waive the filing of a plat.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0203   Proof of Right to Use Highway.
   Each applicant for a permit shall file with the Commissioner, if required by
the Commissioner, proof of the applicant’s right to use the highways for the
purposes set forth in the application.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0204   Special Deposit for Surface Repairs.
   Each applicant for a permit, in addition to the payment of the issuance fee,
shall deposit with the Commissioner a sum of money in no event less than
$10.00, which is twice the estimated cost to the nearest $5.00 for repairing
the surface of the highway which may be damaged or destroyed by the proposed
excavation or obstruction. Provided, however, that where a faithful performance
bond is posted which guarantees to the County the repair of the highway,
including construction financed in whole or in part by special assessments, no
deposits for repairs shall be required of applicant.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0205   Specification in Permit for Warning Signs.
   In any permit issued by him or her, the Commissioner may specify what
lights, barriers, barricades, warning signs or other measures designed to
protect the traveling public must be erected by the permittee, which measures
shall be in accordance with State Highway Regulations.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0206   Precautionary Warning Measures.
   If the permit does not specify the precautionary measures to be taken by the
permittee, such as the erection of barriers, barricades or warning signs, the
permittee shall place and maintain warning lights at each end of such
excavation or obstruction and at distances of not more than 50 feet along such
excavation or obstruction from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day,
until such excavation is entirely refilled and resurfaced or such obstruction
is removed and every said person shall place and maintain barriers, or
barricades, at each end of any said excavation or obstruction at all times
until such excavation is entirely refilled or such obstruction is removed.
   Barriers, barricades and warning devices shall conform to the same
configuration and standards provided for in the current Department of Public
Works publication entitled Manual of Warning Signs, Lights, and Devices for Use
in Performance of Work Upon Highways.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0207   Refilling Excavation or Removal of Obstruction.
   Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation or
obstruction permitted by any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, the
permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner refill the excavation or
remove time obstruction in a manner which the Commissioner determines is most
effective to accomplish thorough consolidation and enable the highway to be
restored to a condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to the
excavation or obstruction.
   After refilling has been completed, the top surface of excavations made in
improved streets shall be covered with not less than one inch nor more that two
inches of pre-mixed bituminous material satisfactory to the Commissioner and
shall conform closely enough to the level of the adjoining surface and shall be
compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be safe for pedestrian
travel over it as well as for vehicular traffic to pass safely over it at a
legal rate of speed. The permittee shall maintain the surface of the refill
safe for pedestrian and vehicular traffic until the excavation has been
resurfaced in accordance with §
51.0208.
   (a)   Failure to Refill Excavation. If any permittee fails or refuses to
refill any excavation which he or she has made, or remove any obstruction which
he or she has placed in any highway, the Commissioner may so do and charge the
cost thereof to the permittee.
   (b)   Notice of Refilling Excavation. Upon completion of the refilling of
the excavation for which a permit has been issued, the permittee shall notify
the Commissioner in writing on a form prescribed by the Commissioner.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0208   Resurfacing of Highway.
   Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation, the Commissioner, at his
or her option, may require the permittee to resurface that portion of the
highway surface damaged by the permittee’s excavation or obstruction, or the
Commissioner may elect to do such resurfacing himself or herself. Where the
pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a
thickness of one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface,
and, in no event, to a thickness less than two inches.
   Where a treated or modified subgrade or surface has been removed or
destroyed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness of not less than that
of the surrounding or adjacent subgrade or surface, unless the Road
Commissioner orders that the repair of such treated or modified subgrade or
surface shall be made by an oil and rock mixture, in which case the thickness
shall not be less than one-half the thickness of the treated or modified
surface or subgrade.
   (a)   Failure to Resurface Highway. If, after the refilling of an excavation
the permittee fails or refuses to resurface that portion of the surface of the
highway damaged by him or her, or if the Commissioner elects to do such
resurfacing, the Commissioner may do such resurfacing. The cost of such
resurfacing shall be charged against the permittee except in those instances
where the permittee’s excavation is within an area of pavement to be
immediately reconstructed by the County, and the resurfacing of the excavation
is an integral part of the general County improvement. The cost shall be
computed as provided in §
51.0204.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0209   Deductions From Deposits and Refund of Excess Deposit.
   The Commissioner shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the
permittee:
   (a)   The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid;
   (b)   The cost to the County for refilling any excavation or removing any
obstruction;
   (c)   The cost to the County for resurfacing the highway;
   (d)   The cost of any inspection by the Commissioner.
   After making the proper deductions, the Commissioner shall refund any
remaining amount to the applicant in the same manner as provided by law for the
repayment of trust moneys. Provided, however, that if a person makes and
maintains with the Commissioner either a general deposit or an undertaking as
provided by this Division, the deductions provided for herein need not be made.
In lieu of such deductions, the Commissioner may bill such persons for the
amount owed by him or her to the County, under the provisions of this Division.
If such amount is not paid within 15 days of the transmission of such bill, the
Commissioner may deduct such amount from the general deposit, and the
provisions of §
51.0111(i) shall apply, or may recover upon such undertaking.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0210   Additional Highway Repairs and Placing of a Bond for That Purpose.
   The highway surface excavated or damaged shall be replaced by the permittee
to as good or better condition as the same was in before such work was begun
and shall be maintained for the life of the utility encroaching in the public
road after the completion of the work performed under the permit, during which
life time period the permittee shall repair and make good any injury or damage
to any portion of the highway which occurs as a result of work done under the
permit, including any and all injury and damage to the highway which would not
have occurred had such work under said permit not been done.
   The permittee shall maintain a bond with the Commissioner in an amount
prescribed by the Commissioner sufficient to comply with the repairs required
in this Section, which shall be forfeited and the proceeds used by the
Commissioner to perform the necessary repair work prescribed by this Section in
the event the permittee fails to make said repairs.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 2377, passed
- -1979)
§ 51.0211   Necessity as Permissive Delay in Obtaining Permit.
   Nothing in this Chapter prohibits any person from maintaining by virtue of
any law, ordinance, or permit, any pipe or conduit in any highway, or from
making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or
property, if the person making such excavation obtains a permit therefor within
one day after the offices of the Commissioner are first opened subsequent to
the making of such excavation.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0212   Certificate of Acceptance.
   If the Commissioner, by survey or by inspection or by both, ascertains that
the work contemplated by this Chapter has been completed according to the
requirements of the permit issued therefor, and of all of the provisions of
this Division, he or she shall issue, if requested so to do by the permittee, a
certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location,
nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
§ 51.0213   Removal of Material and Debris.
   A permittee, upon completion of any work for which a permit under this
Chapter has been issued, shall remove all material and debris:
   (a)   Where new work is covered with earth, in accordance with the terms of
the specifications attached to the permit;
   (b)   In all other cases within three days.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 922, passed - -1960)
CHAPTER 3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
Section
   
51.0301   Scope of Chapter.
   
51.0302   Application.
   
51.0303   Permit Deposits and Refunds.
   
51.0304   Waiver of Inspection Fees.
   
51.0305   (Deleted by Ord. 1327, passed - -1966).
   
51.0306   Request and Waiver of Inspection.
   
51.0307   Warning Signs and Precautionary Measures.
   
51.0308   Certification of Acceptance.
   
51.0309   Removal of Material and Debris.
   
51.0310   Failure of Permittee to Protect the Road or the Traveling Public or
Complete the Work.
§ 51.0301   Scope of Chapter.
   The provisions of this Chapter apply to applications for the granting and
control of permits for the laying, constructing, reconstructing, or repaving of
curbs, sidewalks, gutters, driveways, highway surfaces, retaining walls, storm
drains, culverts, or other appurtenant highway structures in any highway,
except that permits for residential driveways may be obtained from either the
Road Department or the Building and Safety Department.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 1937, passed - -1974)
§ 51.0302   Application.
   An applicant for a construction permit shall complete and file with the
Commissioner an application in duplicate, conforming with the provisions of §
51.0108 of this Division which shall contain, in addition thereto, the
following:
   (a)   The location, nature, and extent of the work to be performed;
   (b)   The materials to be used;
   (c)   The proposed date and time of day when said work will be commenced;
   (d)   The proposed date and time of day when said work will be completed;
   (e)   Such other information as the Commissioner may require.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0303   Permit Deposits and Refunds.
   An applicant for a permit to construct any work, except curbs, walks,
gutters or highway surfaces, shall, in addition to the issuance fee, pay or
make a deposit in an amount estimated by the Commissioner to be equal to twice
the actual cost of all necessary engineering and inspection costs.
   An applicant for a permit to construct a driveway with surfacing other than
dirt, gravel or decomposed rock, shall, in addition to the issuance fee, pay an
engineering and/or inspection fee as follows:
   (a)   For each residential driveway, $1.50.
   (b)   For each commercial drive, $10.00.
   The engineering and inspection costs herein provided for in Subdivision (a)
and (b) of §
51.0303 shall be presumed to be the actual cost. A refund shall not be made to
any applicant unless the inspection and/or engineering fee was erroneously
collected, in which case the entire amount may be returned, or if the driveway
or driveways were not constructed by the permittee, the applicant may apply for
a refund of the unused fees less a charge of $1.50 on the permit for site
inspection costs. Where the deposit has been made for other than driveway
construction work, the Commissioner shall, for refund purposes, deduct from the
deposit in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust, the
required engineering and inspection. If such cost and fee is less than the
deposit, the difference shall be refunded to the person making the deposit in
the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys.
   If the cost, plus the issuance fee, exceeds the amount of the deposit, the
permittee shall pay the deficiency to the Commissioner. If the applicant fails
to pay said deficiency within 15 days, the Commissioner may recover such sum in
any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such amount is paid, further permits
shall not be issued.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0304   Waiver of Inspection Fees.
   The Commissioner shall issue without any inspection fee or deposit therefor,
a permit to construct a residential driveway if the applicant for such permit
pays the issuance fee and submits satisfactory evidence to the Commissioner
that:
   (a)   The distance from the curb line to the property line does not exceed
ten feet;
   (b)   There is no space between the sidewalk and the curb;
   (c)   The edge of the sidewalk closest to any private property line is not
farther than five feet from said private property line; and
   (d)   The driveway will be competently inspected by a governmental agency
other than an agency of the County, and such governmental agency will furnish a
certificate to the effect that that portion of the driveway installed in the
public right-of-way was inspected and complies with minimum standards required
by the County.
   Provided, however, that if an applicant receives a permit pursuant to
Subdivision (d) of this Section and the governmental agency referred to therein
fails to make the inspection or fails to file the certificate there provided
for within four months of the issuance of the permit, the Commissioner himself
or herself may inspect the driveway in which case the applicant shall pay to
the Commissioner the actual cost of such inspection.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0305   (Deleted by Ord. 1327, passed - -1966).
§ 51.0306   Request and Waiver of Inspection.
   Not less than 18 hours before the commencement of any work covered by this
Chapter, the permittee shall apply in writing to the Commissioner for an
inspection therefor. In such application he or she shall specify the day and
hour when, and the location at which, the work will be commenced. The
Commissioner may waive any inspection if he or she believes such inspection is
not necessary for the best interests of the County.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0307   Warning Signs and Precautionary Measures.
   If the permit does not specify the precautionary measures to be taken by the
permittee, such as the erection of barriers, barricades or warning signs, the
permittee shall place and maintain warning lights at each end of such
excavation or obstruction and at distances of not more than 50 feet along such
excavation or obstruction from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day,
until such excavation is entirely refilled and resurfaced or such obstruction
is removed and every said person shall place and maintain barriers, or
barricades, at each end of any said excavation or obstruction at all times
until such excavation is entirely refilled or such obstruction is removed.
   Barriers, barricades and warning devices shall conform to the same
configuration and standards provided for in the current Department of Public
Works publication entitled Manual of Warning Signs, Lights, and Devices for Use
in Performance of Work Upon Highways.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0308   Certification Acceptance.
   If the Commissioner, by survey or by inspection or by both, ascertains that
the work contemplated by this Chapter has been completed according to the
requirements of the permit issued therefor, and of all of the provisions of
this Division, he or she shall issue, if requested so to do by the permittee, a
certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location,
nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0309   Removal of Material and Debris.
   A permittee, upon completion of any work for which a permit under this
Chapter has been issued, shall remove all material and debris:
   (a)   Where new work is covered with earth, in accordance with the terms of
the specifications attached to the permit.
   (b)   In all other cases within three days.
§ 51.0310   Failure of Permittee to Protect the Road or the Traveling Public or
Complete the Work.
   If a permittee unnecessarily damages the road, creates a hazard or otherwise
endangers the traveling public, or the road, or fails to complete the work
within the prescribed time, or authorized extension thereof, the County Highway
Engineer may take corrective action. The cost of such correction work shall be
charged against the permittee.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957; Am. Ord. 1937, passed - -1974)
CHAPTER 4: MOVING PERMITS
Section
   
51.0401   Scope of Chapter.
   
51.0402   Application.
   
51.0403   Approval by Building and Safety Department.
   
51.0404   Time Limit for Commissioner to Act on Permit Application.
   
51.0405   Trees.
   
51.0406   Classification of Buildings and Structures.
   
51.0407   Moving Permit Fees.
   
51.0408   Compliance of Permit with the State Weight Limits.
   
51.0409   Amount of Deposit.
   
51.0410   Display of Permit.
   
51.0411   Appointment of a Supervising Moving Inspector.
   
51.0412   Construction of Runways.
   
51.0413   Restoration Highway.
   
51.0414   Warning Lights for Moving of Buildings or Structures.
   
51.0415   Deductions From Deposits and Refund of Deposits.
   
51.0416   Maintenance of General Deposit or Undertaking in Lieu of Deductions.
   
51.0417   Issuance of Moving Permit—Specific Types of Equipment.
   
51.0418   Rules and Regulations.
§ 51.0401   Scope of Chapter.
   The provisions of this Chapter apply to the making of applications for and
granting and control of permits for the moving of buildings and structures.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0402   Application.
   An applicant for a moving permit shall complete and file with the
Commissioner an application in duplicate conforming with the provisions of §
51.0108 of this Division, which shall contain, in addition thereto, the
following:
   (a)   The kind of building or structure to be moved;
   (b)   The approximate weight thereof, as nearly as may be ascertained;
   (c)   The present location of the building or structure;
   (d)   The location to which said building or structure is to be moved;
   (e)   The proposed route over or along which such building or structure is
to be moved;
   (f)   The number of sections in which the building or structure will be
moved;
   (g)   The type and number of conveyances upon which the building or
structure is to be moved;
   (h)   The proposed date and time of day when the removal of said building,
structure, or portion thereof, is to be commenced;
   (i)   The proposed date and time of day when said removal will be completed.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0403   Approval by Building and Safety Department.
   If the building or structure to be moved is subject to regulation by the San
Bernardino County Building and Safety Department, the applicant shall obtain
and file with his or her application a Building and Safety Department approval
for the moving of said building or structure.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0404   Time Limit for Commissioner to Act on Permit Application.
   Within 15 working days after receipt of the application for a moving permit,
the Road Commissioner shall:
   (a)   Determine whether or not the moving of any building or structure as
proposed in the application can be accomplished without excessive or damaging
tree trimming;
   (b)   Alter or prescribe the route over or along which the building or
structure or portion thereof is to be moved;
   (c)   Determine the number of sections in which such building or structure
shall be moved;
   (d)   Elect to do or not to do any or all of the tree trimming rendered
necessary by the moving of the building or structure;
   (e)   Determine the total estimated cost of such trimming.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0405   Trees.
   (a)   Commissioner’s Authority. A permit granted under this Chapter does not
permit, license, or allow any person, firm or corporation whatever except the
Commissioner to trim, prune, cut, or deface in any manner any tree upon any
grounds or property belonging to the County or upon any road, street or
highway.
   (b)   Supervision of Cutting Trees. At the written request of a moving
contractor holding an unrevoked permit granted pursuant to the provisions of
this Chapter, the Commissioner, subject to his or her election to so do, as
provided in § 51.0404, within a reasonable time after such request, shall,
where it will not harm the trees, trim such trees under his or her supervision,
only to the extent necessary to move the building or structure to the location
specified in the permit.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0406   Classification of Buildings and Structures.
   All buildings and structures are hereby classified as follows:
   (a)   Class “A” is any building or structure or any portion thereof which is
moved on a motor truck or other vehicle propelled by its own power;
   (b)   Class “B” is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of
Class “A” which is not more than 16 feet in width;
   (c)   Class “C” is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of
Class “A” which is more than 16 feet and not more than 22 feet in width;
   (d)   Class “D” is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of
Class “A” which is more than 22 feet and not more than 28 feet in width;
   (e)   Class “E” is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of
Class “A” which is more than 28 feet and not more than 40 feet in width;
   (f)   Class “F” is any building or structure or any portion thereof, not of
Class “A” which is more than 40 feet in width.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0407   Moving Permit Fees.
   Every applicant for a moving permit from whom an issuance fee is required,
who does not maintain a sufficient general deposit or undertaking with the
Commissioner, shall deposit with the Commissioner:
   1.   Ten dollars for a Class “A” permit;
   2.   Twenty-five dollars for a Class “B” permit;
   3.   Fifty dollars for a Class “C” permit;
   4.   One hundred dollars for a Class “D” permit;
   5.   Two hundred fifty dollars for a Class “E” permit;
   6.   Three hundred dollars for a Class “F” permit.
   (a)   Trimming Deposits. If the Commissioner elects to do any part or all of
the necessary tree trimming before any permit is issued, in addition to any
deposit made as required by this Section, the applicant shall also deposit with
the Commissioner an amount equal to that estimated by the Commissioner pursuant
to §
51.0404 to cover the cost of such necessary tree trimming.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0408   Compliance of Permit With the State Weight Limits.
   The Commissioner shall not issue a permit to move any building or structure
when the weight of such building or structure, plus the weight of the vehicle
or other equipment, exceeds the weight permitted by the California Vehicle
Code, except that if it appears to the Commissioner that the size, shape or
physical characteristics of the building or structure or portion thereof, to be
moved, or of the highway over which such building or structure is to be moved,
makes it impossible or impracticable to keep within such weight limits, the
Commissioner may issue a permit to move a building or structure on a vehicle
every wheel of which is equipped with pneumatic tires.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0409   Amount of Deposit.
   Before any permittee moves any building, structure or portion thereof, of a
class higher than the class for which he or she has made any general or special
deposit, he or she shall increase such deposit in an amount sufficient to cover
the class sought to be moved.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0410   Display of Permit.
   The moving contractor shall affix and maintain at all times while it is on
the highway, in a conspicuous place on the building or structure to be moved,
the permit for such moving.
   Where a building or structure is moved in more than one section, and more
than one of such sections is moved at the same time, the moving contractor
shall affix and maintain at all times while they are on the highway, in
conspicuous places on each section on which the original permit is not affixed,
true copies of such permit. Such true copies shall be issued by the
Commissioner upon payment to him or her by applicant of an issuance fee of
$0.25 for each additional copy.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0411   Appointment of a Supervising Moving Inspector.
   The Commissioner may require that the moving of any building or structure be
under the supervision of an inspector to be appointed by the Commissioner. The
permittee shall pay to the Commissioner an amount equal to the compensation and
cost of transportation of such inspector during the time he or she is assigned
to such inspection.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0412   Construction of Runways.
   When so required by the Commissioner, a moving contractor shall place under
each dolly or wheel used in moving the building or structure, boards or planks
of adequate width and strength to carry the load without being broken, to serve
as a runway for such dolly or wheel during such moving along any portion of any
highway which has a surface other than natural soil. The moving contractor
shall prevent such dolly or wheel from ever revolving on or resting on such
surface except upon such board, plank or runway.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0413   Restoration Highway.
   The Commissioner may restore, or cause to be restored, every highway damaged
by the moving of any building or structure thereon, to a condition equivalent
to that prior to such damage, and may require the posting of a bond to secure
said restoration. The moving contractor who caused such damage shall pay the
cost of the repair thereof to the Commissioner.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0414   Warning Lights for Moving of Buildings or Structures.
   When a building or structure while being moved is located on any highway, at
all times between sunset and sunrise, the moving contractor shall keep and
maintain burning a red warning light not over six feet above the surface of
such highway at each corner of such building or structure, and unless the Road
Commissioner otherwise directs, on all sides and projections thereof at
intervals of not more than five feet.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0415   Deductions From Deposits and Refund of Deposits.
   The Commissioner shall deduct from the deposit made or maintained by each
permittee:
   (a)   The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid;
   (b)   The cost of the services and transportation of any inspector appointed
pursuant to §
51.0411;
   (c)   The cost of any repairs made necessary because of the moving of the
building or structure;
   (d)   The total cost of all tree trimming done by said Commissioner made
necessary in order to move the building or structure as specified in the
permit, including all such trimming after the moving of the building or
structure to correct trimming done when the structure was moved.
   The remainder of any such special deposit, if there is any remainder, shall
be refunded to the person, firm or corporation making such deposit, or to his
or its assigns. In the event the deposit made pursuant hereto is insufficient
to pay all fees and deductions provided for herein, the person, firm or
corporation to whom such permit is issued, shall, upon demand pay to the
Commissioner a sufficient sum to fully cover the same. Such unpaid sums may be
recovered by the Commissioner in any court of competent jurisdiction, and until
paid, no further permit under the provisions of this Division shall be issued
to such moving contractor.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0416   Maintenance of General Deposit or Undertaking in Lieu of
Deductions.
   If a moving contractor makes and maintains either a general deposit with the
Commissioner or an undertaking as provided in this Division, the deductions
provided for in §
51.0415 need not be made. In lieu of such deductions, the Commissioner may bill
the moving contractor for the amount due from him or her to the County under
the provisions of this Division. If, 15 days after such bill has been sent, the
moving contractor does not pay the same in full, then such amount may be
deducted from his or her general deposit and the provisions of §
51.0415 shall apply, or the Road Commissioner shall recover upon such
undertaking.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0417   Issuance of Moving Permit - Specific Types of Equipment.
   The Commissioner may, in his or her discretion, upon application in writing
and if good cause appears, issue a permit authorizing the applicant to operate
or move over and along highways, specific pieces of mobile mechanical equipment
or specific vehicles or specific pieces of mechanical equipment on specific
vehicles, or emergency public utility equipment on specific vehicles. Any such
permit shall be subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   The permit shall be limited to specified highways or a specified area
of the County and shall specifically describe the highways or the area of the
County to which it is limited. This limitation shall be fixed by the
Commissioner so as to afford protection to highways and the traveling public.
   (b)   The granting of the permit shall in no way relieve the permittee from
liability for damage to the highways or to persons or property.
   (c)   The permit shall be issued for a specific period of time designated by
the Commissioner and set forth in the permit, which period shall not exceed one
year.
   (d)   The permit may be issued subject to such other conditions as the Road
Commissioner deems necessary for the protection of the highways and the
traveling public.
   The application for a permit pursuant to this Section shall be made on a
form furnished by the Commissioner and shall contain the information required
by Vehicle Code §§ 35780 et seq. and such other information as may be required
by the Road Commissioner. The application shall be accompanied by payment of a
fee of $10.00 which shall be in lieu of any other fee prescribed by this
Division. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall file with
the Road Commissioner, a surety bond satisfactory to the Commissioner, in the
amount of $5,000.00 for the protection of highways from injury and to provide
indemnity for any damage resulting from the operation or movement under the
permit. The filing of such bond shall, for the purpose of this Section,
constitute compliance with the requirements contained in this Chapter relating
to the deposit of money with the Road Commissioner. A single $5,000.00 bond
may, in the discretion of the Commissioner, be deemed sufficient security for
the issuance of one or more permits to the same applicant pursuant to this
Section.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
§ 51.0418   Rules and Regulations.
   The permittee shall comply with the Housemoving Rules and Regulations,
County of San Bernardino, as amended, except to the extent that such rules and
regulations are expressly modified or deleted in the permit.
(Am. Ord. 1287, passed - -1966)
CHAPTER 5: BANNER PERMITS
Section
   
51.0501   Scope of Chapter.
   
51.0502   Application.
   
51.0503   Purpose of Permit.
   
51.0504   Duration.
   
51.0505   Special Banner Permit.
   
51.0506   Public Liability and Property Damage Coverage.
   
51.0507   Installation.
   
51.0508   Deductions and Refunds of Deposits.
   
51.0509   Removal of Material and Debris.
§ 51.0501   Scope of Chapter.
   The provisions of this Chapter apply to the making of applications for and
the granting and control of permits for the placing, erection, maintaining and
removal of banners extending over, upon or along any highway or any portion
thereof.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0502   Application.
   An applicant for a banner permit shall complete and file with the
Commissioner an application in duplicate conforming with the provisions of §
51.0108 of this Division which shall contain, in addition thereto, the
following:
   (a)   The location, dimensions, and purpose of the banner;
   (b)   A facsimile of the proposed banner, including any legend or written
matter;
   (c)   The proposed date and the time of day when said banner will be
installed;
   (d)   The proposed date and time of day when said banner will be removed;
   (e)   Such other information as the Commissioner may require.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0503   Purpose of Permit.
   Permits issued under this Chapter shall be granted only to civic
organizations or public bodies for the purpose of bringing to the attention of
the public, events which are of a general public interest. No permit shall be
issued to further political, religious, or private purposes.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0504   Duration.
   No permit shall be granted for a period of more than 40 days.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0505   Special Banner Permit.
   Every applicant for a banner permit from whom an issuance fee is required
and who does not maintain a sufficient general deposit or undertaking with the
Commissioner, shall deposit with the Commissioner, $10.00 for each banner
permit.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0506   Public Liability and Property Damage Coverage.
   An applicant shall submit proof of public liability and property damage to
the Commissioner in an amount of not less than $100,000.00 for any one person
killed or injured, and $250,000.00 total liability for any one accident, and an
amount of not less than $50,000.00 for property damage.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0507   Installation.
   The Commissioner may require that the installation of any banner be under
the supervision of an inspector appointed by the Commissioner, for which the
permittee shall pay the Commissioner an amount equal to the compensation and
cost of transportation of such inspector during the time he or she is assigned
to such inspection.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0508   Deductions and Refunds of Deposits.
   The Commissioner shall deduct from the deposit made or maintained by the
permittee the following:
   (a)   The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid;
   (b)   The cost of the service and transportation of any inspector;
   (c)   The cost of any repairs made necessary because of installation of the
banner.
   The remainder of any such special deposit, if any, shall be refunded to the
permittee.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
§ 51.0509   Removal of Material and Debris.
   A permittee, upon the removal of any banner for which a permit under this
Chapter has been issued, shall remove from the highway all material and debris
resulting from the installation, maintenance or removal of any banner, within
24 hours after the removal of a banner.
(Ord. 815, passed - -1957)
DIVISION 2: TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1: VEHICLE REGULATIONS
Section
   
52.0101   Title.
   
52.0102   Definitions.
   
52.0103   Vehicle Code Definitions.
   
52.0104   Required Obedience to Traffic Code.
   
52.0105   Scope.
   
52.0106   Exemption of Certain Vehicles.
   
52.0107   Traffic Control Devices.
   
52.0108   Turning Movements.
   
52.0109   One-Way Streets.
   
52.0110   Closing of Streets.
   
52.0111   Through Highways.
   
52.0112   Application of Stopping, Standing and Parking Regulations.
   
52.0113   Standing Prohibited Between Roadways.
   
52.0114   Parking Parallel with Curb.
   
52.0115   Parking on Narrow Streets—Prohibited.
   
52.0116   Parking Adjacent to Schools.
   
52.0117   Stopping or Standing Prohibited in Specified Places.
   
52.0118   Restriction or Prohibition of Parking.
   
52.0119   Use of Streets for Storage of Vehicles Prohibited.
   
52.0120   Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited.
   
52.0121   Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only.
   
52.0122   Additional Parking Regulations.
   
52.0123   Speed Zones.
   
52.0124   Crosswalks.
   
52.0125   Weight Limitations.
   
52.0126   Weight Limits on Bridges.
   
52.0127   Miscellaneous Provisions.
   
52.0128   Restriction or Prohibition of Parking of Commercial Vehicles.
   
52.0129   Procedure for Establishing Terminal Routes.
   
52.0130   Penalty.
   
52.0131   Prohibition of Certain Vehicles on Highways.
   
52.0132   Designated No Parking/Tow-Away Zones.
§ 52.0101   Title.
   This Chapter shall be known as the County Traffic Code.
   (a)   Provision Not Affected by Headings. Chapter and section headings
contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, or modify, or in any
manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any chapter or section hereof.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2778, passed - -1983)
§ 52.0102   Definitions.
   Whenever in this Chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the
meaning respectively ascribed to them in this Chapter.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2778, passed - -1983)
§ 52.0103   Vehicle Code Definitions.
   Whenever any words or phrases used in this Chapter are not defined herein,
but are now defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, such
definitions as now existing are incorporated herein and shall be deemed to
apply to such words and phrases as used in this Chapter as though set forth
herein in full.
   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare, not exceeding 25 feet in width for the use of
pedestrians and/or vehicles, which affords only a secondary means of access to
the abutting property.
   BOARD. The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino.
   BUS LOADING ZONE. That space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway
reserved for the exclusive use of busses during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
   CHAPTER. A chapter of this Division, unless the chapter of some other
Division or law is indicated.
   HOLIDAYS. Within the meaning of this Chapter, holidays are January 1,
February 12, February 22, May 30, July 4, the first Monday in September,
September 9, October 12, November 11, December 25, Thanksgiving Day, and any
day proclaimed a holiday by the President of the United States or the Governor
of California.
   LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway reserved for
the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of
passengers.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices
not inconsistent with this Chapter, placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. Any device whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternatively directed to stop and
proceed, and which may be equipped with a flashing feature which when operated,
discontinues normal signal operation and causes the flashing of any
predetermined combination of signal lights, and which is erected by authority
of a public body or official having jurisdiction.
   PARK. To leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading of passengers or materials.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   ROAD COMMISSIONER. The Road Commissioner of the County of San Bernardino.
   SECTION. A Section of this Chapter, unless the section of some other
ordinance or law is specified.
   STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION. The Department of Transportation of the
State of California.
   STOP or STAND.
   (a)   The word STOP means the complete cessation of movement.
   (b)   The words STOP OR STAND mean any stopping or standing of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except where necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official
traffic control device.
   TIME. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time
or daylight- saving time as may be in current use in the unincorporated
territory of the County of San Bernardino.
   VEHICLE CODE. The Vehicle Code of the State of California.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 1420, passed - -1968; Am. Ord.
2778, passed - -1983)
§ 52.0104   Required Obedience to Traffic Code.
   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to
perform any act required by this Chapter.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2778, passed - -1983)
§ 52.0105   Scope.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, the State, or
any county or city. It shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of
the provisions of this Chapter except as otherwise permitted in this Chapter or
by State statute.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2778, passed - -1983)
§ 52.0106   Exemption of Certain Vehicles.
   (a)   The provisions of this Chapter regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle that has qualified under
the Vehicle Code as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any such vehicle is
operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an
emergency call.
   (b)   The foregoing exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety of
others.
   (c)   The provisions of this Chapter regulating parking or standing of
vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the Transportation Department of the
County of San Bernardino or of the State Department of Transportation, while
necessarily in use for the construction, repair work, survey work, or traffic
engineering investigations on any highway or any vehicle owned by the United
States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of the
United States mail.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2778, passed - -1983)
§ 52.0107   Traffic Control Devices.
   (a)   Signs. The Road Commissioner shall determine and designate the size,
shape and character of all official warning, regulatory, and direction signs,
other than signs the size, shape and character of which have been established
by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to the Vehicle Code.
      (1)   Violation. No provision of this Chapter for which signs are
required, shall be enforced against an alleged violator thereof, unless
appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provision.
   (b)   Authorization and Placing of Signals.
      (1)   The Board shall by resolution designate, upon the basis of a
traffic engineering investigation, what intersections shall be controlled by
official traffic control signals.
      (2)   Whenever the Board finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation, that the conditions, because of which traffic control signals
have been placed at an intersection pursuant to §
52.0107(b), no longer exist, the Board shall by resolution direct that such
traffic control signals be removed.
      The Road Commissioner is hereby authorized to place, maintain, operate or
remove, or cause to be placed, maintained, operated or removed, all official
traffic control signals authorized by the Board as herein provided. Such
official traffic signals shall conform to the provisions of the Vehicle Code.
   (c)   Hours of Operation. The Road Commissioner is hereby authorized to
determine, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, the hours and
days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in
effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this
Chapter or established by resolution of the Board.
    (d)   Installation by Road Commissioner.
      (1)   The Road Commissioner may place and maintain such traffic control
devices in addition to those authorized by other provisions of this Chapter as
may be necessary to regulate, guide or warn traffic, but the Road Commissioner
shall make such determination upon the basis of traffic engineering principles
and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations
and rules as may be established by ordinance or resolution of the Board.
      (2)   Whenever the Road Commissioner finds, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, that the conditions, because of which such traffic
control devices have been installed as provided in §
52.0107(d), no longer exist, the Road Commissioner shall remove such traffic
control devices.
   (e)   Traffic Markings. The Road Commissioner is hereby authorized to place,
upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, traffic guide lines,
dividing highways into the number of traffic lanes that are proper and
necessary, and may place such other pavement markings as are necessary to
direct vehicular movements in accordance with requirements of this Chapter and
the Vehicle Code.
   Whenever the Road Commissioner finds, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, that the conditions, because of which traffic guide
lines or other markings were placed as provided in §
52.0101(e), no longer exist, the Road Commissioner shall remove such traffic
guide lines or such markings.
   (f)   Temporary Removal. Whenever, because of the construction, alteration,
repair or improvement of any highway, or because of other emergency, compliance
with any prohibition of this Chapter, including a prohibition pursuant to any
action of the Board taken in accordance with this Chapter, will create a
traffic hazard and the Road Commissioner so finds, he or she is hereby
authorized to either remove or cover up any traffic control device which
informs persons of such prohibition. While such traffic control device is
removed or covered, the effect of such prohibition is suspended. At the end of
such emergency, unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Road Commissioner
shall replace or uncover such traffic control device.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2778, passed - -1983)
§ 52.0108   Turning Movements.
   (a)   Restricted Turn Signals.
      (1)   Pursuant to the Vehicle Code, whenever the Board determines, upon
the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that the prohibition of the
making or any turning movement by any vehicle at any intersection or between
any designated intersections is necessary, the Board shall by resolution direct
the Road Commissioner to erect any appropriate sign or signs stating the
prohibition of such turning movements. The sign or signs may be supplemented by
appropriate pavement markings.
      (2)   Whenever the Board finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation, that the conditions because of which such turning movements at
such intersections or between such intersections has been prohibited as
provided in §
52.0108(a)(1), no longer exist, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such sign or signs and pavement markings.
   (b)   Turn Markers and Multiple Lanes.
      (1)   Pursuant to the Vehicle Code, the Board hereby authorizes the Road
Commissioner, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, to place
markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections and thereby
require and direct that a different course from that specified in the Vehicle
Code be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection or may allocate and
indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make
right- or left-hand turns.
      (2)   Whenever the Road Commissioner finds, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, that any turning movement within or adjacent to any
intersection which has been required by the placing of markers, buttons or
signs as provided in §
52.0108(b)(1) is no longer necessary, the Road Commissioner shall remove such
markers, buttons or signs.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2778, passed - -1983)
§ 52.0109   One-Way Streets.
   (a)   Pursuant to the Vehicle Code, whenever the Board determines, upon the
basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that it is necessary to designate
particular highways or portions thereof as one-way highways and require that
all vehicles thereon move in one specified direction, the Board shall by
resolution direct the Road Commissioner to erect appropriate signs indicating
the direction of travel at each highway intersecting such one-way highway upon
such particular highway or portion thereof.
   (b)   Whenever the Board finds, upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation, that the conditions, because of which such highway or portions
thereof has been designated as a one-way highway as provided in §
52.0109(a), no longer exist, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such signs from such one-way highway.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2778, passed - -1983)
§ 52.0110   Closing of Streets.
   (a)   Streets Dividing School Property. Pursuant to the Vehicle Code,
whenever the Board determines on the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation that it is necessary to close a street that divides school
grounds to vehicular traffic, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to place appropriate signs indicating such closure.
   (b)   Hours, Days and Conditions. Whenever the Board, pursuant to §
52.0109 of this Chapter, orders the closing of streets, the Road Commissioner
shall, on the basis of traffic engineering investigation, determine the hours
of the day, the days of the week and the conditions under which such street
shall be closed.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0111   Through Highways.
   (a)   Establishment. Pursuant to the Vehicle Code, the Board may determine,
upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, by resolution that it is
necessary, (1) to designate any highway as a through highway and to require
that all vehicles stop before entering or crossing the same, (2) to designate
any intersection as a stop intersection and to require all vehicles to stop at
one or more entrances to such intersections, (3) to control traffic within an
intersection and require it to stop, when signs are erected as provided by the
Vehicle Code.
   (b)   Railroad Stop Signs. Pursuant to the Vehicle Code, the Board may
determine, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, by resolution
that all vehicles shall stop before entering or crossing the tracks at any
highway railroad grade crossing when signs are in place giving notice thereof,
but no such ordinance shall be effective unless approved by an order of the
Public Utilities Commission of the State.
   (c)   Stop Signs. When the Board has adopted resolutions pursuant to §
52.0111(a) and (b) of this Chapter, the Road Commissioner shall erect a stop
sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion
thereof so designated and at those entrances to or locations within other
intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so
designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided
in the Vehicle Code. Such signs may be supplemented by appropriate pavement
markings.
      (1)   Removal. Whenever the Board finds, on the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, that the conditions, because of which such highways
have been designated as through highways or such intersection has been
designated as a stop intersection or such location within an intersection has
been designated where vehicles are required to stop, or such highway railroad
grade crossing has been designated at which vehicles are required to stop
before entering or crossing the tracks, as provided in §
52.0111(a) and (b) of this Chapter, no longer exist, the Board shall by
resolution direct the Road Commissioner to remove such signs and pavement
markings from such intersections or railroad grade crossings.
   (d)   Emergency Stop Signs. The Road Commissioner is hereby authorized when
any emergency condition, as indicated by a traffic engineering investigation,
exists at any highway intersection or intersections, to place and maintain stop
signs as provided in §
52.0111(c) for the duration of such emergency condition. Such stop signs shall
be removed when such emergency condition ceases to exist unless otherwise
determined by the Board.
      (1)   Removal. The Road Commissioner is hereby authorized, when because
of temporary detours, or other emergency, it would be impractical and a hazard
to require vehicles to stop at an intersection where stop signs have been
erected pursuant to this Chapter, to either remove such signs or so cover them
that no portion of the word “stop” remains visible. At the termination of such
emergency, the Road Commissioner shall restore such signs or uncover such signs
unless otherwise determined by the Board.
   (e)   Obedience to Stop Signs. Where stop signs have been erected pursuant
to this Chapter, any vehicle approaching such signs shall stop in accordance
with the provisions of the Vehicle Code except that no stop is required where:
      (1)   An officer is on duty and directs traffic to proceed;
      (2)   A traffic signal is in operation and indicates that traffic may
proceed;
      (3)   A stop sign has been removed or covered pursuant to §
52.0111(d)(1).
   (f)   Yield-Right-of-Way Signs.
      (1)    Pursuant to the Vehicle Code, whenever the Board determines, upon
the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that it is necessary to
require vehicles entering an intersection at one or more of its approaches to
slow and yield the right of way as provided in the Vehicle Code, the Board
shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner to erect and maintain “Yield -
right - of - way” signs on such approaches.
      (2)   Whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, that the conditions, because of which the “Yield -
right - of - way” signs were erected as provided in §
52.0111(f)(1) no longer exist, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such signs.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0112   Application of Stopping, Standing and Parking Regulations.
   (a)   The provisions of this Chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic control device.
   (b)   The provisions of this Chapter imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or an ordinance of this County
prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places
or at specified times.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0113   Standing Prohibited Between Roadways.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any median strip
between roadways or within any traffic island or other area designed to
separate or guide the movement of traffic.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0114   Parking Parallel With Curb.
   (a)   Parking on One-Way Street. Subject to other and more restrictive
limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-
hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street
unless signs or curb markings as described in §
52.0121(f) are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.
   (b)   Parking on Highways Comprised of Two or More Separate Roadways. In the
event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon or adjacent to the left-hand side of such one-way roadway
unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.
   (c)   Prohibition of Parking on One-Way Street. Whenever the Board
determines, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that
standing or parking of vehicles shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of
any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon or
adjacent to the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two
or more separate roadways, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to place signs, pavement markings or curb markings as described in
§
52.0121(f) on such street or highway giving notice thereof.
      (1)   Removal of Prohibition. Whenever the Board, upon the basis of a
traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which
parking was either prohibited or permitted as provided in §
52.0114(c), no longer exist, it shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such signs, pavement markings and curb markings from
such portion of street or highway.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0115   Parking on Narrow Streets—Prohibited.
   The Road Commissioner is hereby authorized, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, to place signs or curb markings as described in §
52.0121, indicating no parking upon any highway when the width of the roadway
and shoulders of such highway do not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a
highway when the width of the roadway and shoulders of such highway do not
exceed 30 feet.
   (a)   Removal of Signs. Whenever the Road Commissioner finds that, due to
widening, the conditions as set forth in §
52.0115 no longer exist, he or she shall remove such signs and curb markings
from such portion of such highway.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0116   Parking Adjacent to Schools.
   (a)   Prohibited. The Road Commissioner is hereby authorized, upon the basis
of a traffic engineering investigation, to place signs or curb markings
described in §
52.0121 indicating no parking upon either side of any street adjacent to any
school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a
hazardous situation.
   (b)   Removal of Prohibiting Sign. Whenever the Road Commissioner, upon the
basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because
of which parking was prohibited as provided in §
52.0116 no longer exist, he or she shall remove such signs and curb markings.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0117   Stopping or Standing Prohibited in Specified Places.
   (a)   The Road Commissioner is hereby authorized to prohibit stopping,
standing or parking and to place signs or curb markings as described in §
52.0121, at any of the following places when such prohibition as indicated by a
traffic engineering investigation will alleviate dangerous hazardous traffic
conditions, facilitate the full use of the roadway, or serve the convenience of
the public:
      (1)   At any place within 100 feet of the intersection of two or more
highways;
      (2)   At any place within 25 feet of a railroad grade crossing;
      (3)   Adjacent to either side of a crosswalk or driveway entrance for a
distance not to exceed 20 feet from either side of such crosswalk or driveway;
      (4)   Adjacent to any fire hydrant when it has been determined that
stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
would present some special hazard or would prevent ready access to the fire
hydrant;
      (5)   At any place in connection with a street or highway vehicular
parking layout or plan;
      (6)   On either side of a highway in those areas where any highway has
been cleared of snow by snowplows, and the width of the highway is restricted
by reason of snow conditions.
   (b)   When the Road Commissioner, upon the basis of a traffic engineering
investigation, finds that the conditions because of which stopping, standing or
parking was prohibited as authorized in §
52.0117(a) no longer exist, he or she shall remove such signs and such curb
markings from such portion of such street or highway.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0118   Restriction or Prohibition of Parking.
   (a)   Basis for Regulation. Whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of
a traffic engineering investigation, that it is necessary to prohibit stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles on certain highways or portion thereof at all
or certain hours of the day in order to facilitate the movement of traffic or
to eliminate hazardous conditions, the Board shall by resolution direct the
Road Commissioner to place appropriate signs or curb markings as designated in
§
52.0121 on such highways or portions thereof.
   (b)   Basis for Lifting Parking Regulations. Whenever the Board, upon the
basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because
of which it was necessary to prohibit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles at all or certain hours of the day as provided in §
52.0118(a) no longer exist, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such signs and curb markings from such highways or
portion thereof.
   (c)   Temporary No Parking. Whenever the Road Commissioner determines that
traffic congestion or traffic hazard of an emergency nature is likely to result
from the operation, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles during the
holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or during
the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of any highway, or for any
other reason, he or she may place or cause to be placed, temporary signs
prohibiting the operation, stopping, standing or parking of vehicles during the
existence of such emergency.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0119   Use of Streets for Storage of Vehicles Prohibited.
   (a)   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any
vehicles shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a
consecutive period of 72 hours.
   (b)   In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in
excess of a consecutive period of 72 hours, the Sheriff or any member of the
Highway Patrol of the State of California may remove said vehicle from the
street in the manner and subject to the requirements of the Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0120   Parking for Certain Purposes Prohibited.
   (a)   Washing, Greasing, or Repairing of Vehicles. No person shall park a
vehicle upon any highway or right-of-way for the principal purpose of washing,
greasing, or repairing such vehicle except repairing necessitated by an
emergency.
   (b)   Vending. No person shall park a vehicle upon any highway or right-of-
way for the principal purpose of vending, except adjacent to the premises of
the purchaser when taking orders or delivering any commodity, or except as
otherwise authorized by the County Code.
   (c)   Display of Vehicles for Sale on Certain County Highways.
      (1)   Legislative Findings.
         (A)   The County of San Bernardino has experienced used vehicles being
parked or left idle on public streets for the purpose of advertising or
displaying such vehicles for sale, resulting in a negative impact on the
County, its residents, and businesses.
         (B)   The courts have ruled that a city or county may reasonably
regulate the time, place, and manner in which its public streets are used for
the sale of vehicles.
         (C)   The California State Legislature enacted Section 22651.9 of the
California Vehicle Code authorizing cities and counties to remove and impound
vehicles with “for sale” signs from designated streets or public lands.
         (D)   Section 22651.9(a) of the Vehicle Code authorizes the removal
and impoundment of vehicles when all of the following requirements are met:
            (I)   Because of a sign or placard on the vehicle, it appears that
the primary purpose of parking the vehicle at that location is to advertise to
the public the private sale of that vehicle;
            (II)   Within the past 30 days, the vehicle is known to have been
previously issued a notice of parking violation, under local ordinance, which
was accompanied by a notice containing all of the following:
               (i)   A warning that an additional parking violation may result
in the impoundment of the vehicle;
               (ii)   A warning that the vehicle may be impounded pursuant to
Section 22651.9 of the Vehicle Code, even if moved to another street, so long
as the signs or placards offering the vehicle for sale remain on the vehicle;
and
               (iii)   A listing of the streets or public lands subject to the
resolution or ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 22651.9(a)(4) of the
Vehicle Code, or if all streets are covered, a statement to that effect.
            (III)   The notice of parking violation was issued at least 24
hours prior to the removal of the vehicle; and
            (IV)   The local authority of the city, County, or city and County
has, by resolution or ordinance, authorized the removal of vehicles pursuant to
Section 22651.9 of the Vehicle Code from the street or public lands on which
the vehicle is located.
         (E)   The County of San Bernardino Department of Public Works
conducted an investigation of its County Highways, in particular, Valley
Boulevard, between Alder Avenue and Spruce Avenue, and Mission Boulevard,
between Central Avenue and Benson Avenue, to determine whether any parked or
standing vehicles were posted with “for sale” signs or placards and whether
such activity adversely affects traffic.
         (F)   The investigation found that significant health and safety
issues as well as dangerous traffic conditions resulted from vehicles parked
for purposes of sale on certain streets in the County.
         (G)   Based on the County of San Bernardino Department of Public Works
investigation, the Board of Supervisors seeks to impose reasonable restrictions
by prohibiting the parking of vehicles for the primary purpose of advertising
or displaying such vehicles for sale upon certain streets within the
unincorporated areas of the County.
         (H)   The Board of Supervisors finds and determines that there is an
important and substantial public interest in adopting the restrictions
identified in this Subsection of the County Code upon vehicles parked along
designated streets for the purpose of advertising or displaying such vehicles
for sale, as they are necessary to protect the general health, safety, and
welfare of the community, and specifically finds:
            (I)   The unrestricted parking of vehicles for such commercial
purposes causes passing motorists to slow down or stop in the street to obtain
information from the signage on the parked vehicles, and, as a result, such
activity may lead to a sudden and unexpected obstruction to other vehicles
thereby creating dangerous traffic conditions; and
            (II)   The unrestricted parking of vehicles for such commercial
purposes encourages prospective buyers to inspect the vehicles while standing
in the street, thereby creating dangerous traffic conditions as well as health
and safety issues for other motorists, the prospective buyers, and pedestrians
alike in the County; and
            (III)   The unrestricted parking of vehicles for such commercial
purposes creates a nuisance by detrimentally impacting existing businesses and/
or residences by reducing and/or eliminating the number of parking spaces on
public streets which are available to business patrons, residents, occupants,
and/or guests in the vicinity of such parked vehicles.
         (I)   The purpose of this Section is to narrowly restrict the standing
or parking of vehicles for sale at the locations identified in Subsection
52.0120(c)(3) in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
      (2)   Authority. Subsection
52.0120(c)(3) is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the County of San
Bernardino by Section 22651.9 of the Vehicle Code. Section 22852 of the Vehicle
Code requires that a post-removal hearing take place after the removal of any
vehicle under Section 22651.9 of the Vehicle Code.
      (3)   Restriction. No person shall park or leave standing any motor
vehicle with a sign or placard on such vehicle at any of the locations listed
below which makes it appear that the primary purpose for parking such vehicle
at that location is to advertise to the public the private sale of such
vehicle:
         (A)   Valley Boulevard, between Alder Avenue and Spruce Avenue, posted
with signage reflecting the prohibition.
         (B)   Mission Boulevard, between Central Avenue and Benson Avenue,
posted with signage reflecting the prohibition.
         (C)   Any additional County Highway segment(s), which is/are posted
with signage reflecting the prohibition, based upon a determination made by the
Board of Supervisors in a resolution that one or more of the conditions
described in Subsection
52.0120(c)(1)(H)(I)-(III) exist at such location(s).
      (4)   Notice of Parking Violation. A vehicle found to be in violation of
Subsection
52.0120(c)(3) shall be issued a notice of parking violation. The notice of
parking violation shall contain all of the following:
         (A)   A statement that the parking of the vehicle violates Subsection
52.0120(c)(3) of the County Code and the date of the violation.
         (B)   A warning that an additional parking violation may result in the
impoundment of the vehicle pursuant to Section 22651.9 of the Vehicle Code.
         (C)   A warning that the vehicle may be impounded pursuant to Section
22651.9 of the Vehicle Code, even if moved to another street described in
Subsection
52.0120(c)(3), so long as the signs or placards offering the vehicle for sale
remain on the vehicle.
         (D)   A listing of the streets subject to the restriction and
described in Subsection 52.0120(c)(3).
      (5)   Authorization for Removal of a Vehicle. Pursuant to Section 22651.9
(a)(4) of the Vehicle Code, any peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5
(commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the Penal Code, or any
regularly employed and salaried employee of the County who is engaged in
directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations of the County, may
remove a vehicle located within the unincorporated area of the County if all of
the following requirements are satisfied:
         (A)   Subsection
52.0120(c)(3) has been violated and a notice of violation was issued pursuant
to Subsection
52.0120(c)(4).
         (B)   Within the past 30 days of the issuance of the notice of
violation referenced in subdivision (A) above, the vehicle is known to have
been previously issued a notice of parking violation for violating Subsection
52.0120(c)(3).
         (C)   The notice of parking violation referenced in Subsection (A)
above was issued at least 24 hours prior to removal of the vehicle.
      (6)   Post Storage Impound Hearing. Section 22852 of the Vehicle Code
applies to the removal of any vehicle pursuant to Subsection
52.0120(c)(5) and is incorporated by reference as if set forth in full herein.
In summary, the procedure under Section 22852 of the Vehicle Code is as
follows: Whenever an authorized member of the County directs the storage of a
vehicle pursuant to Subsection
52.0120(c)(5), the County shall direct the storage operator to provide the
vehicle's registered and legal owners of record, or their agents, with the
opportunity for a post-storage hearing to determine the validity of the
storage. Notice of the storage shall be mailed or personally delivered to the
registered and legal owners within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays,
as specifically provided for under Section 22852 of the Vehicle Code. To
receive a post-storage hearing, the owners of record, or their agents, must
request a hearing in person, in writing, or by telephone within ten days of the
date appearing on the notice. The County may authorize its own officer or
employee to conduct the hearing as long as the hearing officer is not the same
person who directed the storage of the vehicle. The decision of the hearing
officer shall be final.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 4267, passed - -2015)
§ 52.0121   Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only.
   (a)   Establishment of Loading Zones. Whenever the Board determines, upon
the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that loading zones, passenger
loading zones or bus loading zones are necessary on any highway or portion
thereof, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner to place
signs or curb markings as provided in §
52.0121(f) on such highway or portion thereof.
      (1)   Removal of Signs. Whenever the Board, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, finds that the conditions, because of which loading
zones, passenger loading zones and bus loading zones were established along
such highway or portion thereof as provided in §
52.0121(a) no longer exist, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such signs or such curb markings designating such Zones.
   (b)   Marking of Loading Zones. Loading zones shall be indicated by
appropriate signs indicating such zone or by a yellow line stenciled with black
letters “Loading Only” upon the top or side of all curbs within such zones.
   (c)   Marking of Passenger Loading Zones. Passenger loading zones shall be
indicated by appropriate signs or by a white line stenciled with black letters
“Passenger Loading Only” upon the top or side of all curbs within such zones.
   (d)   Marking of Bus Loading Zones. Bus loading zones shall be indicated by
appropriate signs or by a red line stenciled with white letters “No Standing”
together with the words “Bus Zone” on the top or side of all curbs within such
zones.
   (e)   Use of Bus Loading Zone—Restricted. No person shall stop, stand or
park any vehicle except a bus in a bus loading zone.
   (f)   Curb Markings to Indicate No Stopping and Parking Regulations. The
Road Commissioner is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and
limitations of this Chapter, to place, and where required herein shall place
the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and
said curb markings shall have the meaning herein set forth.
      (1)   Red. Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking except as
permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone
marked or signed as a bus zone.
      (2)   Yellow. Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any
purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials,
provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more
than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20
minutes.
      (3)   White. White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any
purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed
three minutes.
      (4)   Green. Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than 20
minutes.
   (g)   Markings in Lieu of Curb Markings. When there are no curbs, the Road
Commissioner shall indicate the parking or standing regulations by installing,
in lieu of curb markings, appropriate signs giving notice of such regulations.
   (h)   Effect of Permission to Load or Unload.
      (1)   Applies Only to Commercial Vehicles and Time Limit. Permission
herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading
materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond
the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes.
      (2)   Deliveries. The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only
to commercial deliveries, the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post
packages and United States mail.
      (3)   Passenger. Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes
of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of
personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in
no event for more than three minutes.
      (4)   Abuse of Privilege. Within the total time limits above specified,
the provisions of this Section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary
and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the
privileges hereby granted.
   (i)   Standing in Alleys. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for
any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials in
any alley.
   (j)   Bus Loading Zone Adjacent to School. The Road Commissioner is hereby
authorized, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, to place
signs or curb markings described in §
52.0121(f) indicating bus loading zone upon either side of any street adjacent
to any school property when such loading zone would facilitate the orderly
movement of traffic.
      (1)   Removal. Whenever the Road Commissioner, upon the basis of a
traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which a
bus loading zone was established as provided in §
52.0121(j) no longer exist, he or she shall remove such signs and such curb
markings.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0122   Additional Parking Regulations.
   (a)   Angle Parking.
      (1)   Permitted. Whenever the Board determines upon the basis of a
traffic engineering investigation that the width of a highway or portion
thereof, and traffic conditions are such that the parking of vehicles at an
angle to the curb or edge of the highway will not be unduly hazardous to the
flow of traffic, and that there is need for additional parking space which
angle parking will provide, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to, and the Road Commissioner shall indicate at what angle traffic
conditions make it desirable that vehicles should be parked by placing parallel
white lines upon the surface of such highway or portion thereof. On such
portions of such highways a person shall not stop, stand or park any vehicle
except between, at the angle indicated by, and parallel to both adjacent white
lines, with the nearest front wheel not more than one foot from the curb or
bumper, which may be placed in lieu of curbs or the edge of the highway. The
Road Commissioner may prohibit stopping, standing, or parking in connection
with any angle parking layout or plan as provided in §
52.0117(a)(5).
      (2)   Prohibited. Whenever the Board, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, finds that the conditions, because of which angle
parking has been permitted upon a highway or portion thereof as provided in §
52.0122(a)(1) no longer exist, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to obliterate such angle parking lines and other markings from
such highways or portions thereof. Thereafter on such portion of the highway,
no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than according to the
Vehicle Code or as provided in this Chapter.
   (b)   Parallel Parking Lines.
      (1)   Placement. Whenever parallel parking is required on any highway or
portion thereof as provided in the Vehicle Code, the Board hereby authorizes
the Road Commissioner to place white lines consistent with the provisions of
the Vehicle Code parallel to and/or at right angles to the curb or edge of the
highway when a traffic engineering investigation indicates that such white
lines would facilitate the parking of vehicles or alleviate a hazardous
condition. When such white lines have been placed, no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle outside of the rectangular space indicated by such lines and
the curb or the edge of the highway. The Road Commissioner may prohibit
stopping, standing or parking in connection with any parallel parking plan or
layout as provided in §
52.0117(a)(5).
      (2)   Prohibited. Whenever the Road Commissioner, upon the basis of a
traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions, because of which
parallel white lines were placed as provided in §
52.0122(b)(1) no longer exist, the Road Commissioner shall obliterate such
white lines from such highway or portion thereof.
   (c)   Right-of-Way When Parallel Parking.
      (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this Section, a LIMITED PARALLEL
PARKING SPACE shall mean an area open for lawful parking along side of, and
adjacent to, a curb or edge of a highway, which area is not of sufficient
length to permit two or more vehicles to park therein at the same time.
      (2)   Right of Way to Person Backing Into Parking Space. Any person
seeking to park his or her vehicle in a limited parallel parking space, whose
vehicle arrives at said parking space prior to any other vehicle, and who
proceeds beyond said space with his entire vehicle a distance not to exceed ten
feet for the purpose of backing his or her vehicle therein, shall have the
right of way over any person driving or attempting to drive any other vehicle
directly into such limited parallel parking space and the driver of such other
vehicle shall yield the right of way to the driver who first arrived at said
limited parallel parking space.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0123   Speed Zones.
   (a)   Authority to Increase 25-Mile Limit. Pursuant to the Vehicle Code,
whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
survey, that a greater speed would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular
traffic and would be safe upon any street otherwise subject to a prima facie
limit of 25 miles per hour under the Vehicle Code, the Board shall determine
and declare a higher prima facie speed limit. When such determination has been
made, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner to erect and
maintain signs upon such street as provided in the Vehicle Code indicating the
appropriate prima facie speed limit. Such signs may be supplemented by
appropriate pavement markings.
      (1)   Removal. Whenever the Board, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, finds that the conditions, because of which a speed
limit has been determined as provided in §
52.0123(a) no longer exist, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such signs and markings from such street.
   (b)   Authority to Decrease 65-Mile Limit. Pursuant to the Vehicle Code,
whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
survey, that the limit of 65 miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe
upon any street or highway where such limit of 65 miles per hour is applicable
under the Vehicle Code, the Board shall determine and declare a lower prima
facie limit which is appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
and is reasonable and safe. When such determination has been made, the Board
shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner to erect and maintain signs
upon such street or highway as provided in the Vehicle Code indicating the
appropriate speed limit. Such signs may be supplemented by appropriate pavement
markings.
      (1)   Removal. Whenever the Board, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which a speed
limit has been determined as provided in §
52.0123(b) no longer exists, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such signs and pavement markings from such street or
highway.
   (c)   Authority to Link Speed Limit Districts. Pursuant to the Vehicle Code,
whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
survey. that the limit of 65 miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe
upon any portion of a street or highway for a distance of not exceeding 2,000
feet in length between districts either business or residence, the Board may
determine and declare a reasonable and safe prima facie limit thereof lower
than 65 miles per hour, but not less than 25 miles per hour. When such
determination has been made, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to erect and maintain signs thereon as provided in the Vehicle
Code. Such signs may be supplemented by appropriate pavement markings.
      (1)   Removal. Whenever the Board finds, upon the basis of an engineering
and traffic survey, that the conditions because of which a prima facie limit
lower than 65 miles per hour has been determined as provided in §
52.0123(c) no longer exist, it shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner
to remove such signs and markings from such portion of street or highway.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0124   Crosswalks.
   (a)   Establishment Between Intersections. Pursuant to the Vehicle Code,
whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation, that a crosswalk between intersections would facilitate the
orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, the Board shall by
resolution direct the Road Commissioner to provide and maintain painted
markings or other appropriately devised symbols or warning signs at all
crosswalks which have been designated as such.
      (1)   Removal. Whenever the Board finds, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering study, that the conditions because of which a crosswalk has been
provided and maintained as provided in §
52.0124(a) no longer exist, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such markings, symbols or signs from such crosswalk.
   (b)   Establishment at Intersections. The Board hereby authorizes the Road
Commissioner to provide and maintain painted crosswalk markings or other
appropriately devised symbols or warning signs at any intersection whenever a
traffic engineering investigation indicates that such markings, symbols or
signs would facilitate the orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic.
      (1)   Removal. Whenever the Road Commissioner, upon the basis of a
traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which
painted crosswalk markings or other appropriately devised symbols or warning
signs at any intersection have been provided and maintained as provided in §
52.0124(b) no longer exist, the Road Commissioner shall remove such markings,
symbols or signs at such crosswalk.
   (c)   Prohibiting the Use of Crosswalks by Pedestrians. Pursuant to the
Vehicle Code, whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, that prohibiting the use of any crosswalk is
necessary, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner to erect
and maintain signs adjacent to such crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall
not cross in the crosswalk.
      (1)   Removal. Whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, that the conditions because of which signs were
erected prohibiting the use of a crosswalk as provided in §
52.0124(c) no longer exists, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such signs.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0125   Weight Limitations.
   (a)   Limits on Unimproved Highways.
      (1)   Whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of an engineering
investigation, that a highway is unimproved as the word “unimproved” is used in
the Vehicle Code, and that the nature of the pavement or surface is such that
it will be damaged if vehicles of over a certain gross weight are permitted to
operate thereon, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner to
erect signs specifying the maximum gross weight limits which shall be permitted
to operate on such highway.
      (2)   The Road Commissioner shall erect and maintain signs upon all
unimproved highways upon which a weight limit is imposed at the entrances
thereto from all improved highways, from all highways upon which no weight
limit has been imposed, and from all highways upon which a greater weight limit
has been imposed.
      (3)   Whenever such weight limit signs have been placed as provided in
this Section, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to drive or operate a
vehicle upon such unimproved highway when the maximum gross weight of such
vehicle, plus the weight of the load thereon, exceeds the weight limit stated
by such signs except that any commercial vehicle shall not be prohibited from
using any County highway by direct route to or from a State Highway for the
purpose of delivering or loading for transportation, goods, wares, or
merchandise as provided in the Vehicle Code.
      (4)   Whenever the Board finds that because of repaving or repair of an
unimproved highway, that a weight limit is no longer necessary upon such
highway, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner to remove
the weight limit signs from such highway or entrances thereto.
   (b)   Temporary Limits on Improved Highways.
      (1)   Whenever the Board, upon the basis of an engineering investigation,
determines that an improved highway as defined in the Vehicle Code, will be
destroyed by reason of deterioration if vehicles of over a certain gross weight
are permitted to operate thereon, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to erect temporary signs, as provided in §
52.0125(a)(2) for unimproved highways, specifying the maximum gross weight
limits upon such highway. No such reduced weight limits shall extend for a
period of more than 90 days unless actual repair of such highway is begun
within such time and thereafter continuously carried on to completion.
      (2)   Whenever such temporary weight limit signs have been placed as
provided in this Section, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to drive or
operate a vehicle upon such improved highway when the maximum gross weight of
such vehicle, plus the weight of the load thereon, exceeds the weight limit
stated by such signs, except that any commercial vehicle shall not be
prohibited from using any County highway by direct route to or from a State
highway for the purpose of delivering or loading for transporting goods, wares,
or merchandise as provided in the Vehicle Code.
   (c)   Closing Highways to Commercial Vehicles.
      (1)   Pursuant to the Vehicle Code, whenever the Board determines, upon
the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, that it is necessary to
prohibit the use of any street, road, or highway in an unincorporated
residential subdivision area to commercial vehicles exceeding a gross weight of
14,000 pounds, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner to
erect and maintain signs indicating such prohibition.
      (2)   Whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, that the conditions because of which a load limit
was established as provided in §
52.0125(c)(1) no longer exist, the Board shall by resolution direct the Road
Commissioner to remove such weight restriction signs.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0126   Weight Limits on Bridges.
   (a)   Whenever the Board determines, upon the basis of a structural
engineering investigation, that the structure of a bridge on a highway is such
that it is unsafe for vehicles over a certain weight to use such bridge, the
Board shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner to place signs at both
entrances to such bridge specifying the maximum gross weight limits of any
vehicle or combination of vehicles which shall be permitted to cross such
bridge.
   (b)   Whenever the Board finds, because of rebuilding, repairing, or
strengthening such bridge, that such weight limits are no longer necessary, the
Board shall by resolution direct the Road Commissioner to remove such weight
limit signs from the entrances to such bridge.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0127   Miscellaneous Provisions.
   (a)   Riding on Motorcycles and Bicycles. No person shall ride upon a
highway on either a motorcycle or bicycle on a portion of said vehicle which is
not specifically designed for the carrying of passengers, nor shall any person
operating a motorcycle or bicycle upon a highway permit another to do so.
   (b)   Clinging to Moving Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person
traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle, motorscooter or any moving vehicle of
any nature whatever, on any public highway, to cling to or attach himself or
herself or his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle.
   (c)   Driving Through Funeral Processions. No driver of a vehicle shall
drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion
and when the vehicles in such procession are conspicuously so designated.
   (d)   Driving on New Pavement—Prohibited. No person shall ride or drive any
animal or any vehicle over or across any newly-made pavement or freshly painted
marking on any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to
drive over or across such pavement or marking, or sign stating that the street
or any portion thereof is closed.
   (e)   Driving on Limited Access Roadway—Prohibited. No person shall drive a
vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and
exits as are established by public authority.
   (f)   Tampering with Traffic Survey Devices. It shall be unlawful for any
person to move, molest, tamper with or damage any survey device used for the
purpose of making traffic investigations located on any County highway.
   (g)   Skiing or Tobogganing on or Across Any Highway—Prohibited. It is
unlawful for any person to ski or toboggan on or across any County highway in
such a manner as to interfere with the movement of vehicles thereon. A person
on skis proceeding on or across a highway at a pace no greater than a walk is
not within the prohibition of this Section and shall be considered to be a
pedestrian with all the rights and duties thereof as prescribed in the Vehicle
Code.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963)
§ 52.0128   Restriction or Prohibition of Parking of Commercial Vehicles.
   (a)   Whenever the Board determines that it is necessary to prohibit
stopping, standing or parking of commercial vehicles having a manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating exceeding 10,000 pounds on certain residential
district streets, portions thereof, or with a limited access residential
community at all or certain hours of the day, the Board shall, by resolution,
direct the Road Commissioner to place appropriate signs specifying applicable
prohibitions on such streets or entrances to the limited access residential
communities thereof.
   (b)   Whenever the Board finds that conditions because of which it was
necessary to prohibit stopping, standing or parking of commercial vehicles
having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating exceeding 10,000 pounds at
all or certain hours of the day as provided in this Section no longer exist,
the Board shall, by resolution, direct the Road Commissioner to remove such
signs from such streets or entrances to communities thereof.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2203, passed - -1977; Am. Ord.
3380, passed - -1990)
§ 52.0129   Procedure for Establishing Terminal Routes.
   (a)   The purpose of this Section is to establish procedures for terminal
designation and truck route designation to terminals for overwidth and
overlength trucks as defined by the California Vehicle Code when operating on a
Federally designated highway system.
   (b)   An applicant is any interested person requiring terminal access from
the Federal designated highway system. The applicant shall submit an
application, on a form provided by the County Transportation Department with
such information as may be required.
   (c)   TERMINAL means any facility at which freight is consolidated to be
shipped or where full load consignments may be loaded and off-loaded or at
which the vehicle combinations defined in Vehicle Code § 35401.5 are regularly
maintained, stored or manufactured.
    (d)   County maintained roads or streets for which use is requested in the
application will be investigated for the purpose of determining if said road(s)
or street(s) are adequate to handle overwidth and overlength trucks as allowed
by Vehicle Code §§ 35100 and 35401.5. The investigation may include, but not be
limited to, turning radii, land width and public safety.
   (e)   Upon receipt of an application, the Road Commissioner shall
investigate available highways to determine if a feasible route(s) appropriate
for the passage of oversized trucks exists.
   (f)   If the Road Commissioner determines that a feasible route(s)
appropriate for oversized trucks exists, then the Application shall be
approved. The routes determined to be appropriate for oversized trucks will be
marked with signs as established by the California Department of
Transportation. Truck route signing will be posted by the County Transportation
Department at decision points as determined by said Department.
   (g)   If all feasible routes to a requested terminal are found
unsatisfactory by the investigation, the application shall be denied. Such
denial will be accompanied with an identification of deficiencies.
   (h)   If the requested approved route passes through several jurisdictions,
applicant shall comply with the application process for each jurisdiction.
Coordination will be the responsibility of the jurisdiction in which the
terminal is located.
   (i)   Subsequent to the approval and granting of a route to a terminal, the
Road Commissioner may find the route to be unsatisfactory and thereafter revoke
the designated terminal route or, at his or her discretion, designate an
alternate route.
   (j)   Whenever the Road Commissioner determines that the terminal route is
no longer appropriate, feasible or necessary, he or she shall deem the route no
longer a truck route and order such route signs removed with written notice to
the applicant.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2203, passed - -1977; Am. Ord.
3395, passed - -1990)
§ 52.0130   Penalty.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of
this Title or disobeys any sign or marking installed pursuant thereto shall be
subject to a civil penalty in an amount established by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to a schedule of parking penalties, unless the violation is cited as a
misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a remedy provided by
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (b)   Except as provided in California Vehicle Code § 40209 (as presently
stated or amended in the future), the registered owner and driver, renter, or
lessee of a motor vehicle cited for any violation of this Chapter related to
motor vehicle parking, shall be jointly liable for parking penalties imposed by
the County, unless the registered owner can show, to the satisfaction of the
San Bernardino County, that the vehicle was used without the owner's consent.
(Ord. 596, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 598, passed - -1947; Am. Ord. 702, passed -
-1953; Am. Ord. 1119, passed - -1963; Am. Ord. 2778, passed - -1983; Am. Ord.
3395, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 4446, passed - -2022)
§ 52.0131   Prohibition of Certain Vehicles on Highways.
   Whenever the Board determines that it is necessary to prohibit the use of
certain vehicles on particular highways within the unincorporated area of the
County, the Board shall, by resolution, set forth those certain streets upon
which use is restricted and the certain vehicle types that are prohibited
thereon. The Board, by resolution, shall further direct the Director of
Transportation to erect and maintain signs indicating such prohibition.
(Ord. 3766, passed - -1999)
§ 52.0132   Designated No Parking/Tow-Away Zones.
   (a)   The Director of Transportation is authorized to post signs indicating
that the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited on such
highways and streets that the Board determines, on the basis of a traffic
engineering investigation, to be no stopping/no standing/no parking/tow-away
zones. The signs authorized by this Section shall provide for the removal of
vehicles stopped, standing or parked in no stopping/no standing/no parking/tow-
away zones.
   (b)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this Section are in place
giving notice thereof, no persons shall stop, stand or park any vehicle
contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.
   (c)   Any peace officer, or regular employed and salaried employee of the
County who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing County parking laws and
regulations, may remove a vehicle that is stopped, standing or parked in the no
stopping/no standing/no parking/tow-away zone as established by this Section.
Vehicles removed pursuant to this Section shall be stored and/or disposed of in
accordance of Vehicle Code Article 2 of Chapter 10 of Division 11.
(Ord. 3766, passed - -1999)
CHAPTER 2: BOATING REGULATIONS
Section
   
52.0201   Swimming and Flotation Devices.
   
52.0202   Speed Limit.
   
52.0203   Boat Launching Areas.
   
52.0204   Length of Boats.
   
52.0205   Overnight Occupancy of Boats.
   
52.0206   Littering Prohibited.
   
52.0207   Swimming, Scuba Diving and Skin Diving.
   
52.0208   Boating and Swimming Hours.
   
52.0209   Tunnels and Intake Towers.
   
52.0210   Spraying Watercraft with Water Canon Prohibited.
§ 52.0201   Swimming and Flotation Devices.
   (a)   Restriction of Swimming and Flotation Devices. 
   In Big Bear Lake, no person shall swim except in designated swimming areas
during the times set out for such areas.
   In Lake Arrowhead, no person shall swim or engage in the use of a
paddleboard or other flotation device except within 100 feet of the shore.
   In Lake Silverwood, paddleboards and other flotation devices must be
maintained within 100 feet of the shore, except in designated swimming areas.
No person shall operate any boat, or pull, tow or ride on any aquaplane, water
ski or similar device within any designated swimming area or within 50 feet of
the boundary of any designated swimming area. No person may use or bring into
an open water zone any flotation device such as a rubber raft, surfboard, surf
mat, buoy, kite or other flotation device except for approved boats,
aquaplanes, water skis or related equipment. The Sheriff’s Department may
permit the use of otherwise unauthorized flotation devices in open water zones
during special events, games, tests or experiments or when traffic is such as
to render their use safe in open water zones.
   In the Park Moabi Channel of the Colorado River, no person shall swim except
in the designated swimming area during the times set out for swimming at that
location. It shall be unlawful to swim, use a paddleboard or other similar
flotation device in areas posted against such uses or to in any way interfere
with the free and proper use of the channel by watercraft between the entrance
to the channel and the launch ramp.
   The entrance to Park Moabi Channel is located at: Latitude: North 34
degrees, 43 minutes, 40.64 seconds Longitude: West 114 degrees, 29 minutes,
59.38 seconds.
   The launch ramp is located at Latitude: North 34 degrees, 43 minutes, 44.14
seconds Longitude: West 114 degrees, 30 minutes, 39.78 seconds.
   (b)   Posting of Swimming Areas in Big Beak Lake. In Big Bear Lake, swimming
areas shall be designated by signs in a manner and at such places as are
reasonably calculated to give notice thereof.
   (c)   Destruction of Signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to tear
down, remove, mutilate, destroy or otherwise tamper with any sign erected
pursuant to §
52.0201(b) of this Chapter.
(Ord. 1233, passed --1965; Am. Ord. 1724, passed --1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed
--1981; Am. Ord. 4135, passed--2011)
§ 52.0202   Speed Limit.
   On Big Bear Lake the speed limit between sunset and sunrise shall be ten
miles per hour, and shall be five miles per hour at any time in any fishing
zone so designated by Big Bear Municipal Water District.
   On Lake Arrowhead the speed limit between sunset and 7:00 a.m. shall be ten
miles per hour.
   On Lake Silverwood, the speed limit between sunset and 7:00 a.m. shall be
five miles per hour. At all times, the speed limit on those portions of Lake
Silverwood that are south of the southern mouth of the channel shall be five
miles per hour.
   The southern mouth of this channel is located at Latitude: North 34 degrees,
17 minutes, 2.88 seconds Longitude: West 117 degrees, 19 minutes, 59.93
seconds.
   On all waterways, it shall be unlawful to operate a motorboat at a speed in
excess of 35 miles per hour any time except on the Colorado River or its
tributaries, unless authorized by the Sheriff’s office or the local lake
officials for special events.
(Ord. 1233, passed --1965; Am. Ord. 1724, passed --1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed
--1981; Am. Ord. 4135, passed--2011)
§ 52.0203   Boat Launching Areas.
   No person shall launch any boat upon any water area or remove any boat
therefrom except from or upon those areas designated as “Boat Launching Areas.”
(Ord. 1233, passed - -1965; Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572,
passed - -1981)
§ 52.0204   Length of Boats.
   (a)   No boats or rubber crafts which are less than 12 feet in length or
more than 26 feet in length shall be permitted on any waterway except the
Colorado River, its tributaries and Lake Havasu, except as otherwise authorized
in this Section.
   (b)   In Lake Arrowhead, sailboats between seven and 12 feet in length may
be used with the approval of the local authority.
(Ord. 1233, passed - -1965; Am. Ord. 1427, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1724,
passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 4135, passed - -2011;
Am. Ord. 4257, passed - -2014)
§ 52.0205   Overnight Occupancy of Boats.
   No overnight occupancy of any boat shall be allowed except upon the Colorado
River or its tributaries.
(Ord. 1233, passed - -1965; Am. Ord. 1427, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1724,
passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 4135, passed - -2011)
§ 52.0206   Littering Prohibited.
   No person shall throw, discharge, deposit or leave or cause, suffer, or
permit to be thrown, discharged, deposited or left, either from the shore or
from any dock or vessel or elsewhere, any refuse matter of any description,
into any lake, river, or other public water.
(Ord. 1233, passed - -1965; Am. Ord. 1427, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1724,
passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981)
§ 52.0207   Swimming, Scuba Diving, and Skin Diving.
   Swimming shall be prohibited in Big Bear Lake. Swimming in Green Valley Lake
is prohibited except in the designated swimming area. Swimming outside the
designated swimming area in Green Valley Lake shall be permitted only when
authorized by the Sheriff’s Office or local lake authority. Scuba diving and
skin diving shall be prohibited in any lake unless authorized by the Sheriff’s
Office or local lake authorities.
(Ord. 1233, passed - -1965; Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572,
passed - -1981)
§ 52.0208   Boating and Swimming Hours.
   Boating and swimming shall be unlawful between the hours of one hour after
sunset until one hour before sunrise on the lake surface of Green Valley Lake.
It shall be unlawful between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. to operate
any boat on the lake surface of Lake Silverwood or to keep any boat on said
lake surface or to keep any boat on the shore of said lake overnight except in
an area so designated and posted for such purpose. It shall be unlawful to
sleep overnight in any boat or to moor any boat overnight except at the
commercial marina on Lake Silverwood.
(Ord. 1233, passed - -1965; Am. Ord. 1305, passed - -1966; Am. Ord. 1724,
passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981)
§ 52.0209   Tunnels and Intake Towers.
   Because of the hazards involved, no person shall operate a boat or floating
device or swim within 500 feet of the tunnel intake tower or the inlet siphon
or the spillway intake on Lake Silverwood.
(Ord. 1233, passed - -1965; Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572,
passed - -1981)
§ 52.0210 Spraying Watercraft with Water Canon Prohibited.
   No person shall emit or expel water or any liquid from a water canon or
similar device at a watercraft while such watercraft is in operation or at any
person operating or riding in such watercraft. As used in this section, “water
canon” means any device capable of emitting or expelling a stream of water or
other liquid over a distance of ten feet.
(Ord. 4135, passed--2011)
CHAPTER 3: SKI ZONE REGULATIONS
Section
   
52.0301   Special-Use Areas.
   
52.0302   Where Permitted.
   
52.0303   Traffic Pattern.
   
52.0304   Entering Traffic Pattern—Restrictions.
   
52.0305   Length of Towline.
   
52.0306   Number of Skiers Limited.
   
52.0307   Ski Starts—Where Permitted.
   
52.0308   Permitted Hours of Skiing.
   
52.0309   Unattended Ski or Ski Equipment.
§ 52.0301   Special-Use Areas.
   Lake Arrowhead, Big Bear Lake, and Lake Silverwood, and any other bodies of
water being used for recreation in San Bernardino County, for the purposes of
this Section, are hereby designated special-use areas.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981)
§ 52.0302   Where Permitted.
   Except on Spring Valley Lake and Lake Arrowhead, it shall be unlawful to
water ski within 200 feet of a beach frequented by bathers, a swimming float, a
diving platform, a lifeline, or a landing float to which boats are made fast,
or other areas designated by the Sheriff’s Office, Big Bear Municipal Water
District or the U.S. Forest Service. On Spring Valley Lake, Lake Silverwood,
Lake Arrowhead and Big Bear Lake, a boat shall not exceed five miles per hour
inside the five mile per hour zone unless it is starting a skier from a beach,
dock or water, and in that situation, the boat shall travel in the most direct
route to open water, maintaining a counter-clockwise direction. On Spring
Valley Lake it shall be unlawful to use a boat or permit a boat to be used at a
speed in excess of five miles per hour within 100 feet of a beach frequented by
bathers, a swimming float, diving platform, or lifeline, and a way or landing
float to which boats are made fast or which is being used for the embarkation
or discharge of passengers. On Lake Arrowhead, it shall be unlawful to use a
boat or permit a boat to be used at a speed in excess of five miles per hour
within 150 feet of a beach frequented by bathers, a swimming float, diving
platform, or lifeline, and a way or landing float to which boats are made fast
or which is being used for the embarkation or discharge of passengers.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 3977,
passed - -2006; Am. Ord. 4035, passed - -2007)
§ 52.0303   Traffic Pattern.
   The traffic pattern for water-skiing shall be in a counter-clockwise
direction.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981)
§ 52.0304   Entering Traffic Pattern—Restrictions.
   No boat shall enter the ski pattern in a direction in conflict with the
counter-clockwise ski pattern.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981)
§ 52.0305   Length of Towline.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to employ a towline less than 70 feet or
greater than 90 feet in length.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981)
§ 52.0306   Number of Skiers Limited.
   The number of skiers towed by one boat shall not be more than two.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981)
§ 52.0307   Ski Starts—Where Permitted.
   Ski starts shall not be made from docks closed to such an activity.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981)
§ 52.0308   Permitted Hours of Skiing.
   It shall be unlawful to engage in the sport of water-skiing between the
hours of sunset and 7:00 a.m.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981)
§ 52.0309   Unattended Ski or Ski Equipment.
   No unattended ski or piece of ski equipment shall be left in the lake.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 2572, passed - -1981)
CHAPTER 4: FISHING ZONE REGULATIONS
Section
   
52.0401   Fishing—Where Permitted.
   
52.0402   (Deleted by Ord. 2572, passed - -1981).
   
52.0403   Cleaning of Fish.
   
52.0404   Violations.
§ 52.0401   Fishing—Where Permitted.
   No fishing shall be done from a concrete dam or from the dam at Green Valley
Lake. Except as above prohibited, people may fish the entire areas of Lake
Arrowhead, Big Bear Lake, Lake Silverwood, and Green Valley Lake, except where
otherwise posted.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972)
§ 52.0402   (Deleted by Ord. 2572, passed - -1981).
§ 52.0403   Cleaning of Fish.
   No fish shall be cleaned except at fish cleaning stations, so designated by
local governmental authorities.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972)
§ 52.0404   Violations.
   Every person violating any of the provisions of this Division shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $500.00 or be imprisoned in the County Jail, not exceeding six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Am. Ord. 1724, passed - -1972)
CHAPTER 5: FROZEN BODIES OF WATER
Section
   
52.0501   Definitions.
   
52.0502   Presence on Frozen Body of Water Prohibited.
   
52.0503   Exceptions.
   
52.0504   Violation an Infraction; Enforcement.
§ 52.0501   Definitions.
   The following words shall have the definitions set out here when used in
this Chapter.
   FROZEN BODY OF WATER. The following: Cedar Lake, Grass Valley Lake, Lake
Arrowhead, Baldwin Lake, Erwin Lake, Green Valley Lake, Lake Gregory, Big Bear
Lake, Bluff Lake, Cedar Lake, Jenks Lake and Arrowbear Lake;
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association or other
entity, but does not include the United States, the State of California or a
municipality or subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 2926, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 2982, passed - -1985)
§ 52.0502   Presence on Frozen Body of Water Prohibited.
   Except as provided in §
52.0503, when ice or snow is present on all or any part of the surface of any
frozen body of water, no person shall walk, run, play, ice skate or otherwise
travel upon or across the surface of such lake, nor shall any person operate a
snowmobile, A.T.C., motorcycle, ice boat, automobile or any other vehicle upon
said ice in any manner.
(Ord. 2926, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 2982, passed - -1985)
§ 52.0503   Exceptions.
   This Chapter shall not apply (a) to any properly licensed ice skating rink
in which the water is frozen to its entire depth; (b) to Olympic or other
training conducted on Green Valley Lake with the prior written consent of the
San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Office; (c) to ice rescue training conducted by
a law enforcement agency, fire protection district or other entity, or an agent
or group of such entities with the prior written consent of the San Bernardino
County Sheriff’s Office; (d) to any person or group which has obtained the
prior written consent of the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Office; (e) to any
person rescuing or attempting to rescue another or enforcing the provisions of
this Chapter or County Ordinance, State or Federal law.
(Ord. 2926, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 2982, passed - -1985)
§ 52.0504   Violation an Infraction; Enforcement.
   Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be an infraction. This
Chapter shall be enforced by all peace officers legally able to do so.
(Ord. 2926, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 2982, passed - -1985)
CHAPTER 6: WATER VEHICLE SPEED AND WAKE RESTRICTIONS ON LAKE HAVASU
Section
   
52.0505   Definitions.
   
52.0506   Speed Limits on Lake Havasu.
   
52.0507   Penalty.
§ 52.0505   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOAT OR OTHER VESSEL. A boat, ship, personal water craft, or other device,
craft or vehicle designed to be used in, on, and/or under water, however
powered.
   BOATERS. Persons operating a boat, ship, personal water craft, or other
device, craft or vehicle designed to be used in, on, and/or under water,
however powered.
   NO WAKE ZONES. No wave of water generated or increased by a moving boat or
other vessel which strikes the shore, a levee, anchored vessel or moored vessel
which is made fast to a way or landing float, shall show a white water break.
      “No wake” buoys shall be clearly marked and placed in a manner which will
make one or more of them plainly visible to boaters approaching the “no wake
zone” anywhere along its entire circumference.
   SPEED ZONE. In areas where speed limits are established, as used in this
Chapter, a SPEED ZONE means that a maximum speed limit is prescribed and posted
for boats and other vessels within a circumscribed space of water ringed by
marked buoys.
      Speed limit buoys shall be clearly marked and placed in a manner which
will make one or more of them plainly visible to boaters approaching the “speed
zone” anywhere along its entire circumference.
   WHITE WATER BREAK. A broken wave topped by distinctive white froth, caused
by a moving boat or other vessel creating enough turbulence through propulsion
that a vee-shaped pattern is formed on the surface of the water that curls
until the resultant wave forms a crest and breaks.
(Ord. 2926, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 3019, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3628,
passed - -)
§ 52.0506   Speed Limits on Lake Havasu.
   (a)   Copper Canyon.
      (1)   No person shall operate a boat or other vessel at greater than “no
wake” speed or above five miles per hour in areas designated “no wake zones” in
the cove area of the Colorado River commonly referred to as Copper Canyon,
which is part of Lake Havasu and is within the area described as follows:
   The northernmost edge of this cove is located at: Latitude: North 34
degrees, 25 minutes, 40 seconds Longitude: West 114 degrees, 18 minutes, 30
seconds. The southernmost edge of this cove is located at: Latitude: North 34
degrees, 25 minutes, .380 seconds Longitude: West 114 degrees, 18 minutes, .230
seconds.
      (2)   “No wake” and “speed zone” buoys shall be clearly marked and placed
in a manner which will make one or more of them plainly visible to boaters
approaching Copper Canyon anywhere along the entire waterway opening leading
into this cove.
   (b)   Black Meadow Landing Marina.
      (1)   No person shall operate a boat or other vessel at greater than “no
wake” speed or above five miles per hour in areas designated “no wake zones” in
the cove area of the Colorado River commonly referred to as Black Meadow
Landing Marina, which is part of Lake Havasu, and is within the area described
as follows: The northernmost edge of this cove is located at: Longitude: North
34 degrees, 21 minutes, 27 seconds Latitude: West 114 degrees, 11 minutes, 68
seconds. The southernmost edge of this cove is located at: Longitude: North 34
degrees, 21 minutes, 23 seconds Latitude: West 114 degrees, 11 minutes, 54
seconds.
      (2) “No wake” and “speed zone” buoys shall be clearly marked and placed
in a manner which will make one or more of them plainly visible to boaters
approaching Black Meadow Landing Marina anywhere along the entire waterway
opening leading into this cove.
   (c)   Havasu Palms Marina.
      (1)   No person shall operate a boat or other vessel at greater than “no
wake” speed or above five miles per hour in areas designated “no wake zones” in
the cove area of the Colorado River commonly referred to as Havasu Palms
Marina, which is part of Lake Havasu and is within the area described as
follows: The northernmost edge of this cove is located at: Latitude: North 34
degrees, 23 minutes, 98 seconds Longitude: West 114 degrees, 16 minutes, 86
seconds. The southernmost edge of this cove is located at: Latitude: North 34
degrees, 24 minutes, 05 seconds Longitude: West 114 degrees, 16 minutes, 80
seconds.
      (2)   “No wake” and “speed zone” buoys shall be clearly marked and placed
in a manner which will make one or more of them plainly visible to boaters
approaching Havasu Palms Marina anywhere along the entire waterway opening
leading into this cove.
   (d)   Unnamed Cove Located Seven/Tenths of a Mile North of Havasu Palms
Marina and Three/Tenths of a Mile Southwest of Pilot Rock.
      (1)   No person shall operate a boat or other vessel at greater than “no
wake” speed or above five miles per hour in areas designated “no wake zones” in
the unnamed cove area of the Colorado River that is located seven-tenths of a
mile north of Havasu Palms and three-tenths of a mile southwest of Pilot Rock,
which is part of Lake Havasu, and is within the area described as follows: The
northernmost edge of this cove is located at: Longitude: North 34 degrees, 24
minutes, 51 seconds. Latitude: West 114 degrees, 17 minutes, 57 seconds. The
southernmost edge of this cove is located at: Longitude: North 34 degrees, 24
minutes, 22 seconds Latitude: West 114 degrees, 17 minutes, 37 seconds.
      (2)   “No wake” and “speed zone” buoys shall be clearly marked and placed
in a manner which will make one or more of them plainly visible to boaters
approaching the unnamed cove located seven-tenths of a mile north of Havasu
Palms Marina and three-tenths of a mile southwest of Pilot Rock anywhere along
the entire waterway opening leading into this cove.
   (e)   Other Designated “No Wake Zones” and “Speed Zones” on Lake Havasu.
      (1)   In addition to the restrictions set forth in Subdivisions (a)
through (d) above, on that portion of the Colorado River within the County’s
jurisdiction and commonly referred to as Lake Havasu, it shall be unlawful to
operate a boat or other vessel in violation of marked “no wake zones” and
“speed zones.” Such zones may be designated by the Sheriff to promote public
safety and to reduce the hazards presented by conflicting uses on the Colorado
River by the boating public.
      (2)   All designated “no wake zones” and “speed zones” on Lake Havasu
shall be clearly marked by buoys placed in a manner which will make one or more
of them plainly visible to boaters approaching a designated “no wake zone.”
(Ord. 2926, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 3019, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3628,
passed - -)
§ 52.0507   Penalty.
   A violation of this Chapter shall be an infraction, punishable as provided
by the State of California Uniform Bail and Penalty Schedules for boating
offenses, pursuant to Rule 850 of the California Rules of Court.
(Ord. 2926, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 3019, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 3628,
passed - -)
CHAPTER 7: REGULATION OF ACCESS BY TIME OF DAY AND EMERGENCY RULES AND
REGULATIONS ON THE COLORADO RIVER
Section
   
52.0701   Purpose.
   
52.0702   Areas on the Colorado River with Access by Time of Day Regulations.
   
52.0703   Exceptions to Access by Time of Day Regulations.
   
52.0704   Emergency Rules and Regulations.
   
52.0705   Notice.
   
52.0706   Penalty.
§ 52.0701   Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide the Sheriff with authority for
regulating access by time of day and for establishing emergency rules and
regulations for all geographical areas on the waterways of the Colorado River
that are within the jurisdiction of the County of San Bernardino as may be
necessary to promote public safety; to preserve life; to protect property; to
reduce the hazards created by conflicting uses; and to coordinate the County’s
law enforcement activities with other interested State and Federal agencies,
agencies from contiguous counties, and tribal governments of affected Indian
tribes. This Chapter is necessary because of the heavy congestion of vessels on
the Colorado River within the County’s jurisdiction. These circumstances have
resulted in unsafe conditions, and an inability of Sheriff’s Department
personnel to maintain public safety and reach injured persons to render medical
aid. Access regulations by time of day are necessary to maintain open
waterways, to enable the Sheriff to timely and adequately provide for the
public safety and to rapidly and adequately respond to medical emergencies on
the Colorado River.
(Ord. 3686, passed - -1997)
§ 52.0702   Areas on the Colorado River with Access by Time of Day Regulations.
   (a)   Establishing Access by Time of Day Regulations. Whenever the Sheriff
determines that it is necessary to regulate access to any area or areas on the
Colorado River under the County’s jurisdiction in order to promote public
safety, to preserve life, or to protect property, he or she shall regulate
access by time of day on such area or areas for the public and shall erect and
prominently post notice of the regulations on specially marked signs and/or
buoys to provide adequate notice to the public of the access by time of day
regulations and the geographical boundaries of the regulated areas. No person
shall enter or remain within the areas of the Colorado River that are posted as
areas regulated to deny access pursuant to access by time of day regulations,
during the regulated time period specified in the posted notice. Access by time
of day regulations shall be established as the Sheriff determines in the
exercise of his or her reasonable discretion are necessary under the
circumstances relating to the affected area.
   (b)   Application of Access by Time of Day Regulations. Access by time of
day regulations during the applicable periods and in the regulated posted areas
shall deny access to boaters, swimmers, water-skiers, and operators of personal
water craft; prohibit use by the public of power vessels, vessels without
power, floating devices, and all other devices, crafts or vehicles, designed to
be used in, on, and/or under water, however powered; and prohibit all other
water-oriented activity subject to local control.
(Ord. 3686, passed - -1997)
§ 52.0703   Exceptions to Access by Time of Day Regulations.
   Whenever access by time of day regulations are implemented under this
Chapter, temporary access shall be permitted into and out of posted areas to
persons experiencing emergencies, and to owners, residents, and Indian tribal
members of lands and Indian country as defined by Federal law and border the
Colorado River, and the spouses and children of owners, residents, and Indian
tribal members of lands and Indian country as defined by Federal law that
border the Colorado River, for the limited purpose of affording such persons
access to and from lands which they or their family member owns or on which
they or their family member resides or over which their tribe or their family
member’s tribe has jurisdiction, upon a showing of proof of ownership,
residency or tribal status, or applicable family affiliation.
(Ord. 3686, passed - -1997)
§ 52.0704   Emergency Rules and Regulations.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to address temporary emergency
circumstances or conditions arising on the waterways of the Colorado River that
are within the jurisdiction of the County which are required to insure the
safety of persons and property because of disaster or other calamity.
   (b)   Authority. The authority to implement emergency rules and regulations
on the waterways of the Colorado River that are within the jurisdiction of the
county during an emergency shall be vested with the Sheriff, after the Sheriff
has consulted with tribal governments of affected Indian tribes, and has
consulted with and obtained the approval of the California Department of
Boating and Waterways prior to the adoption of any emergency rules or
regulations.
   (c)   Duration. Implementation of emergency rules and regulations on the
waterways of the Colorado River during an emergency shall remain in effect no
longer than 60 days, unless extended beyond 60 days by the Sheriff with
approval of the California Department of Boating and Waterways.
   (d)   Declaration of Implementation of Emergency Rules or Regulations. A
declaration of implementation of emergency rules or regulations shall be made
by the Sheriff prior to implementation of emergency rules or regulations, which
shall include an identifying description of the affected area, a brief
statement of the circumstances or conditions constituting the emergency, and
the type or types of emergency rules or regulations to be imposed on the area.
(Ord. 3686, passed - -1997)
§ 52.0705   Notice.
   (a)   Placement of Regulatory Waterway Markers.
      (1)   Areas Subject to Access by Time of Day Regulations. When an area is
designated as being subject to access by time of day regulations, the Sheriff
shall erect and post specially marked signs and/or buoys giving notice of the
access by time of day regulations and the notice of the access by time of day
regulations and the geographical boundaries of the regulated area, prominently
displayed on the waterway immediately outside the area subject to access by
time of day regulations in places where boaters and swimmers will have
sufficient notice in order to permit them to comply with the access
regulations.
      (2)   Areas Subject to Emergency Rules or Regulations. When emergency
rules or regulations are to be imposed on an area, the Sheriff shall erect and
post specially marked signs and/or buoys giving notice of the emergency rules
or regulations and the geographical boundaries of the regulated area,
prominently displayed on the waterway immediately outside the affected area in
places where boaters and swimmers will have sufficient notice of the emergency
rules or regulations in order to permit them to comply with the emergency rules
or regulations.
   (b)   Wording and Size of Regulatory Signs. The wording and size of waterway
signs and buoys shall be approved by the Sheriff’s Department and appropriate
State and Federal agencies after the Sheriff’s Department has consulted with
tribal governments of affected Indian tribes.
   (c)   Maintenance of Regulatory Signs. All waterway signs and buoys shall be
maintained by the Sheriff’s Department in proper condition or be replaced or
removed, within the discretion of the Sheriff.
(Ord. 3686, passed - -1997)
§ 52.0706   Penalty.
   A violation of this Chapter or any access by time of day regulations or any
emergency rules and regulations implemented pursuant to this Chapter shall be a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 3686, passed - -1997)
DIVISION 3: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: INJURY TO ROADS
Section
   
53.0101   Prohibition.
§ 53.0101   Prohibition.
   Every person who cuts, digs up, breaks or otherwise injures, damages or
destroys with a plow, cultivator or any other implement or means, the surface
of any of the roadways of said County over which said Board of Supervisors has
jurisdiction without the written consent of said Board or some member thereof,
or who deposits garbage, tin cans, tree or vine cutting, rock, bottles, broken
glass, nails or any refuse of any kind or nature upon, or who removes dirt from
any such roadway, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is
punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. A judgment that the defendant
pay a fine for violation of this Section may also direct that he or she be
imprisoned until the fine be satisfied, specifying the extent of the
imprisonment which must not exceed one day for every $2.00 of the fine.
(Ord. 120, passed - -1907)
CHAPTER 2: SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
Section
   
53.0201   Prohibition of Signs and Billboards on Highway Right-of-Way.
§ 53.0201   Prohibition of Signs and Billboards on Highway Right-of-Way.
   That no person, firm or corporation shall post any bill or advertising
matter or place any sign or billboard upon the right-of-way of any public
highway of the County of San Bernardino without first having secured the
permission of the Board of Supervisors so to do, and all persons desiring to
place any sign, billboard or advertising matter upon such highway, shall before
so doing, make application to the Board of Supervisors of the County of San
Bernardino so to do, with full particulars as to such signs and billboards or
advertising matter, and the Board of Supervisors shall thereupon, if satisfied
that such sign, billboard or advertising matter shall be placed on said right-
of-way, give a written permit to place the same in accordance with the terms of
the said application.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
Section, shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $300.00 and upon failure to
pay such fine may be imprisoned in the County Jail one day for each $5.00 of
said fine.
(Ord. 262, passed - -1925)
CHAPTER 3: PARKING REGULATIONS IN MOUNTAIN AREAS
Section
   
53.0301   Purpose.
   
53.0302   Definitions.
   
53.0303   Parking in Snow Area.
   
53.0304   Posting of Snow Area.
   
53.0305   Destruction of Signs.
   
53.0306   Removal of Vehicles.
   
53.0307   Emergency Vehicles.
   
53.0308   Penalty.
§ 53.0301   Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to safeguard the public health, safety and
general welfare by prohibiting parking vehicles on State and County roadways in
certain unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County to promote effective and
speedy removal of snow by the San Bernardino County Transportation Department
and the California State Department of Transportation or other persons engaged,
hired, contracted, or otherwise authorized to remove snow from said roadways
and to prevent hazardous traffic conditions on said roadways.
(Am. Ord. 2024, passed - -1975)
§ 53.0302   Definitions.
   When used in this Chapter, the words and phrases contained in this Section
shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, have the following meanings:
   EMERGENCY VEHICLES. All vehicles defined in Vehicle Code §§ 165 and 165.5.
   PERSON. Includes a natural person, firm, copartnership, association, or
corporation.
   ROADWAY. That portion of highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel including improved shoulders.
   SNOW AREA. All unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County encompassed by
the U. S. National Forest boundary.
   SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT. Rotary plows, graders and loaders with V-plot,
angle-plow and/or wing plow attachments and such other machinery or equipment
as may be engaged in snow removal and all supporting vehicles of the San
Bernardino County Transportation Department and California State Department of
Transportation or other persons engaged, hired, contracted or otherwise
authorized to remove snow from State or County highways or roads.
   UNATTENDED VEHICLE. A vehicle where the licensed driver responsible for the
vehicle is not within an audible distance and immediately available for moving
said vehicle.
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved,
or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Am. Ord. 2024, passed - -1975)
§ 53.0303   Parking in Snow Area.
   It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of a vehicle to
park within snow area or leave unattended, such vehicle upon any State or
County roadway, so as to interfere with snow removal operations, except when
necessary to comply with the directions of peace officers.
(Am. Ord. 2024, passed - -1975)
§ 53.0304   Posting of Snow Area.
   Snow area shall be posted by signs in a manner and at such places as are
reasonably calculated to give notice of the snow area parking restrictions
contained in this Chapter.
(Am. Ord. 2024, passed - -1975)
§ 53.0305   Destruction of Signs.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, remove, mutilate, destroy
or otherwise tamper with any sign erected pursuant to §
53.0304 of this Chapter.
(Am. Ord. 2024, passed - -1975)
§ 53.0306   Removal of Vehicles.
   (a)   Any vehicle which is in violation of this Chapter may be moved or
caused to be moved by those regularly employed and salaried County or State
highway employees designated by the Board of Supervisors, or the California
Highway Patrol.
   (b)   Charges for vehicle removal, tow away, and storage, shall be assessed
against the vehicle in accordance with the California Highway Patrol Tow
Service Agreement for San Bernardino, Arrowhead, Pomona and Banning Areas.
(Am. Ord. 2024, passed - -1975)
§ 53.0307   Emergency Vehicles.
   This Chapter shall not apply to emergency vehicles.
(Am. Ord. 2024, passed - -1975)
§ 53.0308   Penalty.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine or fines established by
Vehicle Code § 42001.
(Am. Ord. 2325, passed - -1979)
CHAPTER 4: BLINKER LIGHTS UPON AND ADJACENT TO PUBLIC HIGHWAYS
Section
   
53.0401   Definitions.
   
53.0402   Permit for the Use of Blinker Lights.
   
53.0403   Application for Permit.
§ 53.0401   Definitions.
   The following words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them:
   BLINKER LIGHT. A light whether colored or uncolored which emits an
intermittent light.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
   STREET. Every public street, alley, lane, court, place, drive, bridge,
viaduct, or trestle intended for use or used by the general public.
(Ord. 225, passed - -1924)
§ 53.0402   Permit for the Use of Blinker Lights.
   No person shall erect or maintain or cause or permit to be erected or
maintained, any blinker light upon or adjacent to any street within the County
of San Bernardino whether on public or private property, which emits a light
the same as or similar to highway warning, danger or signal lights, and which
blinker light is so located as to be visible from any public street unless
under and in accordance with the terms of a permit in writing first obtained
from the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to apply to advertising
signs upon private property consisting of continuous or intermittent lights in
the form of illuminated words, letters or figures or portraying any advertising
scene, figure or emblem and so constructed, arranged and located as to be
clearly distinguishable from a highway warning, danger, or signal light.
   Nor shall this Chapter be deemed to apply to any government lighthouse nor
to any warning, danger or signal light heretofore or hereafter erected or
maintained as required by law or under orders of any board or commission of the
State of California.
(Ord. 225, passed - -1924)
§ 53.0403   Application for Permit.
   Any person desiring to erect or maintain any blinker light or lights upon or
adjacent to any street so located as to be visible from any street shall first
make application in writing so to do to the Board of Supervisors, which
application shall state the proposed location of such light or lights, and a
brief description of the proposed light or lights. The Board of Supervisors
shall consider every such application, and if it finds that the blinker light
or lights proposed to be erected will serve as a warning to persons using the
street and will tend to increase the safety of the traveling public, shall
issue a permit in writing authorizing the erection and maintenance of such
blinker lights. Such permit shall be valid until revoked and no charge shall be
made for any such permit.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$100.00 or by imprisonment in the city jail or County Jail not exceeding 30
days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 225, passed - -1924)
CHAPTER 5: LITTERING HIGHWAYS
Section
   
53.0501   Reward for Reporting Violators.
§ 53.0501   Reward for Reporting Violators.
   The County will pay a reward of $100.00 to any person who gives information
which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person for a violation of Penal
Code § 374.3.
(Ord. 1084, passed - -1963)
CHAPTER 6: COUNTY PARKING LOTS
Section
   
53.0601   Scope of Chapter.
   
53.0602   Administration.
   
53.0603   Control Devices and Equipment, and Marking of Stalls.
   
53.0604   Parking Regulations.
   
53.0605   Speed Limit.
   
53.0606   Classification of Offenses and Penalties.
   
53.0607   Removal or Towing of Vehicles.
   
53.0608   Electric Vehicle Fees and Time Limits.
§ 53.0601   Scope of Chapter.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all parking lots owned or
operated by the County of San Bernardino and shall apply to all vehicles public
and private.
(Ord. 939, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1027, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1600, passed
- -1970; Am. Ord. 2226, passed - -1978)
§ 53.0602   Administration.
   (a)   Policy. Parking lots owned or operated by the County of San Bernardino
will be governed by this Chapter and Board Policy as set forth in the County
Policy Manual.
   (b)   Enforcement. The Assistant County Administrator for the Public and
Support Services Group or designee shall be the responsible authority for the
administration of County parking lots and the enforcement of the provisions of
this Chapter.
   (c)   Ad Hoc Parking Committee. The Administrator, or his or her designee,
may refer questions concerning County parking lot rules and regulations to ad
hoc Parking Committees for consideration.
(Ord. 939, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1027, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1600, passed
- -1970; Am. Ord. 2226, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 2847, passed - -1984; Am. Ord.
4034, passed - -2007)
§ 53.0603   Control Devices and Equipment, and Marking of Stalls.
   The Projects and Facilities Management Department shall erect signs,
devices, and other apparatus and provide marked spaces or stalls for the
control of traffic and the parking of motor vehicles, including designated
parking spaces for disabled persons and disabled veterans in compliance with
Vehicle Code § 22511.8.
(Ord. 939, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1027, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1600, passed
- -1970; Am. Ord. 2226, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 2847, passed - -1984; Am. Ord.
3010, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 4034, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4446, passed - -
2022)
§ 53.0604   Parking Regulations.
   The following regulations shall govern parking in County parking lots:
   (a)   Motor vehicles shall be parked only in marked stalls or designated
spaces.
   (b)   Motor vehicle operators must observe and comply with all traffic and
parking control signs, devices, and directions.
   (c)   A person assigned a particular parking lot or space shall park his or
her motor vehicle only in such lot or space.
   (d)   Appropriate parking permits must be properly displayed for parking in
permitted spaces.
   (e)   There shall be no parking in spaces or stalls in such manner as to
obstruct the use of a parking lot or any other space by another person or to
constitute a hazard to safety of person or property.
   (f)   Only motor vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or
placard, issued pursuant to California Vehicle Code §§ 5007, 22511.55, or
22511.59 may park in parking spaces or stalls designated for disabled persons
or disabled veterans pursuant to Vehicle Code § 22511.8.
   (g)   Only electric vehicles (EVs) and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles
(PHEVs) may park at designated EV charging station parking stalls. Any vehicle
that does not require charging and EVs or PHEVs that are parked at, but not
plugged into, the EV charging station are subject to penalties. "EV charging
station parking stall" is defined as a space in a parking lot or other location
containing electric vehicle supply equipment that supplies electrical power for
charging plug-in electric vehicles.
(Ord. 939, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1027, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1600, passed
- -1970; Am. Ord. 2226, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3010, passed - -1986; Am. Ord.
4034, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4446, passed - -2022)
§ 53.0605   Speed Limit.
   The maximum speed limit of all County parking lots or County-owned property
shall be 15 miles per hour; however, lower speed limits may be posted by the
County and enforced accordingly.
(Ord. 939, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1027, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1600, passed
- -1970; Am. Ord. 2226, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 2847, passed - -1984; Am. Ord.
4034, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4446, passed - -2022)
§ 53.0606   Classification of Offenses and Penalties.
   (a)   Violation of §
53.0605 is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by
imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six months or both.
Violation of any provisions of §
53.0604 is a parking violation subject to a civil penalty, unless the violation
is a misdemeanor. The penalties for violation of §
53.0604 shall be as follows:
      (1)   For §
53.0604(a) the penalty amount shall be $70.00.
      (2)   For §
53.0604(b) the penalty amount shall be $80.00.
      (3)   For §
53.0604(c) the penalty amount shall be $80.00.
      (4)   For §
53.0604(d) the penalty amount shall be $100.00.
      (5)   For §
53.0604(e) the penalty amount shall be $100.00.
      (6)   For §
53.0604(f) the penalty amount shall be $350.00.
      (7)   For §
53.0604(g) the penalty amount shall be $200.00.
   (b)   A late fee in the amount of 50% shall be added to the penalty amount
when the penalty is not paid within 31 days of the date of the notice of
violation. The date of payment is the day upon which the payment is received,
or, when mailed, the date of the postmark.
(Ord. 939, passed - -1960; Am. Ord. 1027, passed - -1962; Am. Ord. 1600, passed
- -1970; Am. Ord. 2226, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3010, passed - -1986; Am. Ord.
4034, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4446, passed - -2022)
§ 53.0607 Removal or Towing of Vehicles.
   (a)   Any vehicle in violation of this Chapter may be removed or towed and
stored. Removal and storage costs shall be charged to and paid by the vehicle
owner prior to release of the vehicle, in a manner and subject to the
requirements of Chapter 10 of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code.
   (b)   A vehicle shall not be removed or towed unless signs are posted giving
notice of the possibility of removal or towing, and in a manner and subject to
the requirements of Chapter 11 of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 4446, passed - -2022)
§ 53.0608 Electric Vehicle Fees and Time Limits.
   (a)   The EV charging station monitors shall display the schedule of fees
and time limits, if any, established by the Board of Supervisors. As a
convenience to vehicle owners, the applicable fee, if any, may be displayed on
the EV charging station application.
   (b)   EV charging stations are intended for EVs and PHEVs that need to be
charged. EVs and PHEVs not utilizing the service or parking for longer than is
designated by signage are subject to citation as provided in §
53.0606 and removal as provided in §
53.0607.
   (c)   Electric vehicle charging station user fees shall be as provided in §
16.0209 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4446, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 7: SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLE FUELS
Section
   
53.0701   Sign Required.
   
53.0702   Availability of Fuel.
   
53.0703   Compliance with Business and Professions Code.
   
53.0704   Optional Posting of Prices.
§ 53.0701   Sign Required.
   Every person, firm, copartnership, association, or corporation offering for
sale or selling any gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel to the public from any
place of business in the unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino,
shall post or display a sign which is clearly visible from any street or
highway, except from freeways, adjacent to such place of business, and which
indicates the actual price per gallon, including all taxes, at which all grades
of gasoline or diesel fuel are currently being offered for sale or sold.
(Repealed by Ord. 1772, passed - -1972; Ord. 1894, passed - -1974; Am. Ord.
1911, passed - -1974)
§ 53.0702   Availability of Fuel.
   Where any of the grades of motor fuel, whose prices have been posted
pursuant to §
53.0701 are not immediately available for sale, there shall also be posted on
each motor fuel pump, which is without fuel, a sign of at least one and one-
half inches high with letters in contrasting color, stating: “OUT OF GAS,” or
“NO FUEL AVAILABLE,” or words of similar meaning.
(Repealed by Ord. 1772, passed - -1972; Ord. 1894, passed - -1974; Am. Ord.
1911, passed - -1974)
§ 53.0703   Compliance with Business and Professions Code.
   Any sign posted or displayed pursuant to §
53.0701 of this Chapter shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of
Business and Professions Code §§ 13531 and 13532, and shall be in compliance
with the provisions of this County Code regulating size and construction of
signs.
(Repealed by Ord. 1772, passed - -1972; Ord. 1894, passed - -1974)
§ 53.0704   Optional Posting of Prices.
   Any other sign used for the posting of prices for grades of motor fuel other
than the posting of prices required by §
53.0701, shall be optional, but any such sign shall be in compliance with
Business and Professions Code §§ 20880 et seq.
(Repealed by Ord. 1772, passed - -1972; Am. Ord. 1911, passed - -1974)
CHAPTER 8: POWERS OF COUNTY ROAD COMMISSIONER TO CLOSE OR RESTRICT USE OF
COUNTY HIGHWAYS
Section
   
53.0801   Powers of the County Road Commissioner to Close or Restrict Use of
County Highways.
§ 53.0801   Powers of the County Road Commissioner to Close or Restrict Use of
County Highways.
   Pursuant to the authority of Streets and Highways Code § 942.6, the Board of
Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino hereby delegates to the County Road
Commissioner the powers to restrict the use of, or close, any County highway
whenever the Commissioner considers such closure or restriction of use
necessary:
   (a)   For the protection of the public;
   (b)   For the protection of such County highway from damage during storms;
   (c)   During construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon.
(Ord. 2623, passed - -1982)
CHAPTER 9: TRUCK ROUTES AND PARKING REGULATIONS IN THE CHINO HILLS COMMUNITY
Section
   
53.0901   Chino Hills Defined.
   
53.0902   Truck Route Designation Plan; Parking Regulations.
   
53.0903   Penalty.
§ 53.0901   Chino Hills Defined.
   The Chino Hills is that County unincorporated territory bounded on the south
by the Riverside and Orange County lines, on the west by the Los Angeles County
line, on the north by the Los Angeles County line and on the east by State
Highway 71, from the Los Angeles County line southerly to Chino Hills Parkway,
then east on Chino Hills Parkway to Chino Creek, southerly on Chino Creek to
Pine Avenue, westerly on Pine Avenue to State Highway 71, and south on State
Highway 71 to the Riverside County line.
(Ord. 3361, passed - -1989)
§ 53.0902   Truck Route Designation Plan; Parking Regulations.
   (a)   Whenever the Board, by resolution, designates and describes any street
or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle
exceeding a gross vehicle weight limit of 7,000 pounds lying within the Chino
Hills, the Director of Transportation is authorized and directed to designate
such street or streets by appropriate signs as truck routes for the movement of
vehicles exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 7,000 pounds.
   (b)   When such truck routes are established and designated by appropriate
signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 7,000
pounds shall drive on such routes and none other, provided, however, the
provisions of this Section shall not prohibit the operator of any vehicle
exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 7,000 pounds coming from an unrestricted
street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from a restricted
street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods,
wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the
restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the
actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any
building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit
has previously been obtained.
   (c)   Parking of commercial vehicles on restricted streets, when necessary
for the purpose of making pick-ups or deliveries, shall be restricted to 30
minutes for any vehicle exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 7,000 pounds.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any commercial vehicle
to allow the trailer or semi-trailer, disconnected from the truck tractor, to
remain standing upon any highway, street or alley in the Chino Hills.
   (e)   The provisions of this Article shall not apply to:
      (1)   Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission or any public agency;
      (2)   Any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor
while being used in the construction, installation or repair of any facility;
      (3)   Any vehicle defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California
as a house car (motor home) or vehicles used for recreation only.
   (f)   The streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of
vehicles exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 7,000 pounds.
(Ord. 3361, passed - -1989)
§ 53.0903   Penalty.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine or fines established by
Vehicle Code § 42001.
(Ord. 3361, passed - -1989)
CHAPTER 10: AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND
Section
   
53.1001   Purpose.
   
53.1002   Definitions.
   
53.1003   Receipt of Fees; Establishment of Trust Fund.
   
53.1004   Use of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund.
   
53.1005   Audits.
§ 53.1001   Purpose.
   This Chapter is intended to support the South Coast Air Quality Management
District’s (SCAQMD) imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the
County into compliance with the requirements set forth in Health and Safety
Code § 44243 in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing
programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles.
(Ord. 3431, passed - -1991)
§ 53.1002   Definitions.
   As applied in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined
as follows:
   FEE ADMINISTRATOR. The County Auditor/Controller.
   MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAMS. Any program or project
implemented by the County to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant
to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Health
and Safety Code § 40460.
(Ord. 3431, passed - -1991)
§ 53.1003   Receipt of Fees; Establishment of Trust Fund.
   (a)   Vehicle registration fees due pursuant to this ordinance disbursed by
the SCAQMD and remitted to the County shall be accepted by the Fee
Administrator.
   (b)   Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the Fee Administrator shall
be responsible for placement of such funds into a separate account as
hereinafter specified.
   (c)   The County will establish a separate interest-bearing Air Quality
Improvement Trust Fund where the Fee Administrator will place the funds.
Interest earned by the Trust Fund shall be credited to that fund and shall be
used to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs.
(Ord. 3431, passed - -1991)
§ 53.1004   Use of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund.
   All funds disbursed by SCAQMD and deposited in the Air Quality Improvement
Trust Fund shall be used exclusively for mobile source air pollution reduction
programs.
(Ord. 3431, passed - -1991)
§ 53.1005   Audits.
   The County consents to audits of all programs and projects funded by the Air
Quality Improvement Trust Fund, at least once every two years.
(Ord. 3431, passed - -1991)
CHAPTER 11: CITATION OF VEHICLES PARKED WITHOUT PERMISSION OF OWNER OF PRIVATE
REAL PROPERTY FOR PURPOSES OF SALE OF VEHICLE
Section
   
53.1101   Prohibition Against Parking Vehicles for Sale on Private Real
Property without Permission of Owner of the Private Real Property.
   
53.1102   Administration.
   
53.1103   Penalties.
§ 53.1101   Prohibition Against Parking Vehicles for Sale on Private Real
Property without Permission of Owner of the Private Real Property.
   (a)   Except as provided for in Subdivisions (b) or (c) of this Section, no
person shall park, stop, place or leave standing any vehicle or cause any
vehicle to be parked or placed upon any portion of any parcel of private real
property which is adjacent to any public street or highway located within the
unincorporated area of the County for the purpose of selling, displaying for
sale or offering for sale any such vehicle. The terms PRIVATE REAL PROPERTY as
used in this Chapter shall include any real property interest owned by a
private person, including private streets, private roadways, a private easement
on publicly owned real property, or a private title to real property encumbered
by a publicly owned easement.
   (b)   Subject to the limitations of Subdivision (d), Subdivision (a) shall
not prohibit any person from selling, displaying for sale or offering for sale
three or fewer vehicles at the same time on any single parcel of private real
property, provided the person owns or legally occupies the property or has
written permission of the property owner, authorized agent of the property
owner or the person in lawful possession of such private real property. Such
written permission shall be displayed in or on the vehicle(s) in such a manner
as to be clearly visible, and upon request by a peace officer or code
enforcement officer employed by the Department of Land Use Services, such
written permission shall be made available for further inspection.
   (c)   Subdivision (a) shall not prohibit a person from parking a vehicle
upon a public street or highway in a legal parking space for the time period
allowed by other laws or ordinances.
   (d)   Neither Subdivision (b) nor (c) shall exempt a person from compliance
with laws relating to public nuisance, County of San Bernardino Development
Code (Title 8), other ordinances regarding land use districts, the sale of
vehicles on private real property, or hawking.
   (e)   The parking or placing of any vehicle on private real property with a
sign or other advertising device thereon or proximate thereto, indicating such
vehicle is for sale shall constitute prima facie evidence that such vehicle was
parked or placed for the purpose of selling, displaying, or offering the
vehicle for sale.
§ 53.1102   Administration.
   The provisions of this Chapter may be administered and enforced by the
Director of the Land Use Services Department and his or her employees or
designees. In order to implement the program as set forth in this Chapter, the
Director of the Land Use Services Department shall prepare procedures
consistent with Vehicle Code § 40215 for issuance of citations, review of
citations, administrative appeals and for reporting to the appropriate State
agencies in order to enforce the citations consistent with State law for
approval of the County Administrative Officer.
§ 53.1103   Penalties.
   Violation of any provisions of §
53.1101 is an infraction, with violations of Subdivision (a) thereof punishable
by a penalty in the following amounts: a penalty of $100.00 for a first
violation; a penalty not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same
ordinance within one year; a penalty not exceeding $500.00 for each additional
violation of the same ordinance within one year. Each calendar day that a
vehicle is parked upon such property shall be considered a violation, and the
parking of a vehicle shall be considered a separate violation even if multiple
vehicles owned by the same person are parked on the same parcel on the same
day.
(Ord. 3858, passed - -2002)
DIVISION 4: VALIDITY OF TITLE 5
Section
   
54.0401   Validity of Title 5.
§ 54.0401   Validity of Title 5.
   This Title and the various parts, divisions, chapters, sections, and clauses
thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of
this shall not be affected thereby. The County Board of Supervisors hereby
declares that it would have passed this and each part thereof, regardless of
the fact that one or more parts thereof be declared unconstitutional or
invalid.
TITLE 6: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter
DIVISION 1: (DELETED)
DIVISION 2: (DELETED)
DIVISION 3: BUILDING REGULATIONS
   
1.   California Building Code
   
1.5   California Residential Code
   
2.   California Electrical Code
   
3.   California Plumbing Code
   
4.   California Mechanical Code
   
5.   California Energy Code
   
6.   (Repealed by Ord. 4314, passed - -2016)
   
7.   Posting of Street Numbers
   
8.   General Provisions for California Building Standards Code
   
9.   (Repealed by Ord. 4130, passed - -2010)
   
10.   (Repealed by Ord. 4130, passed - -2010)
   
11.   Disaster Reconstruction
   
12.   (Repealed by Ord. 4314, passed - -2016)
   
13.   California Historical Building Code
   
14.   California Existing Building Code
   
15.   California Green Building Standards Code
   
16.   Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems
   
17.   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
   
18.   California Administrative Code
   
19.   International Property Maintenance Code
   
20.   California Referenced Standards Code
   
21.   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
22.   Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance
DIVISION 4: VALIDITY OF TITLE 6
DIVISION 5: (DELETED)
DIVISION 6: (DELETED)
DIVISION 7: UNDERGROUNDING PROCEDURAL REGULATIONS
   
1.   Definitions
   
2.   Procedure—Public Hearing by Board of Supervisors
DIVISION 8: (DELETED BY ORD. 2815, PASSED - -1983)
DIVISION 9: (DELETED BY ORD. 2540, PASSED - -1981)
 
Editor's Note:
   Ordinance 4046, passed April 8, 2008, repealed and reenacted Title 6.
DIVISION 1: (DELETED)
DIVISION 2: (DELETED)
DIVISION 3: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
Section
   
63.0101   Adoption of California Building Code.
   
63.0102   Adoption of Code Appendices.
   
63.0103   Changes in the Appendices.
   
63.0104   Relocation Permits.
   
63.0105   Appeals Board.
§ 63.0101   Adoption of California Building Code.
   A copy of the 2021 Edition of the International Building Code, volumes 1 and
2, prepared and published by the International Code Council, with state
amendments, also known as the 2022 California Building Code, contained in Part
2 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, having been filed in the
Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County, is
hereby designated and adopted by reference as the Building Code for the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California, subject to
those amendments and limitations as set forth in this Chapter 1.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0102 Adoption of Code Appendices.
   Appendices C - "Group U - Agricultural Buildings," Appendix I - "Patio
Covers," and Appendix J - "Grading" of the 2022 California Building Code are
hereby adopted by reference as part of the Building Code for the unincorporated
area of San Bernardino County, State of California, subject to those amendments
and limitations as set forth in this Chapter 1.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0103   Changes in the Appendices.
   (a)   Appendix J - "Grading" is hereby amended by adding exemption 8 to
Section J103.2 entitled "Exemptions" to read:
      8.   The sum of the total excavation and fill not exceeding 100 cubic
yards.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0104   Relocation Permits.
   (a)   Relocation Building Permit Required. A person shall not move onto any
premises, other than a commercial storage yard authorized for such use, any
building or structure, except a contractor's tool shed, storage building or
similar structure which is moved as construction requires, until he or she
first secures a relocation building permit as hereinafter provided.
   (b)   Application. An applicant for a relocation permit shall submit
photographs of at least two separate elevations, one of which shall be the
front, and a certificate from a pest control agency or operator licensed under
the Structural Pest Control Act of California, showing freedom from termite
infestation, for each building or structure to be moved, when application for a
relocation permit is filed.
   (c)   Structural Observation Report Fee. An applicant for a relocation
permit shall pay a structural observation report fee at the time of submittal.
The fee shall be in accordance with
Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code (Schedule
of Fees).
   (d)   Building and Relocation Site Inspection Report. Upon receipt of an
application for permit to relocate a building or structure, a detailed
structural observation report by a civil or structural engineer, or an
architect licensed by the State of California to practice as such, shall be
submitted. The report shall describe any structural deficiencies and all non-
structural code-related deficiencies and be stamped and signed by the reporting
engineer or architect. This report shall be approved or disapproved by the
Building Official. If approved for moving, the report shall contain the
requirements necessary to make the building or structure comply with Chapter 14
of the 2022 California Existing Building Code and any additional requirements
necessary to assure that such relocation shall not have detrimental effect by
size, design, or age on the living environment and property values in the area
into which the building or structure is to be moved.
   (e)   Report Validity. Additional corrections may be added to the report
whenever the structure has been vandalized, damaged during transportation, or
altered in any manner after the structural observation report has been
submitted for review.
   (f)   Changes. The applicant shall make all required changes within 180 days
and shall agree in writing to do so. This time limitation may be extended by
the Building Official upon receipt of evidence of just and proper cause;
provided, however, that no such extension shall be granted when, in his or her
judgment, such an extension would be detrimental to the public welfare for any
cause or reason.
   (g)   Declaration of Public Nuisance. When any relocated building or
structure or portion thereof remains unfinished or unfit for occupancy after
expiration of the time limit herein specified, any and all permits pertaining
thereto shall expire by limitation and such building or structure or portion
thereof is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated as authorized
by the County Code and as provided by law.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0105 Appeals Boards.
   (a)   Building and Safety Appeals Board. In order to hear and decide appeals
of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative
to the application and interpretation of the California Building Standards Code
and its amendments, the County Code and the building requirements of the
County, or other applicable law, the Building and Safety Appeals Board is
hereby established pursuant to § 1.8.8 of the California Building Standards
Code, as adopted herein.
      (1)   Membership. The Building and Safety Appeals Board shall include
five regular members and three alternate members. Members shall be appointed at
large. No County employees shall be members of this board. All members -
regular and alternate - must have knowledge, experience and training to review
and reach decisions on matters pertaining to building construction and
applicable building codes, regulations, and ordinances. Members shall serve a
term of four years. In addition to the board members and the alternate members,
the Building Official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary
to the board. The members of the appeals board shall be appointed by the Board
of Supervisors and shall hold office at its pleasure. Terms of office shall be
staggered. Three of the initial appointments for regular members and one of the
initial appointments for alternate members to the board shall be for two-year
terms. A member whose term has expired shall continue to serve in that capacity
until a new appointment is made by the Board of Supervisors. Upon
recommendation of the County Chief Executive Officer or his or her designee,
members may be removed by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors.
      (2)   Meetings. A quorum shall be a meeting of at least three members.
Alternate members may sit on the board in the absence of any regular members
and shall be counted towards the quorum of three if there is an insufficient
number of regular members available. A regular meeting shall be held at least
once annually at a date and time established by a resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. Rules for notice and conduct of the Building and Safety Appeals
Board meetings, including without limitation all regular, adjourned regular and
special meetings, shall be pursuant to the terms of this section and shall be
in accordance with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code §
54950 et seq.). The members shall be reimbursed as provided by County Code §
13.0618(b).
      (3)   Responsibilities and Authority. The Building and Safety Appeals
Board shall conduct hearings on appeals of orders, decisions, and
determinations made by the Building Official relative to the applications and
interpretation of the California Building Standards Code, and other regulations
governing the use, maintenance, and change of occupancy. The Building and
Safety Appeals Board shall have no authority to waive requirements of the
California Building Standards Code or the County Code. All decisions of the
Building and Safety Appeals Board shall be rendered in writing. The Building
and Safety Appeals Board shall meet as necessary in order to abide by the
scheduling provisions of County Code §
63.0105(c)(4). An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the
Building Code, as adopted herein, or the County Code, or the rules legally
adopted thereunder, have been incorrectly interpreted, or do not fully apply,
or that an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The
Building and Safety Appeals Board shall also function as the "local appeals
board" and the "housing appeals board" specified in the California Health and
Safety Code §§ 17920.5 and 17920.6.
   (b)   Physically Disabled Access Appeals Board. For the purpose of
considering written appeals to the actions taken by the Building Official in
the exercise of its or his or her responsibility and authority as specified
herein and to ratify certain exemption actions of the Building Official in
enforcing the accessibility requirements of Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations for privately funded construction, and to serve as an advisor to
the Building Official on disabled access matters, there is hereby established
the Physically Disabled Access Appeals Board.
      (1)   Membership. The Physically Disabled Access Appeals Board shall
consist of five regular members as follows: a minimum of two physically
disabled members; two members experienced in the professions or disciplines of
construction; and one member of the public. The Building Official shall be an
ex officio member and shall act as secretary to the board. The two members
experienced in the professions or disciplines of construction shall be regular
or alternate board members from the Building and Safety Appeals Board, and
shall be so designated by majority vote of that board. The two physically
disabled members and the one public member may, but are not required to be,
members of the Building and Safety Appeals Board. The Physically Disabled
Access Appeals Board shall also have a panel of three alternate members. Said
alternate panel must consist of one physically disabled member, one member
experienced in the professions or disciplines of construction as designated by
the Building and Safety Appeals Board, and one member of the public. A regular
member may only be substituted by an alternate member of the same
classification. The members of the Physically Disabled Access Appeals Board
shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors and shall hold office at its
pleasure. Terms of office shall be for four years, and for members appointed to
both the Building and Safety Appeals Board and the Physically Disabled Access
Appeals Board said terms shall be served concurrently. However, as to one of
the initial appointments for an individual with a disability, the initial
appointment shall be for two years to allow for the terms of office to be
staggered. A member whose term has expired shall continue to serve in that
capacity until a new appointment is made by the Board of Supervisors. Upon
recommendation of the County Chief Executive Officer or his or her designee,
members may be removed by majority vote of the Board of Supervisors.
      (2)   Meetings. All meetings of the Physically Disabled Access Appeals
Board, including without limitation, regular, adjourned regular and special
meetings, shall be conducted pursuant to the terms of this section and called,
noticed, held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Ralph M.
Brown Act (Government Code § 54950 et seq.). The members shall be reimbursed as
provided by County Code §
13.0618(b).
      (3)   Responsibilities and Authority. The Physically Disabled Access
Appeals Board shall serve as the "local appeals board" specified in § 19957.5
of the California Health and Safety Code in appeals relating to accommodations
for the physically disabled. The authority of the Physically Disabled Access
Appeals Board shall consist of the conducting of appeals for the purpose
limited to that expressed in California Health and Safety Code §§ 19955 through
19959. All decisions of the Physically Disabled Access Appeals Board shall be
rendered in writing.
   (c)   Appeal. Unless otherwise provided, reference to "Appeals Board" shall
refer to the Building and Safety Appeals Board or Physically Disabled Access
Appeals Board, whichever is applicable.
      (1)   Timing and Form of Appeal. The Building Official shall have the
right to appeal to the Appeals Board, provided that a written application for
appeal is filed within 20 days after the decision, determination, or notice and
order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the
true intent of the applicable code or rules legally adopted thereunder have
been incorrectly interpreted, or that the provisions of the applicable code or
rules legally adopted thereunder do not fully apply or that the requirements of
the applicable code or the rules legally adopted thereunder are adequately
satisfied by other means. The appeal shall be made in writing and filed along
with the appeal fee with the appropriate County office. The written appeal
shall contain:
         (A)   A heading containing the words "Before the Building and Safety
Appeals Board of San Bernardino County" or "Before the Physically Disabled
Access Appeals Board of San Bernardino County," whichever is applicable.
         (B)   A caption reading: "Appeal of ... " giving the names of all
appellants participating in the appeal;
         (C)   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of
the appellants;
         (D)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the
specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to
support the contentions of the appellant;
         (E)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should
be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside;
         (F)   The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their
official mailing addresses; and
         (G)   The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at
least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
      (2)   Processing of Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal and the applicable
fee filed pursuant to this section, the Building Official shall present it at
the next regular or special meeting of the Appeals Board.
      (3)   Limitation to Appeal. Limit of one appeal hearing per property or
parcel relative to the same notice and order or action of the Building Official
may be heard by an Appeals Board. If appellants consist of both property owners
and any interested parties of record, appellants must jointly file an appeal,
and the appeal hearing must be conducted jointly amongst all appellants.
      (4)   Scheduling and Noticing of Appeal Hearing. As soon as practicable
after receiving the written appeal and appeal fee, the Appeals Board shall fix
a date, time, and place for the hearing of the appeal by the board. Such date
shall not be less than ten days nor more than 60 days from the date the appeal
was filed with the Building Official, subject to any stay pending a decision to
grant or deny an appeal fee hardship waiver request. Written notice of the time
and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten days prior to the date of
the hearing to each appellant and any interested parties of record discovered
through reasonable diligence, through either personal service or first class
mail, each appellant at the address shown on the appeal, and to the interested
party of record at the party's last known address. Notice by mail shall be
deemed effective on the date of deposit.
      (5)   Open Hearing. Hearings before the Appeals Board shall be open to
the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Code Official
and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be
heard.
      (6)   Waiver of Appeal Fee for Financial Hardship. Any appellant who is
financially unable to pay the required appeal fee may file a written request
for an appeal fee hardship waiver. The written request must be filed prior to
or contemporaneous with the filing of the appeal. The written request shall be
filed with the Building Official. The appellant requesting the appeal fee
hardship waiver shall indicate on the written appeal that an appeal fee
hardship waiver request has been filed.
      (7)   Appeal Fee Hardship Waiver Evaluation Procedures. Hardship waivers
shall be granted based on the grounds provided by County Code §
16.0231 or other applicable authority in the County Code or law. Requests will
only be considered if the appellant requesting the waiver submits a sworn
affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, reasonably
demonstrating the appellant's actual financial inability to submit the appeal
fee. A written decision to grant or deny the request shall be made not less
than ten days nor more than 60 days after submission of the request. If the
request is denied, the written decision shall explain the reason for denial and
shall state the due date - not less than ten days nor more than 60 days from
the date of the decision - for payment of the appeal fee. The written decision
shall be sent via first class mail to the appellant and shall be final. An
appeal hearing shall not be scheduled until the appeal fee is received. If the
request is denied and the appeal fee is not remitted within the time indicated
in the written decision, the right to an appeal shall be deemed waived and the
notice and order or the action of the Building Official shall become final.
      (8)   Effect of Failure to Appeal. Failure of any person or entity to
file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of §
63.0105(c)(1) shall constitute a waiver of the right to an appeal hearing and
the Building Official or the Code Official's notice and order or action shall
become final.
      (9)   Scope of Hearing on Appeal. Only those matters or issues
specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the
appeal.
      (10)   Stay Pending Appeal. Except for vacation orders issued by the
Building Official because of conditions that represent an immediate threat to
life, limb, property, or safety of the public or adjacent properties,
enforcement of any notice and order of the Building Official shall be stayed
during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
      (11)   Hearing and Decision. The decision of the Appeals Board shall be
final; there is no further administrative appeal.
   (d)   Procedures for Conduct of Hearing of Appeals.
      (1)   Hearing Examiners. The Appeals Board may designate one or more of
its members to serve as a hearing examiner to conduct the hearing of an appeal
to the board. The examiner hearing the case shall exercise all powers relating
to the conduct of hearings until it is submitted to the Appeals Board for
decision. Decisions and actions of the Building Official regarding the
enforcement of the requirements of Health and Safety Code §§ 19955 through
19959 shall be appealed to the Physically Disabled Access Appeals Board.
Appeals to the Physically Disabled Access Appeals Board must be heard in front
of that board as a whole.
      (2)   Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by
electronic recording or by any other means of tangible recording determined to
be appropriate by the Appeals Board. A transcript of the recording will be made
available to any party that requests a transcript in writing accompanied with
the transcription fee established by the County Fee Ordinance. If no
transcription fee has been established by the County Fee Ordinance, then the
fee shall be the full actual cost of transcribing the requested recordings into
print form as established by a transcription service, and shall be paid prior
to transcription services being rendered.
      (3)   Continuances and Postponements. The Appeals Board may grant a
continuance for good cause shown. If a hearing examiner has been assigned to a
hearing, the examiner may grant a continuance for good cause shown so long as
the matter remains before the examiner.
      (4)   Oaths—Certification. In any proceedings under this chapter, the
Appeals Board, any board member, or the hearing examiner has the power to
administer oaths and affirmations and to certify official acts.
      (5)   Reasonable Dispatch. The Appeals Board and its representatives
shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before it. Due
regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties and/or
their representatives.
      (6)   Form of Notice of Hearing. The notice to appellant shall be
substantially in the following form, but may include other information:
         "You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before (the
Building and Safety Appeals Board, Physically Disabled Access Appeals Board or
name of hearing examiner, whichever is applicable) at __________ on the day
_____ of _____, 20___, at the hour of _______. You may be present at the
hearing. The hearing will proceed as noticed in absentia if you elect not to be
present. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel, even if you elect
not to be present. You may present any relevant evidence and will be given full
opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you. You may
request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, documents, or other things by filing an affidavit
therefore with (Building and Safety Appeals Board, Physically Disabled Access
Appeals Board or name of hearing examiner, whichever is applicable)."
      (7)   Subpoenas.
         (A)   Filing of Affidavit. A subpoena may be issued for the attendance
of witnesses or the production of other evidence at a hearing upon the request
of a member of the Appeals Board or a hearing examiner, or upon the written
demand of any party. The subpoena must be accompanied by an affidavit that
states the name and address of the proposed witness and/or specifies the exact
things sought to be produced and the materiality thereof, and states that the
witness has the desired things in possession or under control. A subpoena need
not be issued when the affidavit is defective.
         (B)   Cases Referred to Hearing Examiner. In cases where a hearing is
referred to an examiner, all subpoenas shall be obtained through the examiner.
         (C)   Penalties. Any person who refuses without lawful excuse to
attend any hearing or produce material evidence which the person possesses or
controls, as required by any subpoena served upon such person as provided
herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (8)   Conduct of Hearing.
         (A)   Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical
rules of evidence. The following rules shall apply:
            (I)   Oral Evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or
affirmation.
            (II)   Hearsay Evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the
purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be
sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over
objection in civil actions in a court of competent jurisdiction in this state.
            (III)   Admissibility of Evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be
admitted if it is the type of evidence that responsible persons are accustomed
to relying on in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of
any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of
such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent
jurisdiction in this state.
            (IV)   Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious
evidence shall be excluded.
         (B)   Rights of Parties. Each party shall have these rights, among
others:
            (I)   To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the
issues of hearing;
            (II)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
            (III)   To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant
to the issues of the hearing;
            (IV)   To impeach any witness regardless of which party first
called the witness to testify;
            (V)   To rebut evidence; and
            (VI)   To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do
so.
      (9)   Official Notice.
         (A)   What may be noticed. The Appeals Board or hearing examiner may
take official notice of any matter that may be judicially noticed by the courts
of this state or any official records of the County or any department and
ordinances of the County or rules and regulations of the County.
         (B)   Parties to be notified. Parties present at the hearing shall be
informed of the matters to be noticed, and these matters shall be noted in the
record, referred to therein, or appended thereto.
         (C)   Opportunity to refute. Parties present at the hearing shall be
given a reasonable opportunity, upon the request of a party, to refute any
officially noticed matters with the manner of such refutation to be determined
by the Appeals Board or hearing examiner.
      (10)   Inspection of the premises. The Appeals Board or the hearing
examiner may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the
course of the hearing, provided that:
         (A)   Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before
the inspection is made;
         (B)   The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and
         (C)   The Appeals Board or the hearing examiner shall state for the
record upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and the
conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or
explain the matters so stated by the Appeals Board or hearing examiner.
      (11)   Method and Form of Decision.
         (A)   Hearing before the Board itself. When the Appeals Board hears an
appeal, a member thereof who did not hear the evidence or has not read the
entire record of the proceedings shall not vote on or take part in the
decision.
         (B)   Hearing before the Examiner. If a contested case is heard by a
hearing examiner alone, the examiner shall within a reasonable time (not to
exceed 90 days from the date the hearing is closed) submit a written report to
the Appeals Board. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence
considered and state the examiner's findings, conclusions and recommendations.
The report also shall contain a proposed decision in such a form that it may be
adopted by the Appeals Board as its decision in the case. The examiner's report
filed with the Appeals Board shall be a public record. A copy of the report
shall be mailed to each party on the date it is filed with the Appeals Board.
         (C)   Consideration of Report by Board - Notice. The Appeals Board
shall fix the time, date, and place to consider the examiner's report. Notice
thereof shall be mailed to each interested party not less than five days prior
to the date fixed, unless it is otherwise stipulated by all of the parties.
         (D)   Exceptions to Report. Not later than two days before the date
set to consider the report, any party may file written exceptions to any part
or all of the examiner's report and may attach thereto a proposed decision
together with written argument in support of such decision. By leave of the
board, any party may present oral argument to the Appeals Board.
         (E)   Disposition by the board. By a concurring vote of the majority
of the total number board members who heard the appeal, the Appeals Board may
adopt or reject the proposed decision in its entirety, or may modify the
proposed decision.
         (F)   Proposed Decision Not Adopted. If the proposed decision is not
adopted, the Appeals Board may decide the case upon the entire record before
it, with or without taking additional evidence, or may refer the case to the
same or another hearing examiner to take additional evidence. If the case is
reassigned to a hearing examiner, the examiner shall prepare a report and
proposed decision as provided in Subdivision (11)(B) hereof after any
additional evidence is submitted. Consideration of such proposed decision by
the board shall comply with the provisions of this section.
         (G)   Form of Decision. The decision shall be in writing and shall
contain findings of fact and a determination of the issues presented. The
decision shall be recorded with the County Recorder's Office. A copy of the
decision shall be delivered to the appellant(s) personally or sent by certified
mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and a copy of the decision
shall be sent to any interested parties of record discovered through reasonable
diligence, by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
         (H)   Effective Date of Decision. The effective date of the decision
shall be the date the decision is served upon the parties, including the date
of deposit if service is by mail, or otherwise as stated therein.
         (I)   Administration. Unless there are exigent circumstances
justifying immediate abatement action, upon expiration of the court review
process, the Building Official shall take action in accordance with the
decision of the Appeals Board or judge reviewing the board's decision.
   (e)   Court Review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the
appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of
certiorari to correct errors of the law. Application for review shall be made
in the manner and time required by law.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 1.5: CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
Section
   
63.0151   Adoption of California Residential Code.
   
63.0152   Adoption of Code Appendices.
§ 63.0151 Adoption of California Residential Code.
   A copy of the International Residential Code, 2021 Edition, prepared and
published by the International Code Council, with state amendments, also known
as the 2022 California Residential Code, contained in Part 2.5 of Title 24 of
the California Code of Regulations, having been filed in the Office of the
Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County, is hereby
designated and adopted by reference as the Residential Code for the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0152 Adoption of Code Appendices.
   Appendix AH - "Patio Covers" and Appendix AX - "Swimming Pool Safety Act" of
the 2022 California Residential Code are hereby adopted by reference as part of
the Residential Code for the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County,
State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 2: CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
   
63.0201   Adoption of California Electrical Code.
   
63.0202   Adoption of Code Annexes.
§ 63.0201 Adoption of California Electrical Code.
   A copy of the National Electrical Code, 2020 Edition, prepared and published
by the National Fire Protection Association, with state amendments, also known
as the 2022 California Electrical Code, contained in Part 3 of Title 24 of the
California Code of Regulations, having been filed in the Office of the Clerk of
the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County, is hereby designated and
adopted by reference as the Electrical Code for the unincorporated area of San
Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0202 Adoption of Code Annexes.
   Annexes A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and I of the 2022 California Electrical Code
are hereby adopted by reference as part of the Electrical Code for the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 3: CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
63.0301   Adoption of California Plumbing Code.
   
63.0302   Express Findings.
   
63.0303   Changes in the Code.
   
63.0304   Adoption of Code Appendices.
   
63.0305   Changes in the Appendices.
§ 63.0301 Adoption of California Plumbing Code.
   A copy of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2021 Edition, prepared and published by
the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, with state
amendments, also known as the 2022 California Plumbing Code, contained in Part
5 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, having been filed in the
Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County, is
hereby designated and adopted by reference as the Plumbing Code for the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California, subject to
those amendments and limitations as set forth in this Chapter 3.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0302 Express Findings.
   It is expressly found and determined that more restrictive amendments to the
2022 California Plumbing Code adopted in §
63.0301 and its appendices adopted in §
63.0304 are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological, and
topographical conditions existing in the County which are more specifically
described as follows:
   (a)   The buildup of nitrate in groundwater poses a threat to public health
and is one of the potentially significant long-term consequences of on-site
sewage disposal practices; on-site private sewage disposal systems contribute
to the discharge of nitrates and other pollutants into the groundwater table
within the planning areas for the spheres of influence of the Cities of Chino
and Montclair; the failure of private sewage disposal systems is a threat to
the health of the public; and the orderly development of these areas is
promoted by requiring development to connect to public sewers in order to
obtain the maximum benefit from existing infrastructure.
   (b)   The mountain areas of the County are generally unsuitable for the
installation of private sewage disposal system seepage pits due to thin soils
over bedrock, steep slopes and/or locally high groundwater.
   (c)   Geologic conditions within the County make increasing the minimum
separation between a well and a septic tank from 50 feet to 100 feet reasonably
necessary for the protection of water quality in water supply wells. Soils are
generally sufficiently porous so that should a septic tank have structural
failure due to corrosion, earthquake damage, or by other means, 50 feet does
not provide sufficient separation to prevent contamination of nearby wells from
the leaking contents.
   (d)   Geologic conditions within the County make increasing the minimum
separation between a well and a soil absorption portion of a sewage disposal
system discharging 5,000 gallons per day or more from 100 feet to 200 feet
reasonably necessary for the protection of water quality in water supply wells.
Local soils are generally porous so that where large volumes of sewage effluent
are discharged closer than 200 feet, the cone of depression created by pumping
a well may intercept significant amounts of sewage effluent, thereby
contaminating the water produced by the well.
   (e)   Geologic conditions within the County in the vicinities of the
Colorado and Mojave Rivers make increasing the minimum separation from the soil
absorption portion of a sewage disposal system from 100 feet to 200 feet
reasonably necessary to protect the beneficial uses of these rivers as drinking
water supplies. Both rivers flow through highly porous material and both rivers
either directly or by nearby wells provide the primary sources of drinking
water to residents and communities along their courses.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0303 Changes in the Code.
   The following changes are hereby made to the 2022 California Plumbing Code,
as adopted herein.
   Section 713.3 is amended by adding the following sentence at the end of that
section to read as follows:
   Within the sphere of influence boundaries for the Cities of Chino and
Montclair, as adopted by the Local Agency Formation Commission for San
Bernardino County, the installation of building sewers shall connect to a
public sewer.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0304 Adoption of Code Appendices.
   Appendices A, B, D, G, H, and I of the 2022 California Plumbing Code are
hereby adopted by reference as part of the Plumbing Code for the unincorporated
area of San Bernardino County, State of California, subject to those amendments
and limitations as set forth in this Chapter 3.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0305 Changes in the Appendices.
   (a)   Table H - 101.8 of Appendix H is amended in its entirety to read as
follows:
 
TABLE H-101.8
LOCATION OF SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
MINIMUM HORIZONTAL                                           SEEPAGE PIT OR
DISTANCE IN CLEAR  BUILDING SEWER SEPTIC TANK DISPOSAL FIELD CESSPOOL
REQUIRED FROM
MINIMUM HORIZONTAL                                               SEEPAGE PIT OR
DISTANCE IN CLEAR      BUILDING SEWER SEPTIC TANK DISPOSAL FIELD CESSPOOL
REQUIRED FROM
Building or            2 feet         5 feet      8 feet         8 feet
structures1            (610 mm)       (1,524 mm)  (2,438 mm)     (2,438 mm)
Property line                         5 feet      5 feet         8 feet
adjoining private      Clear2         (1,524 mm)  (1,524 mm)     (2,438 mm)
property
Water supply wells     50 feet3       100 feet    100 feet       150 feet
                       (15,240 mm)    (30.5 m)    (30.5 m)9      (45.7 m)
Streams and other      50 feet        50 feet     1007, 10 feet  1507 feet
bodies of water        (15,240 mm)    (15,240 mm) (30.5 m)       (45.7 m)
Trees                                10 feet                   10 feet
                                      (3,048 mm)                 (3,048 mm)
Seepage pits or                      5 feet      5 feet         12 feet
cesspools8                            (1,524 mm)  (1,524 mm)     (3,658 mm)
Disposal field8                      5 feet      4 feet4        5 feet
                                      (1,524 mm)  (1,524 mm)     (1,524 mm)
On-site domestic water 1 foot5        5 feet      5 feet         5 feet
service line           (305 mm)       (1,524 mm)  (1,524 mm)     (1,524 mm)
Distribution box                                5 feet         5 feet
                                                  (1,524 mm)     (1,524 mm)
Pressure public water  10 feet6       10 feet     10 feet        10 feet
main                   (3,048 mm)     (3,048 mm)  (3,048 mm)     (3,048 mm)
NOTE:
When disposal fields and/or seepage pits are installed in sloping ground, the
minimum horizontal distance between any part of the leaching system and ground
surface shall be 15 feet (4,572 mm).
1.   Including porches and steps, whether covered or uncovered, breezeways,
roofed porte coachers, roofed patios, carports, covered walks, covered
driveways, and similar structures or appurtenances.   
2.   See also Section 312.3 of the California Plumbing Code.   
3.   All drainage piping shall clear domestic water supply wells by not less
than fifty (50) feet (15,240 mm). This distance may be reduced to not less than
25 feet (7,620 mm) when the drainage piping is constructed of materials
approved for use within a building.   
4.   Plus two feet (610 mm) for each additional one foot (305 mm) of depth in
excess of one foot (305 mm) below the bottom of the drain line. (See also
Section H 601.0).   
5.   See section 720.0 of the California Plumbing Code.   
6.   For parallel construction. For crossings, approval by the Health
Department shall be required.    
7.   These minimum clear horizontal distances shall also apply between disposal
fields, seepage pits, and the mean high-tide line.   
8.   Where disposal fields, seepage pits, or both are installed in sloping
ground, the minimum horizontal distance between any part of the leaching system
and the ground surface shall be 15 feet (4572 mm).   
9.   Sewage disposal systems discharging 5,000 gallons per day or more shall be
separated from water supply wells by a minimum of 200 feet (61 m).   
10.   In the vicinities of the Colorado and Mojave Rivers, sewage disposal
systems shall be separated from streams and other bodies of water by a minimum
of 200 feet (61 m).
 
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 4: CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
Section
   
63.0401   Adoption of California Mechanical Code.
   
63.0402   Adoption of Code Appendices.
§ 63.0401 Adoption of California Mechanical Code.
   A copy of the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition, prepared and published
by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, with
state amendments, also known as the 2022 California Mechanical Code, contained
in Part 4 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, having been filed
in the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino
County, is hereby designated and adopted by reference as the Mechanical Code
for the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.0402 Adoption of Code Appendices.
   Appendices B, C, D and G of the 2022 California Mechanical Code are hereby
adopted by reference as part of the Mechanical Code for the unincorporated area
of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 5: CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
Section
   
63.0501   Adoption of California Energy Code.
§ 63.0501   Adoption of California Energy Code.
   A copy of the California Energy Code, 2022 Edition, contained in Part 6 of
Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, prepared and published by the
California Building Standards Commission, having been filed in the Office of
the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County, is hereby
designated and adopted by reference as the Energy Code for the unincorporated
area of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 6: REPEALED BY ORD. 4314, PASSED - -2016
CHAPTER 7: POSTING OF STREET NUMBERS
Section
   
63.0701   Adoption of Uniform Numbering System.
   
63.0702   Designation of Numbers.
   
63.0703   Posting Requirement.
   
63.0704   Size and Location of Numbers.
   
63.0705   Exceptions to Posting Requirements.
   
63.0706   Enforcement.
§ 63.0701   Adoption of Uniform Numbering System.
   The Board of Supervisors has adopted a uniform system of house numbering for
the unincorporated territories within the County of San Bernardino and such
uniform numbering system has been made a part of the General Plan of the County
upon recommendation of the Planning Department.
(Ord. 2108, passed - -1976)
§ 63.0702   Designation of Numbers.
   Street numbers shall be designated and assigned by the Planning Department
or other agencies in cooperation with the Planning Department as approved by
the Planning Director.
(Ord. 2108, passed - -1976)
§ 63.0703   Posting Requirement.
   Street numbers shall be conspicuously posted on each building located in the
unincorporated area of the County of San Bernardino. If there is more than one
building on a lot and only one street number is assigned, the number shall be
posted on the principal building or the building nearest the street.
(Ord. 2108, passed - -1976)
§ 63.0704   Size and Location of Numbers.
   All street numbers posted pursuant to this Chapter shall meet the following
requirements:
   (a)   Numbers shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Fire
Code as adopted by the County.
   (b)   Numbers and background colors must be of contrasting shades.
   (c)   Numbers must be visible and identifiable from the street on which the
building or buildings front.
   (d)   Where numbers on a building would not be visible from the street due
to setback (distance from street) or would otherwise be obstructed, street
numbers may be posted on an independent structure such as a post, but must
otherwise meet the requirements of this Section. Numbers posted on mail boxes
are acceptable under the provisions of this Subdivision only when no more than
one mail box is installed on a given lot.
   (e)   Numbers painted on curbs are not acceptable as a substitute for the
requirements herein.
(Ord. 2108, passed - -1976)
§ 63.0705   Exceptions to Posting Requirements.
   Alternative methods of posting street numbers may be authorized by the
enforcing agency, provided the enforcing agency determines that the method used
complies with the intent of this Chapter, which is to insure that all street
numbers are properly posted and can be readily ascertained by those agencies
charged with protection of the public peace, health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2108, passed - -1976)
§ 63.0706   Enforcement.
   The Fire Chief, or his or her authorized representative, of the fire agency
having jurisdiction shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this
Chapter.
(Ord. 2108, passed - -1976)
CHAPTER 8: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Section
   
63.0801   General Provisions.
   
63.0802   Substitutions of References.
   
63.0803   Permit Fees.
   
63.0804   Annual Permits.
   
63.0805   Interpretation of Code.
   
63.0806   Water Conservation.
   63.0807   Penalty for Violation.
   63.0808   Interpretation, Legal Procedure, and Penalties.
   63.0809   Findings.
   63.0810   Validity.
§ 63.0801   General Provisions.
   The requirements of this Chapter are general in nature and apply to all the
provisions in
Division 3 of Title 6 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Am. Ord. 2159, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2473, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2815,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3130, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.0802   Substitutions of References.
   Whenever in any of the parts of the California Building Standards Code
(Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), as adopted in this division
or in any other location, there appears a reference to the following names or
terms, those names or terms shall be deemed and construed as follows, to wit:
   BUILDING OFFICIAL, DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND SAFETY, DIRECTOR OF ARCHITECTURE
AND ENGINEERING, BUILDING AND ENGINEERING, ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY. Or any
other similar term which makes reference to the individual official, board,
department, or agency created by law to administer and enforce the provisions
of the codes adopted herein, means the San Bernardino County Building Official
and his or her authorized assistants.
   CITY COUNCIL. The Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County.
   CITY OF. Or any other similar reference to a political entity, means the
unincorporated territory of the County of San Bernardino.
(Am. Ord. 2159, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2473, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2815,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3130, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3584, passed - -1994;
Am. Ord. 3627, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.0803   Permit Fees.
   Any and all references to the amount of fees in any of the parts of the
California Building Standards Codes herein adopted are hereby deleted and
superceded by the applicable fee in
Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Am. Ord. 2159, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2473, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2815,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3130, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.0804   Annual Permits.
   (a)   Where any person, firm, or corporation in the course of normal
maintenance procedures proposes to install, alter, or repair any electrical
wiring, devices, appliances, plumbing, drainage systems, septic tanks, seepage
pits, leaching lines, heating, ventilating, refrigeration, or water
conservation equipment in an existing facility located on property under the
direct control of such person, firm, or corporation and is able to, and does in
fact, furnish inspection service which meets the requirements and rules and
regulations of the San Bernardino County Code, and whose operations are under
the continuous supervision of a qualified person who shall demonstrate
competence, to the satisfaction of the Building Official, such person, firm, or
corporation shall not be required to obtain approval at each consecutive
inspection step of the installation, alteration, or repair but shall be
required only to obtain an annual permit or annual permits and assure that the
work in progress is accessible to the Building Official for such periodic
inspections as he or she may deem necessary.
   (b)   The fee for each separate annual permit (electrical, plumbing,
mechanical) shall be based upon the number of employees doing work in the
crafts covered in each annual permit in accordance with
Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (c)   The designated responsible individual shall file with the Building
Official a written report specifying the work done under the issued annual
permit. Such written report shall be filed with the Building Official within 30
days following the end of the fiscal year for which the permit was issued.
(Am. Ord. 2159, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2473, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2815,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3130, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3627, passed - -1995;
Am. Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.0805   Interpretation of Code.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief Inspectors, Building and Safety Engineer
and/or Regional Building Inspector Supervisors, under the administration of the
San Bernardino County Building Official, to enforce the provisions of the codes
herein adopted and to determine the intent and meaning thereof. Any
determination or decision, made by any of these individuals and concurred in by
the Building Official, which is in dispute is subject to review and final
decision by the Board of Appeals as established by § 63.0107.
(Am. Ord. 2159, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2473, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2815,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3130, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 3627, passed - -1995;
Am. Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.0806   Water Conservation.
   Stationary equipment or machinery, or water utilized for heating or cooling
in an industrial process, shall not be wasted but shall be recirculated and
reused. Every evaporative cooler shall be equipped with a circulating pump.
(Am. Ord. 2159, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2473, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2815,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3130, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.0807   Penalty for Violation.
   Where work for which a permit is required by the codes herein adopted is
started or proceeded without first obtaining the required permit, a permit
shall not be issued until all past due enforcement costs are paid. The
enforcement costs are the actual costs, as specified in the schedule of fees
set forth in Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code, and must
be paid on demand. The Building Official may use any legal means available to
collect enforcement fees. The payment of such enforcement fees shall not
relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of these codes
in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.
Any provision in any of the codes herein adopted which is in conflict with this
Section is hereby superseded by this Section.
(Am. Ord. 2159, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2473, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2815,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3130, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.0808   Interpretation, Legal Procedure, and Penalties.
   (a)   Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this
Division, said provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (b)   Penalties. Any building or structure erected or maintained, or any use
of property contrary to the provisions of this Division, shall be and the same
is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the San Bernardino
County Counsel may, upon request of the Building Official, immediately commence
an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and
enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such steps and
shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such
relief as will abate or remove such building, structure, or use, and restrain
and enjoin any person from erecting or maintaining such building or structure
or using any property contrary to the provisions of this Division.
      (1)   All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive. The conviction and punishment of any person hereunder shall not
relieve such person from the responsibility of correcting prohibited conditions
or removing prohibited buildings, structures, or improvements, nor prevent the
enforced correction or removal thereof.
      (2)   All other provisions of the San Bernardino County Code
notwithstanding, any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
or employee, violating or causing or permitting the violation of any of the
provisions of this Division, or of any permit or exception granted hereunder,
shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified, and
each day such violation is in existence shall constitute a new and separate
offense. Any person so convicted shall be:
         (A)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $100.00 and not less than $50.00 for a first violation;
         (B)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $200.00 and not less than $100.00 for a second violation.
         (C)   The third and any additional violations shall constitute a
misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00
and not less than $500.00 or six months in jail, or both.
         Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be charged
and prosecuted as a misdemeanor. Payment of any penalty herein provided shall
not relieve a person, firm, corporation, or other entity from the
responsibility of correcting the condition, resulting from the violation. In
addition to the above penalties the court may order that the guilty party
reimburse the County of San Bernardino for all of its costs of investigating,
analysis and prosecuting the enforcement action against the guilty party; the
court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursements upon submission of proof
of such costs by the County.
      (3)   Each such person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense upon each day during any part of which any violation of any of
the provisions of this Division is committed, continued, permitted, or
maintained by such person, firm, or corporation.
      (4)   A notice of pendency of administrative action or proceeding may be
filed in the Office of the San Bernardino County Recorder at the time of
commencement of action or proceeding or at any time before final judgment or
order. The County Recorder shall record and index the pendency of action in the
name of each person specified in the action or proceedings. After all required
work has been completed and approved, the Building Official shall record in the
Office of the County Recorder a document terminating the above notice.
      (5)   In the event that any person, firm, or corporation shall fail,
neglect, or refuse to demolish, remove, abate, or correct a structure or
condition existing in violation of this Division, upon his or her or its
property after a civil court order or criminal conviction obtained pursuant to
this Section, the Board of Supervisors may order the Building Official to
demolish, remove, abate, or correct the offending structure or condition. A
statement of the cost of such work shall be transmitted to the San Bernardino
County Board of Supervisors who shall cause the same to be paid and levied as a
special assessment against the property.
(Am. Ord. 2159, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2473, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2815,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3130, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.0809   Findings.
   The Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino finds that these
regulations and provisions and those of the codes adopted herein are in
compliance with Health and Safety Code §§ 17958, 17958.5, and 17958.7, and that
any modification and changes herein made to the model codes herein adopted are
reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical
conditions.
(Am. Ord. 2159, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2473, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2815,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3130, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.0810   Validity.
   If any chapter, section, subdivision, sentence, clause or phrase of the
Division is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Division nor its
application to other persons or circumstances. The San Bernardino County Board
of Supervisors hereby declares that it would have passed this Division and each
chapter, section, subdivision, clause, sentence or phrase thereof, irrespective
of the fact that any one or more section, subdivision, clause, sentence and
phrase be declared unconstitutional.
(Am. Ord. 2159, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2473, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 2815,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 3130, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
CHAPTER 9: (Repealed by Ord. 4130, passed - -2010)
(Repealed by Ord. 4130, passed - -2010)
CHAPTER 10: (Repealed by Ord. 4130, passed - -2010)
(Repealed by Ord. 4130, passed - -2010)
CHAPTER 11: DISASTER RECONSTRUCTION
Section
   
63.1101   Intent.
   
63.1105   Invocation of Provisions.
   
63.1110   Definitions.
   
63.1115   Repair Criteria.
   
63.1120   Historic Buildings.
   
63.1125   Chimneys.
   
63.1130   Unreinforced Masonry.
   
63.1135   Essential Service Facilities.
   
63.1140   Board of Appeals.
§ 63.1101   Intent.
   This Chapter establishes regulations for adequate and expeditious repair and
reconstruction of structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a
local emergency has been declared by the Board of Supervisors. The chapter does
not allow exemptions from the Building, Fire or other codes.
(Ord. 3501, passed - -1992)
§ 63.1105   Invocation of Provisions.
   The provisions of this Chapter are applicable following each disaster for
which a local emergency has been declared by the Board of Supervisors. The
Board may extend the provisions as necessary.
(Ord. 3501, passed - -1992)
§ 63.1110   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter the following definitions apply:
   CURRENT CODE. The edition of the Uniform Building Code, published by the
International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by the County of San
Bernardino in accordance with operation of law pursuant Health and Safety Code
§ 18941.5.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICE FACILITIES. Those structures which are necessary for
emergency operations subsequent to a disaster.
(Ord. 3501, passed - -1992)
§ 63.1115   Repair Criteria.
   Damaged structures of all occupancies regulated by the County of San
Bernardino which have been damaged as a result of a disaster shall be repaired
in accordance with the following criteria:
   (a)   When the estimated value of repair does not exceed ten percent of the
replacement value of the structure, the damaged portion(s) shall be restored to
their predisaster condition.
   (b)   When the estimated value of repair is greater than ten percent, but
less than 50 percent, of the replacement value of the structure, the damaged
elements, as well as all critical ties associated with those elements, shall be
repaired and/or brought into conformance with the structural requirements of
the current Code.
   (c)   When the estimated value of repair exceeds 50 percent of the
replacement value of the structure, the entire structure shall be brought into
conformance with the structural requirements of the current Code.
   (d)   Exception: The repair of damaged chimneys in Group R, Division 3
occupancies shall be excluded from the computation of percentage of replacement
value and chimneys shall be repaired pursuant to §
63.1125.
(Ord. 3501, passed - -1992)
§ 63.1120   Historic Buildings.
   All damaged buildings or structures currently considered as historic places,
or qualifying structures within established historic districts, shall be
repaired in accordance with the standards in §
63.1115, above, with due consideration given to the historical ratings.
Additional standards and criteria, as noted in the State of California Historic
Building Code, shall apply. Where conflicts occur between these standards and
the State of California Historic Building Code, the standards in §
63.1115 still govern.
(Ord. 3501, passed - -1992)
§ 63.1125   Chimneys.
   All damaged chimneys must be evaluated by a State of California registered
civil or structural engineer or licensed architect prior to reconstruction and
shall be constructed in accordance with Chapter 37 of the current Code.
Unconventional masonry fireplace and chimney systems may be constructed
pursuant to the alternate materials and methods of construction provisions of
the current Code. Further, all new or reconstructed chimneys shall be anchored
to the structure in accordance with the current Code. Where the portion or the
chimney extending above the roof line exceeds two times the least dimension of
the chimney, the portion extending above the roof line shall be braced to the
roof structure.
(Ord. 3501, passed - -1992)
§ 63.1130   Unreinforced Masonry.
   All damaged buildings determined to be constructed of unreinforced masonry
shall be repaired and strengthened to comply with the currently adopted edition
of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation, Appendix Chapter I.
(Ord. 3501, passed - -1992)
§ 63.1135   Essential Service Facilities.
   Damaged structures of all occupancies regulated by the County of San
Bernardino which have been damaged as a result of a disaster which are
Essential Service Facilities shall be repaired in accordance with the following
criteria:
   (a)   When the estimated value of repair does not exceed 50 percent of the
replacement value of the structure, the damaged elements, as well as all
critical ties associated with those elements, shall be repaired and/or brought
into conformance with the structural requirements of the current Code.
   (b)   When the estimated value of repair exceeds 50 percent of the
replacement value of the structure, the entire structure shall be brought into
conformance with the structural requirements of the current Code.
(Ord. 3501, passed - -1992)
§ 63.1140   Board of Appeals.
   In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of
construction and to provide for reasonable interpretation of this Chapter, all
technical decisions allowed by this Chapter may be appealed to the San
Bernardino County Board of Appeal pursuant to San Bernardino County Code §
63.0102.
(Ord. 3501, passed - -1992)
CHAPTER 12: (REPEALED BY ORD. 4314, PASSED - -2016)
CHAPTER 13: CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
Section
   
63.1301   Adoption of California Historical Building Code.
   
63.1302   Adoption of Code Appendix.
§ 63.1301 Adoption of California Historical Building Code.
   A copy of the California Historical Building Code, 2022 Edition, contained
in Part 8 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, prepared and
published by the California Building Standards Commission, having been filed in
the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County,
is hereby designated and adopted by reference as the Historical Building Code
for the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.1302 Adoption of Code Appendix.
   Appendix A of the 2022 California Historical Building Code is hereby adopted
by reference as part of the Historical Building Code for the unincorporated
area of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 14: CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Section
   
63.1401   Adoption of California Existing Building Code.
   
63.1402   Adoption of Code Appendix.
§ 63.1401 Adoption of California Existing Building Code.
   A copy of the International Existing Building Code, 2021 Edition, prepared
and published by the International Code Council, with state amendments, also
known as the 2022 California Existing Building Code, contained in Part 10 of
Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, having been filed in the Office
of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County, is hereby
designated and adopted by reference as the Existing Building Code for the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.1402 Adoption of Code Appendix.
   Appendix A, Chapter A1 "Seismic Strengthening Provisions For Unreinforced
Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings" of the 2022 California Existing Building Code
is hereby adopted by reference as part of the Existing Building Code for the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 15: CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Section
   
63.1501   Adoption of California Green Building Standards Code.
§ 63.1501 Adoption of California Green Building Standards Code.
   A copy of the California Green Building Standards Code, 2022 Edition,
contained in Chapters 1-8 of Part 11 of Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations, prepared and published by the California Building Standards
Commission, having been filed in the Office of the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors of San Bernardino County, is hereby designated and adopted by
reference as the Green Building Standards Code for the unincorporated area of
San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 16: RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Section
   
63.1601   Purpose.
   
63.1602   Definitions.
   
63.1603   Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System Requirements
   
63.1604   Application Review.
   
63.1605   Electronic Access to Permit Information and Submittals.
   
63.1606   Inspection.
§ 63.1601 Purpose.
   In adopting this Chapter, it is the intent of the Board of Supervisors to
provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with
the Solar Rights Act of 1978, as amended by Assembly Bill 2188 (Chapter 521,
Statutes 2014), in order to facilitate the timely and cost-effective
installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This Chapter
is intended to make the installation of residential solar distributed
generation technology easier, to facilitate the deployment of such technology
in the County, to enhance the County’s contribution to the State’s ability to
reach its clean energy goals, and to generate much needed jobs in the County
and State. The provisions of this Chapter will help the County achieve these
goals while protecting public health and safety.
(Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.1602 Definitions.
   The following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions in this
Chapter.
   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following: e-
mail; internet; or facsimile.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system as defined in §
810.01.210(uu) of the County Code.
   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system which
meets all of the following:
      (1)   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts
alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.
      (2)   A solar energy system that (1) conforms to all applicable state
fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by
the County; (2) all State and County health and safety standards; and (3) all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.
      (3)   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex
family dwelling.
      (4)   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum
legal building height as defined by the County.
   SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT. A significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.
(Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.1603 Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System Requirements.
   (a)   All small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with
the applicable standards and requirements for solar energy systems as set forth
in the County Code.
   (b)   Except to the extent deviations are required due to unique climactic,
geological, or topographical conditions pursuant to §
63.0809, the small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard
plans, and checklists, shall otherwise substantially conform to the
recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklists and standard
plans, contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting
Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.
(Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.1604 Application Review.
   (a)   Upon confirmation that the application is complete, staff shall review
the application to ensure that the small residential rooftop solar energy
system meets local, State, and Federal health and safety requirements. The
Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit pursuant
to the County Development Code, if the Building Official finds, based on
substantial evidence, that the small residential rooftop solar energy system
could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety.
   (b)   Staff shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit
within a reasonable time following receipt of a complete application that meets
the requirements of the approved checklist, standard plan, and this Chapter.
   (c)   Staff’s approval of an application shall not be based or conditioned
on the approval of an association, as defined in California Civil Code § 4080.
(Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.1605 Electronic Access to Permit Information and Submittals.
   (a)   The Building Official shall make the checklist and all permitting
documentation required for a small residential rooftop solar energy system
available on a publicly accessible website.
   (b)   An applicant may submit the application and related documentation for
a small residential rooftop solar energy system by electronic submittal, as
specified on the County website. Electronic signatures shall be accepted by the
County on all electronic submittals in lieu of a wet signature, in conformance
with California Government Code § 16.5 and Title 2 of the California Code of
Regulations, §§ 22000 et seq.
(Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
§ 63.1606 Inspection.
   (a)   One inspection shall be required and performed by staff for each small
residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review.
   (b)   The inspection shall be done in a timely manner.
   (c)   If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a
subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of
§
63.1606.
(Ord. 4285, passed - -2015)
CHAPTER 17: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Section
   
63.1701   Purpose.
   
63.1702   Definitions.
   
63.1703   Permit Required.
   
63.1704   Permit Application Process.
   
63.1705   Decision on Application.
§ 63.1701 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined electric
vehicle charging stations permitting process that complies with § 65850.7 of
the Government Code (Assembly Bill 1236 (2015-16 Regular Session)). This
Chapter will promote the deployment of electric vehicle charging stations,
remove obstacles to and minimize the costs of permitting for electric vehicle
charging stations, improve the State and County’s ability to reach its clean
energy goals, and promote the generation of new jobs. This Chapter enables the
County to achieve these goals while protecting public health and safety.
(Ord. 4310, passed - -2016)
§ 63.1702 Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply to this Chapter:
   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following: e-
mail; Internet; facsimile.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION or CHARGING STATION. Any level of electric
vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with
Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it read on the effective date
of Government Code § 65850.7, i.e., January 1, 2016, and delivers electricity
from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
   A FEASIBLE METHOD TO SATISFACTORILY MITIGATE OR AVOID THE SPECIFIC, ADVERSE
IMPACT. Includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition,
or mitigation imposed by the County on another similarly situated application
in a prior successful application for a permit.
   SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT. A significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.
(Ord. 4310, passed - -2016)
§ 63.1703 Permit Required.
   Installation of an electric vehicle charging station shall require a current
and effective permit issued pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 4310, passed - -2016)
§ 63.1704 Permit Application Process.
   (a)   An application for a permit to install an electric vehicle charging
station shall be processed in accordance with Government Code § 65850.7. The
Building Official shall implement the expedited, streamlined permitting process
adopted herein for the administrative, nondiscretionary review of electric
vehicle charging station permit applications.
   (b)   Checklist. The Building Official, upon review and consideration of the
recommendations in the most current version of the Office of Planning and
Research’s “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness
Guidebook” and in conformity with all applicable safety and performance
standards, shall adopt and update a checklist that sets forth all requirements
with which an electric vehicle charging station must comply in order to be
eligible for expedited review.
   (c)   Electronic Access. The checklist and any required permitting
documentation shall be published on the County’s website. An applicant may
submit a permit application and associated documentation over-the-counter, by
mail, or through electronic submittal, using the electronic submittal method or
methods specified on the County website. Electronic signatures shall be
accepted by the County on all electronic submittals in lieu of a wet signature,
in conformance with Government Code § 16.5 and Title 2 of the California Code
of Regulations, §§ 22000 et seq.
   (d)   Complete Application. An application that satisfies the information
requirements in the checklist shall be deemed complete.
   (e)   Incomplete Application. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the
Building Official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all
deficiencies in the application and identifying any additional information
required for the application to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.
(Ord. 4310, passed - -2016)
§ 63.1705 Decision on Application.
   (a)   Upon confirmation that the application is complete, the Building
Official shall review the application to ensure the electric vehicle charging
station meets local, State, and Federal health and safety requirements.
   (b)   If the Building Official makes a finding, based on substantial
evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific,
adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the Building Official may
require the applicant to apply for a use permit and impose conditions designed
to mitigate the specific, adverse impact at the lowest cost possible.
   (c)   If the Building Official makes written findings based upon substantial
evidence that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact
for which there is no feasible method for satisfactory mitigation or avoidance,
the permit application may be denied.
   (d)   The decision of the Building Official pursuant to Subdivisions (b) and
(c) may be appealed to the Planning Commission.
   (e)   Absent any specific, adverse impact findings pursuant to Subdivision
(b) or (c), the Building Official shall administratively approve the
application and issue the permit.
   (f)   Approval of an electric vehicle charging station permit application
shall not be based on or conditioned on the approval of an association, as
defined in § 4080 of the Civil Code.
(Ord. 4310, passed - -2016)
CHAPTER 18: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
   
63.1801   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
§ 63.1801 Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code.
   A copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2021 Edition,
prepared and published by the International Code Council, having been filed in
the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County,
is hereby designated and adopted by reference as the International Property
Maintenance Code for the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of
California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 19: CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Section
   
63.1901   Adoption of California Administrative Code.
§ 63.1901 Adoption of California Administrative Code.
   A copy of the California Administrative Code, 2022 Edition, contained in
Part 1 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, prepared and
published by the California Building Standards Commission, having been filed in
the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County,
is hereby designated and adopted by reference as the Administrative Code for
the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 20: CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
Section
   
63.2001   Adoption of California Referenced Standards Code.
§ 63.2001 Adoption of California Referenced Standards Code.
   A copy of the California Referenced Standards Code, 2022 Edition, contained
in Part 12 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, prepared and
published by the California Building Standards Commission, having been filed in
the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County,
is hereby designated and adopted by reference as the Referenced Standards Code
for the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 21: INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
Section
   
63.2101   Adoption of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
   
63.2102   Changes in the Code.
§ 63.2101 Adoption of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
   A copy of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2021 Edition,
prepared and published by the International Code Council, having been filed in
the Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County,
is hereby designated and adopted by reference as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code
for the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State of California,
subject to those amendments and limitations as set forth in this Chapter 21.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
§ 63.2102 Changes in the Code.
   The following changes are hereby made to the 2021 International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code, as adopted herein. Chapters 4 through 6 of the 2021
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code are hereby deleted in their entirety,
and Chapters 1 through 3 and Chapters 7 through 11 of the 2021 International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code are hereby amended, deleted, or added to as follows:
   Amend Section 101.1 as follows:
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Swimming
Pool and Spa Code for the unincorporated area of San Bernardino County, State
of California, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
   Delete Sections 101.2 through 102.10 of Part 1-Scope and Application.
   Amend Section 103.1 in its entirety to read as follows:
   103.1 Administration. For administrative issues please reference the 2022
California Administrative Code adopted herein.
   Delete Sections 103.2 through 108 of Part 2-Administrative and Enforcement.
   Add Section 301.1.2 as follows:
   301.1.2 In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the Swimming
Pool Safety Act, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2021 Edition,
the 2022 California Building Code, or the 2022 California Residential Code, the
Building Official shall implement the most restrictive measures cited.
(Ord. 4452, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 22: MODEL WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE
Section
   
63.2201   Adoption of Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.
§ 63.2201 Adoption of Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.
   The Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (§§ 490 through 495 of Chapter
2.7 of Division 2 of Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations), which may
be referred to in the County Code as the MWELO, as promulgated by the
California Department of Water Resources, as may be amended, is hereby adopted
and incorporated by reference into the County Code. One copy of the MWELO shall
be on file and available for use by the public in the Office of the Clerk of
the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino.
(Ord. 4382, passed - -2020)
DIVISION 4: VALIDITY OF TITLE 6
Section
   
64.0101   Validity of Title 6.
§ 64.0101   Validity of Title 6.
   This Title and the various parts, divisions, chapters, sections and clauses
thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph,
section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of
this Title shall not be affected thereby. The County Board of Supervisors
hereby declares that it would have passed this Title and each part thereof,
regardless of the fact that one or more parts thereof be declared
unconstitutional or invalid.
DIVISION 5: (DELETED)
DIVISION 6: (DELETED)
DIVISION 7: UNDERGROUNDING PROCEDURAL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
67.0101   Generally.
   
67.0102   Commission.
   
67.0103   Director.
   
67.0104   Underground Utility District or District.
   
67.0105   Person.
   
67.0106   Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures.
   
67.0107   Utility.
§ 67.0101   Generally.
   Whenever in this Division the words or phrases hereinafter in this Chapter
defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in
the following definitions.
(Ord. 1429, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0102   Commission.
   COMMISSION. The Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.
(Ord. 1429, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0103   Director.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the San Bernardino County Special Districts
Department or his or her designated representative.
(Ord. 1429, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0104   Underground Utility District or District.
   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT. That area in the County within
which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited
as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of
§
67.0205 of this Code.
(Ord. 1429, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0105   Person.
   PERSON. Includes individuals, partnerships, and their agents and employees,
firms, corporations,
(Ord. 1429, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0106   Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Overhead Structures.
   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES. Poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a
District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar
service.
(Ord. 1429, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0107   Utility.
   UTILITY. Includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication
or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
(Ord. 1429, passed - -1968; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1971; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
CHAPTER 2: PROCEDURE—PUBLIC HEARING BY BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Section
   
67.0201   Called When.
   
67.0202   Notification of Hearing.
   
67.0203   Open to Public.
   
67.0204   Report by Director of the Special Districts Department.
   
67.0205   Board of Supervisors May Designate Underground Utility District by
Resolution.
   
67.0206   Unlawful Acts.
   
67.0207   Exception, Emergency or Unusual Circumstances.
   
67.0208   Granting Special Permission.
   
67.0209   Other Exception.
   
67.0210   Notice to Utility Companies.
   
67.0211   Responsibility of Utility Companies.
   
67.0212   Notice to Property Owners.
   
67.0213   Responsibility of Property Owners.
   
67.0214   Responsibility of County.
   
67.0215   Extension of Time.
   
67.0216   Official Records of Underground Utility Districts.
§ 67.0201   Called When.
   The Board of Supervisors may from time to time call public hearings to
ascertain whether the public interest, necessity, health, safety or welfare
requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures within designated areas of the County and the underground
installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0202   Notification of Hearing.
   The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall notify all affected property
owners shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and all utilities
concerned, by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days
prior to the hearing. Included in the notice shall be a copy of Ord. 2346,
together with a copy of the resolution of the Board of Supervisors calling for
a public hearing to determine whether public interest, necessity, health,
safety, or welfare requires the formation of an underground utility district.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0203   Open to Public.
   Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time
to time. At the hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity
to be heard. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be final and
conclusive.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0204   Report by Director of the Special Districts Department.
   Prior to public hearing, the Director of Special Districts Department shall
consult all affected utilities and prepare a report to present at the hearing
containing the extent of such utilities’ participation and estimates of the
total costs to the County and affected property owners. The report shall also
contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground
installation and removal of overhead facilities.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0205   Board of Supervisors May Designate Underground Utility District by
Resolution.
   If, after the public hearing the Board of Supervisors finds that the public
interest, necessity, health, safety or welfare is benefitted by such removal
and underground installation within a designated area, the Board of Supervisors
shall, by resolution, declare the designated area an Underground Utility
District and order removal and underground installation. The resolution shall
include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the
time within which such removal and underground installation shall be
accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive
underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for removal and
underground installation.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0206   Unlawful Acts.
   Whenever the Board of Supervisors, creates an Underground Utility District
and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures per §
67.0205, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct,
place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures in the District after the overhead facilities
are removed.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0207   Exception, Emergency or Unusual Circumstances.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, overhead facilities may be
installed and maintained for a period not to exceed 30 days, without authority
of the Director of the Special Districts Department in order to provide
emergency service.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0208   Granting Special Permission.
   The Director of the Special Districts Department may grant special
permission in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any
person or utility to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0209   Other Exception.
   This Chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to §
67.0205 hereof shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply
to the following types of facilities:
   (a)   Poles or electroller used exclusively for street lighting being served
by an underground electric system, except that lines and wires shall be
underground.
   (b)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building or to the
supplying utility located outside of the District boundary without crossing any
public street.
   (c)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a
utility for furnishing communication services.
   (d)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts.
   (e)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0210   Notice to Utility Companies.
   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to
§
67.0205, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall mail a copy of the
resolution to all affected utilities.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0211   Responsibility of Utility Companies.
   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to §
67.0205, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits,
conductors and associated equipment required under its applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0212   Notice to Property Owners.
   Within 30 days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to
§
67.0205, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall mail a notice of the
Board’s action to all property owners within the District.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0213   Responsibility of Property Owners.
   (a)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a
building within a District shall construct and provide that portion of the
service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in
§
67.0211 and the termination facility on or within said building being served.
If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in
the resolution enacted pursuant to §
67.0205 hereof, the Director of the Special Districts Department shall give
notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in
writing to the owner on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the
required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.
   (b)   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given
either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of
such persons, the notice must be addressed to the person in possession of such
premises and also to the owner thereof. If notice is given by mail, such notice
shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent
within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either
the owner or occupant of such premises, the Director of the Special Districts
Department shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy to be
posted in a conspicuous place on said premises.
   (c)   The notice given by the Director of the Special Districts Department
to provide the required underground facilities shall specify what work is
required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within
30 days after receipt of notice, the Director will authorize such required
underground facilities to be provided in which case the cost and expense
thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon
such property.
   (d)   If upon the expiration of the 30-day period the said required
underground facilities have not been provided, the Director shall proceed to
have the work completed provided, however, if the premises are unoccupied and
no electric or communications services are being furnished, the Director may in
lieu of providing the required underground facilities, authorize the
disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated
facilities supplying utility service. Upon completion, the Director shall file
a written report with the Board of Supervisors setting forth the fact that the
required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof,
together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to
be assessed. The Board of Supervisors shall thereupon fix a time and place for
hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such
premises, which said time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.
   (e)   The Director shall, upon the time for hearing of protest, give a
notice in writing to the owner in the manner hereinabove provided for of the
time and place that the Board of Supervisors will pass upon such report and
will hear protests against the assessment. The notice shall also set forth the
amount of the proposed assessment.
   (f)   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Board of
Supervisors shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be
any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
   (g)   If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation
by the Board of Supervisors, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien
upon the property against which the assessment is made and the Director is
directed to turn over to the Auditor-Controller a list of properties on which
the assessment has not been paid, and the Auditor-Controller shall add the
amount of assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the
premises upon which assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and
payable at the same time as property taxes are due and payable. If not paid
when due and payable, the assessment shall bear interest at the currant rate
charged by the County Treasurer’s Office for delinquent property tax levies.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0214   Responsibility of County.
   County shall remove at its own expense all County-owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or use
of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution
enacted pursuant to §
67.0205 hereof.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0215   Extension of Time.
   In the event that any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to §
67.0205 hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of
shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor
disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control
of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be
extended for a period equivalent to the time or such limitation.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
§ 67.0216   Official Records of Underground Utility Districts.
   After the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to §
67.0205 hereof, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall send a certified
copy of such resolution and all appended documents, charts, or maps, to the
County Surveyor. All such resolutions and documents so received shall be filed
by the County Surveyor and kept for public reference, and shall constitute the
Official County Records of all Underground Utility Districts.
(Am. Ord. 1507, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 1647, passed - -1969; Am. Ord. 2346,
passed - -1979)
DIVISION 8: (DELETED BY ORD. 2815, PASSED - -1983)
DIVISION 9: (DELETED BY ORD. 2540, PASSED - -1981)
TITLE 7: COUNTY AIRPORTS
Chapter
DIVISION 1: AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS
   
1.   General Rules and Regulations
   
2.   Aircraft Operations
   
3.   Motor Vehicle Regulations
   
4.   Personal Contact
   
5.   Fire Hazards and Fueling Operations
   
6.   Commercial or Business Activity
 
Editor's Note:
   Ordinance 4046, passed April 8, 2008, repealed and reenacted Title 7.
DIVISION 1: AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.0101   Scope.
   
71.0102   Definitions.
   
71.0103   Authority of Director.
   
71.0104   Liability.
   
71.0105   Insurance.
§ 71.0101   Scope.
   The provisions of this Title shall be applicable to all airports owned or
operated by the County of San Bernardino or by a County Service Area governed
by the Board of Supervisors of said County (“CSA”) within this County. Each
such airport shall be conducted as a public facility for the promotion and
accommodation of civil aviation and associated activities, and shall be open
for public use at such hours and subject to such restrictions as are contained
in this Title or as may be determined by the Board or the Director, acting
pursuant hereto on behalf of the County or a CSA as owner and proprietor of the
airport.
   These provisions are not intended to amend, modify, or supersede any
provisions of Federal, State, or local law, or any specific contractual
agreement of the County or a CSA with which they may conflict, provided,
however, that these provisions shall be interpreted, insofar as is possible, in
such manner that no conflict shall exist. If any portion of these provisions
shall be invalid or unenforceable, all other provisions shall remain in effect
and be construed to achieve the purposes hereof. All persons on, and users of,
such an airport shall be governed by the provisions of this Title and by any
rules, regulations, orders, or directives made or issued by the Board or the
Director pursuant hereto.
   All services in operating a facility at the airport must be performed
without discrimination or segregation as to race, creed, color, sex, age or
national origin.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3975,
passed - -2006)
§ 71.0102   Definitions.
   As used in this Title, the following definitions apply:
   AIR OPERATIONS AREA. The runways, taxiways and other areas of an airport
which are utilized for taxiing, hover taxiing, air taxiing, takeoff or landing
of aircraft, inclusive of loading ramps and parking areas.
   AIRCRAFT MOVEMENT AREA. The runways, taxiways and other areas of an airport
which are utilized for taxiing, hover taxiing, air taxiing, takeoff, or landing
of aircraft, exclusive of loading ramps and parking areas.
   AIRPORT. Each airport, heliport, and helistop owned or operated by the
County of San Bernardino or by a CSA governed by the Board of Supervisors of
said County, except when otherwise specifically noted. It includes all property
and improvements within the property or boundary lines of the airport, heliport
or helistop.
   AIRPORT MANAGER. The individual assigned day-to-day responsibility for an
airport or group of airports.
   AIRPORT SURFACE. The public runways for taking off or landing of aircraft,
the public taxiways for ground movement of aircraft, and the public aircraft
parking space for loading, unloading, fueling and emergency servicing of
aircraft.
   BOARD. Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino.
   COMMERCIAL OPERATOR. A person or business that, pursuant to a lease or
business permit with the County or a CSA, engages in the business of
aeronautics, aircraft repairs of all kinds, sale and renting of new and used
aircraft, sale of parts, flight instruction, commercial flying clubs, airplane
charter, local flights, or sale of fuel.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. A vehicle of any type whatsoever, used or maintained for
the transportation of persons for hire, for compensation, or for profit, or
designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of goods or
property.
   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino, State of California.
   DIRECTOR. The Director, Department of airports.
   FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA) REGULATIONS. Include all applicable
laws of the Department of Transportation and Department of Homeland Security.
   NON-AVIATION COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES. Any activity conducted by any person
engaged in any business authorized by permit with the County or CSA at any
airport covered by this Code, which business is not that of aviation operator,
certificated air carrier, commercial operator, mechanic, or commercial aircraft
use.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association, organization, joint stock association or body politic; and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative
thereof.
   RESTRICTED AREAS. All runways and taxiways, fuel farms, water well pumping
stations, sewer lift stations, oxidation ponds, mechanical rooms, and
electrical vaults. Any other restricted areas will be marked as such with
signs.
   SUPERVISED AREAS. All aprons, hangars, and air operations areas.
   VEHICLE. Any conveyance used to move people or property.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3975,
passed - -2006)
§ 71.0103   Authority of Director.
   The Director shall have the authority, and is charged with the
responsibility, to administer and enforce the provisions of this Title and may
issue such orders, instructions, or directives as may be necessary to achieve
the purposes hereof. The Director shall at all times have authority to take
such actions as may be necessary to achieve the purposes hereof. The Director
shall at all times have authority to take such actions as may be necessary to
safeguard persons and property at an airport and to make and enforce such rules
and regulations, in addition to those provided herein, as may be required in
any emergency or abnormal condition. The Director is empowered to post signs or
employ other markings at any airport, which state or apply rules, regulations,
orders, or directives. Each Airport Manager, as a representative and agent of
the Director, is empowered to require compliance with the provisions of this
Title and with any rules, regulations, orders, or directives issued pursuant
hereto.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3975,
passed - -2006)
§ 71.0104   Liability.
   (a)   The privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be
conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk of the user
thereof, who shall release, hold harmless and indemnify the County, CSA, their
officers and employees from any liability or loss resulting from such use. The
owners and operators of all aircraft based at the airport shall comply with the
Uniform Aircraft Financial Responsibility Act (Public Utilities Code §§
24230—24410), except that the amounts of insurance coverage shall be determined
as set forth in §
71.0105.
   (b)   The permission granted by the County or CSA to use said airport and
its facilities shall be at all times conditioned upon the assumption of full
responsibility therefore by every person exercising or taking advantage of such
permission. It shall be a further condition hereof that each person using said
airport and its facilities, as a consideration for the use of said airport and
its facilities, shall at all times release, hold harmless, and indemnify the
County, CSA, and their officers, agents and employees, from any and all
responsibility, liability, loss or damage, caused by or on the behalf of such
person using said airport and its facilities.
   (c)   The use of said airport by any person for any purpose, or the paying
of any fees therefore, or the operation of any aircraft thereon, shall be in
itself an acknowledgment that such persons accept such privileges on the
conditions herein set forth.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3975,
passed - -2006)
§ 71.0105   Insurance.
   All commercial businesses, including commercial operators and non-aviation
commercial uses, as defined in §
71.0102, shall be covered by adequate insurance at their own expense, to assure
payments of damage occasioned by their operation or conduct of business
activities in and upon the airport including aircraft and ramp vehicles. Said
insurance shall have single limit bodily injury and property damage liability
in an amount specified by the Director, but under no circumstances less than an
amount specified from time to time by the County Risk Manager. The County or
CSA shall be an additionally insured or an additionally named insured in said
insurance policy, as specified by the County Risk Manager. Each operator or
business must provide and keep current a certificate of insurance with the
respective Airport Manager indicating such coverage and providing for 30 days’
written notice to said Airport Manager before cancellation.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3975,
passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 2: AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS
Section
   
71.0201   Aeronautical Activities.
   
71.0202   Payment.
   
71.0203   Refusal of Clearance.
   
71.0204   Closing of Field.
   
71.0205   Airport Ground and Flight Regulations.
   
71.0206   Disabled Aircraft.
   
71.0207   Categories of Aircraft Use.
   
71.0208   Radio Contact.
   
71.0209   Glider Towing.
   
71.0210   Parachute Jumping.
§ 71.0201   Aeronautical Activities.
   No person shall conduct any aircraft operation to, on, from or over the
airport, or service, maintain or repair any aircraft on the airport, or conduct
any aircraft operations on or from the airport except in conformity with the
requirements herein contained, orders issued by the Director, regulations
established by the FAA under authority of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958
(Pub. Law No. 85-726) and amendments thereto, and any California State Rules
and Regulations governing aircraft not in conflict with rules and regulations
of the United States of America.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0202   Payment.
   Payment for use of airport facilities, commercial permit fees, storage,
repairs, supplies, or other services rendered by the Department of Airports
shall be made before flight clearance will be granted unless satisfactory
credit arrangements have been made with the Airport Manager. Unless payment is
made or credit arrangements are made, the County or CSA shall have a lien on
the aircraft and may impound the aircraft. Said lien is pursuant to Code of
Civil Procedure § 1208.62 and Civil Code §§ 3051 and 3068.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0203   Refusal of Clearance.
   The Airport Manager may delay or restrict any flight or other operations at
the airport and may refuse takeoff clearance to any aircraft for a violation of
these regulations or for reasons of safety to persons or property.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0204   Closing of Field.
   In the event a determination is made that the conditions of the airport are
unsafe for landings or takeoffs, it shall be within the authority of the
Director, Airport Manager or designated representative to close the airport or
any part thereof. Closure shall be accompanied, as appropriate, with a FAA
notice to airpersons with notice to appropriate Air Traffic Control agencies.
This same procedure shall be followed to re-open the airport when the field is
again usable.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0205   Airport Ground and Flight Regulations.
   (a)   All aircraft traffic shall conform to the established traffic pattern
as approved by the FAA and posted at the airport.
   (b)   No person shall park nor permit an aircraft to stand an unreasonable
length of time on any runway or taxiway at the airport.
   (c)   No person shall park or store an aircraft or aircraft components at
the airport except in areas designated by the Airport Manager.
   (d)   No person shall conduct experimental flight or ground demonstrations
on the airport, which are not in accordance with applicable FAA regulations.
   (e)   No person shall take any aircraft from the landing area or hangars or
operate such aircraft while under the influence of alcohol or FAA prohibited
drugs.
   (f)   No person shall leave an aircraft unattended unless it is properly
tied down or placed in a hangar. Owners of such aircraft shall be held
responsible for any damage resulting from failure to comply with this rule.
   (g)   No aircraft shall be permitted to remain on any part of the landing or
takeoff areas for the purpose of repairs.
   (h)   All aircraft shall be taxied at slow and reasonable speeds and shall
not be taxied onto a runway without first stopping and waiting for any
approaching aircraft preparing to land, or as directed by the tower.
   (i)   No person shall, without the owner’s permission, interfere or tamper
with an aircraft parked or stored at the airport.
   (j)   No person shall move an aircraft on the airport in a negligent or
reckless manner.
   (k)   No person shall start or taxi any aircraft on the airport in a place
where the air or exhaust blast is likely to cause injuries to persons or
property. If the aircraft cannot be started or taxied without violating this
Subdivision, the operator must have it towed.
   Helicopters shall in all cases comply with FAA requirements.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0206   Disabled Aircraft.
   (a)   Disabled aircraft and parts thereof on the airport shall be promptly
removed from the airport or to a designated area by owners, at their own
expense.
   (b)   If any person refuses to move an aircraft as directed by the Airport
Manager, said aircraft may be towed away and stored at the owner’s expense, and
without liability for damage which may result in the course of or after such
moving. The same shall apply to removal of a wrecked or damaged aircraft and
its parts. The County or CSA shall have a lien upon said aircraft for the cost
of such towing and storage as described above. Said lien is pursuant to Code of
Civil Procedure § 1208.61 and Civil Code §§ 3051 and 3068.
   (c)   If an aircraft is disabled on a runway of the airport, the Airport
Manager may take whatever action he or she deems necessary to make the runway
safe for other aircraft, and the owner shall bear the expense of such action as
well as the expense of any and all damages caused to the disabled aircraft.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0207   Categories of Aircraft Use.
   (a)   Private.
      (1)   PRIVATELY OWNED AND OPERATED AIRCRAFT will be as defined by
appropriate FAA regulations.
      (2)   Company and corporation-owned aircraft that are operated for the
free transportation of personnel and/or products are classified as private
aircraft and subject to the same restrictions.
      (3)   AIRCRAFT FOR SALE. New or used privately owned aircraft held for
sale only. Such aircraft may be demonstrated to prospective purchasers, or,
when sold, may be used to instruct the new owner in their operation.
      (4)   Aircraft owned privately, but leased or rented back to a commercial
operator, shall be automatically classified as “commercial” as defined in §
71.0207(b).
   (b)   Commercial.
      (1)   Rental, lease, hire or charter aircraft;
      (2)   Aircraft used for commercial purposes and not otherwise covered in
this Chapter.
   (c)   Certificated Air Carriers.
      (1)   Contract. All Federally- or California-certificated air carriers
holding a contract with the County or CSA for airport usage.
      (2)   Non-contract. All Federally- or California-certificated air
carriers not covered in §
71.0207(c)(1) above.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0208   Radio Contact.
   (a)   Pilots of aircraft shall not land, taxi, or take off without first
obtaining a clearance from the appropriate air traffic control currently in
operation by radio, telephone or light signal when operating from any airport
with an air traffic control tower.
   (b)   All aircraft based on or operating regularly into or out of an airport
with an air traffic control tower must be equipped with two-way radio.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0209   Glider Towing.
   No person shall tow or pull a glider by airplane, motor vehicle, or any
other method, where such towing or pulling is for the purpose of taking off,
unless the Airport Manager determines that it may be done without danger to
life or property and without interfering with the operations of the airport and
gives prior approval.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0210   Parachute Jumping.
   Parachute jumping within the confines of the airport boundaries, flight
patterns, approach zones, or 45-degree entry legs, or in any other area which
would constitute a hazard is prohibited unless prior written approval is
obtained from the Airport Manager and compliance with FAA regulations is
assured.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 3: MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.0301   Licensing.
   
71.0302   Rules of Operation.
   
71.0303   Permits Required.
   
71.0304   Radio Equipment.
   
71.0305   Emergency Vehicles—Right of Way.
   
71.0306   Repair of Motor Vehicles.
   
71.0307   Parking.
§ 71.0301   Licensing.
   No person shall operate motorized equipment of any kind on the airport
unless in possession of a current and valid operator’s license for such
equipment.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0302   Rules of Operation.
   (a)   No person shall operate a vehicle of any kind on the airport in a
reckless or negligent manner or in excess of the speed limits prescribed by the
Airport Manager. If not posted, the speed limit shall not exceed ten miles per
hour in ramp, apron, aircraft parking areas, hangar areas and automobile
parking lots.
   (b)   Pedestrians and aircraft shall at all times have right of way over
vehicular traffic. All vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft.
   (c)   Persons operating vehicles on the airport shall give proper signals
and observe the directions of posted traffic signs.
   (d)   No person under the influence of alcohol or FAA prohibited drugs shall
operate a vehicle or aircraft on the airport.
   (e)   No person shall operate on the airport any vehicle which is overloaded
or carrying more passengers than that for which the vehicle was designed. No
person shall ride on the running board, stand up or ride in the body of a
moving vehicle with arms or legs protruding from the body of the motor vehicle.
   (f)   No vehicle shall be operated on the airport if it is so constructed,
equipped or loaded as to endanger persons or property.
   (g)   No person shall operate, in any hangar on the airport, a motor
scooter, truck, or other motor vehicle without exhausts protected by screens or
baffles to prevent the escape of sparks or the propagation of flame.
   (h)   No vehicle, commercial or otherwise, other than those for the
operation of which the Airport Manager has granted a permit, may enter upon,
travel through, park at, stop in, or be operated upon the airport surface. The
Director, or designee may waive the foregoing requirements when such waiver
will not adversely affect airport operations.
   (i)   No person under 12 years of age shall operate any motorized vehicle on
the airport property under any circumstances nor operate any non-motorized
vehicle on the airport property unless under direct supervision by an adult
with full and legal responsibility for the operator.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0303   Permits Required.
   (a)   Except as otherwise specifically authorized by the Airport Manager, no
person may operate a vehicle that is carrying passengers for hire from the
airport without appropriate license and a permit from the County or CSA.
   (b)   Except for discharging passengers and as otherwise directed by the
Airport Manager, no person may park on the airport a vehicle used for the
purpose of carrying passengers for hire without appropriate license and a
permit from the County or CSA.
   (c)   Except with the specific approval of the Airport Manager under
conditions prescribed by him or her, no person may on the airport solicit or
invite any person to ride in a vehicle used for the purpose of carrying
passengers for hire, either by driving slowly past a loading entrance to an
airport building or by any other act or the speaking of words that are intended
to induce that person to engage the vehicle.
   (d)   Each person who requests a permit to operate on the airport a vehicle
used for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire must apply in writing to
the Airport Manager and pay any applicable permit fee.
   (e)   Upon receiving an application under Subdivision (d) of this Section,
the Airport Manager may issue a permit authorizing the holder to operate on the
airport a vehicle used for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire. The
Airport Manager may revoke such a permit at any time.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0304   Radio Equipment.
   (a)   All vehicles operating within the aircraft movement area must be
equipped with two-way radio and be in continuous communication with ground
control with the exception of the following types of equipment:
      (1)   Crash, fire and other emergency equipment while attending an
accident if another radio-controlled vehicle is acting as a leader;
      (2)   Gasoline and fuel tenders when operating in apron and ramp areas
for fueling purposes only;
      (3)   Agricultural and maintenance equipment owned by the County or CSA
not engaged in work on the runways;
      (4)   Aircraft support equipment such as baggage trailers, in-flight meal
trucks, power units, tow tractors, when operating in the airport terminal apron
area, but not when operating in any other airport surface areas such as runways
and taxiways;
      (5)   Private vehicles.
   (b)   The installation of two-way radios does not permit the operation of
vehicles on the aircraft movement area of the airport without prior written
permission from the Airport Manager.
   (c)   Any vehicle which has been permitted to operate on the airport will
not proceed into the aircraft movement area until cleared by ground control.
Vehicle operators shall be held responsible for knowing the meaning of the
standard airport light signal regardless of whether or not the vehicle is
radio-equipped.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0305   Emergency Vehicles—Right of Way.
   Upon approach of a police, ambulance, fire department, or other emergency
vehicle giving an audible or visual signal that it is on an emergency call,
each person operating another vehicle on any road on the airport shall
immediately drive the vehicle parallel with, and as near as possible to, the
right-hand edge of the road, clear of all intersections, and stay there until
the emergency vehicle has stopped or passed, unless otherwise directed by an
airport employee or peace officer.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0306   Repair of Motor Vehicles.
   No person shall clean or make any repairs to vehicles anywhere on the
airport other than in designated shop or vehicle repair areas, as stated in
tenant’s lease agreement or business permit, except those minor repairs
necessary to remove such vehicle from the airport; nor shall any person move,
interfere, or tamper with any vehicle, or put in motion the engine, or take, or
use any motor vehicle part, instrument, or tool thereof, without the permission
of the owner and satisfactory evidence of the right to do so.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0307   Parking.
   (a)   No person shall park or store a vehicle on the airport except in a
specifically designated area.
   (b)   No person shall park a vehicle in any posted area on the airport for a
period longer than that prescribed.
   (c)   No person shall park a vehicle in a restricted or reserved area on the
airport unless there is displayed, in the manner prescribed, a parking permit
issued by the Airport Manager for that area.
   (d)   No person shall double park a vehicle on any road on the airport.
   (e)   No person shall abandon a vehicle on the airport.
   (f)   No person shall leave a vehicle standing unattended or parked on the
airport with a key in the ignition switch, the motor running, a key in the door
lock, or an open door.
   (g)   No person shall park or store a vehicle at any place on the airport in
violation of any sign posted by the Airport Manager.
   (h)   No person shall park or store a vehicle within 15 feet of a fire
hydrant on the airport, or park in such manner as to block any fire gate or
entrance.
   (i)   No person shall park a vehicle in any marked space in such manner as
to occupy more than one space.
   (j)   No person shall park a vehicle in a pay parking area without paying
the required parking fee.
   (k)   No person shall park a vehicle in individual storage hangars or
aircraft shelters unless permitted by the owner or lessee of said structure.
   (l)   The Airport Manager or designee may cause to be removed, at the
owner’s expense, any vehicle which is parked on the airport in violation of
this Chapter. The vehicle shall be subject to a lien for the cost of removal.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 4: PERSONAL CONTACT
Section
   
71.0401   General.
   
71.0402   Sanitation.
   
71.0403   Preservation of Property.
   
71.0404   Airport and Equipment.
   
71.0405   Dangerous Objects.
   
71.0406   Coin-Operated Machines.
   
71.0407   False Report.
   
71.0408   Interfering or Tampering with Aircraft.
   
71.0409   Repairing of Aircraft.
   
71.0410   Restricted Areas.
   
71.0411   Soliciting and Canvassing.
   
71.0412   Commercial Photography.
   
71.0413   Use of Roads, Walks, and Open Space.
   
71.0414   Animals.
   
71.0415   Loitering.
   
71.0416   Use of Airport and Airspace.
§ 71.0401   General.
   (a)   No person shall be disorderly, obnoxious, indecent, or commit any act
of nuisance on the airport.
   (b)   No person shall engage in gambling in any form on the airport.
   (c)   No person shall hunt, pursue, trap, catch, deliberately injure, or
kill any bird, fish, or animal on the airport without authorization.
   (d)   No person shall reside in, domicile in, or otherwise occupy any
facility on an airport for any residential purpose unless specifically
authorized by the Director and in full compliance with applicable laws.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0402   Sanitation.
   (a)   No person may release, deposit, blow, or spread any bodily discharge
on the floor, wall, partition, furniture, or any other part of a public comfort
station, terminal building, hangar, or other building on the airport, other
than directly into a fixture provided for that purpose.
   (b)   No person may place any foreign object in any plumbing fixture of a
public comfort station, terminal building, hangar, or other building on the
airport.
   (c)   No person may dispose of sewage, garbage, refuse, paper, or other
material on the airport except in a receptacle provided for that purpose.
   (d)   No person shall keep uncovered trash containers in any area. No
vehicle used for hauling trash, dirt, or any other materials shall be operated
on the airport unless such vehicle is constructed so as to prevent the contents
thereof from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping there from. Areas
to be used for trash or garbage containers shall be designated by the Airport
Manager and no other areas shall be used. Such areas shall be kept clean and
sanitary at all times.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0403   Preservation of Property.
   No person may, without the specific permission of the Airport Manager:
   (a)   Destroy, injure, deface, or disturb any building, sign, equipment,
marker, or other structure, tree, flower, lawn, or other public property on the
airport;
   (b)   Walk or operate any vehicle on a restricted area of the airport;
   (c)   Alter, add to or erect any building on the airport;
   (d)   Make an excavation on the airport;
   (e)   Willfully abandon any personal property on the airport.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0404   Airport and Equipment.
   No person may interfere, tamper with, or damage any part of the airport or
its equipment.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0405   Dangerous Objects.
   (a)   No person except a peace officer, an authorized post office, airport,
or air carrier employee, or a member of an armed force on official duty, may
carry any weapon, explosive, or flammable material, openly or concealed, on the
airport without permission of the Airport Manager.
   (b)   No person may furnish, give, sell, or trade a weapon on the airport.
   (c)   For the purposes of this Section, a WEAPON includes a gun, dirk, Bowie
knife, blackjack, switch blade knife, slingshot, or metal knuckles, and
includes all those weapons listed in Penal Code § 12020.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0406   Coin-Operated Machines.
   No person may, on the airport:
   (a)   Place, or attempt to place, in a coin-operated machine a slug, foreign
coin, or object other than the coin required by the instructions on the
machine;
   (b)    Pass through, over, or under a turnstile that requires the deposit of
a coin for its use, without first depositing the required coin in the
turnstile.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0407   False Report.
   No person may make a false report of conduct on or the operation or use of
the airport to the Director or authorized representatives.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0408   Interfering or Tampering with Aircraft.
   No person may interfere or tamper with an aircraft on the airport or put its
engine in motion, or use any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments, or tools on
the airport, without the permission of the owner.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0409   Repairing of Aircraft.
   No person may repair an aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, or apparatus
in an area of the airport other than that specifically designated for that
purpose by the Airport Manager. However, this does not prevent a minor
adjustment being made while the aircraft is in the aircraft parking area or on
a ramp preparing to take off, if the adjustment is necessary to prevent a
delayed movement of the aircraft.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0410   Restricted Areas.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person may, without permission
of the Airport Manager, enter any restricted area on the airport that is posted
as closed to the public.
   (b)   No person may enter marked restricted areas, the control tower, any
hangar, the apron, or any other part of the airport specified by the Airport
Manager except:
      (1)   A person assigned to duty at that place;
      (2)   A passenger who, under appropriate supervision, is entering the
apron to embark or debark; or
      (3)   Any other person authorized by the Airport Manager or by a tenant
for an area occupied by said tenant.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0411   Soliciting and Canvassing.
   No person may, on the airport, solicit fares, alms, or funds for any purpose
without the permission of the Director or authorized representative.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0412   Commercial Photography.
   (a)   Except as provided in Subdivision (b) of this Section, no person may
take a still, motion, or sound picture on the airport for commercial purposes
without the permission of the Airport Manager.
   (b)   The Airport Manager may allow any of the following to take pictures on
the airport for commercial purposes:
      (1)   Professional photographers and motion picture camera operators
photographing events on the airport as representatives of news concerns or bona
fide news publications;
      (2)   Professional photographers and motion picture camera operators
photographing events at the airport, for nonprofit exhibit, to stimulate
interest in air commerce or travel, or for nonprofit educational purposes;
      (3)   Professional photographers photographing scenes on the airport for
general artistic purposes.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0413   Use of Roads, Walks, and Open Space.
   (a)   No person may occupy or place an object on a road or walk on the
airport in a manner that hinders or obstructs its proper use.
   (b)   No person may walk in a picket line as a picket or take part in a
labor or other public demonstration on any part of the airport except a place
specifically assigned by the Airport Manager for picket lines or other public
demonstrations.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0414   Animals.
   No person may enter the airport with a domestic or wild animal without the
written permission of the Airport Manager, except:
   (a)   A person entering any part of the airport other than the terminal
building, gate loading area, or other restricted area with a domestic animal
that is kept restrained by a leash or is confined so as to be completely under
control;
   (b)   A person entering the terminal building or gate loading area with a
small domestic animal (such as a dog or cat) that is to be transported by air
and is kept restrained by a leash or is confined so as to be completely under
control; or
   (c)   A blind person entering the terminal building or gate loading area
with a seeing-eye dog.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0415   Loitering.
   No person may loiter or loaf on any part of the airport.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0416   Use of Airport and Airspace.
   (a)   No person who has been denied the use of the airport by the Director
or designated representative may enter on or use the airport except while
traveling through as a passenger in a bus or taxi or while embarking or
debarking as a passenger on an aircraft operating on the airport.
   (b)   No person, without specific permission of the Airport Manager, may
prepare to operate, or release a kite, parachute, or balloon, model aircraft,
or rocket on the airport.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 5: FIRE HAZARDS AND FUELING OPERATIONS
Section
   
71.0501   Cleaning Fluids.
   
71.0502   Smoking.
   
71.0503   Storage.
   
71.0504   Apron Surface Areas and Floor Surface.
   
71.0505   Doping.
   
71.0506   Fueling Operations.
   
71.0507   Fire Equipment.
   
71.0508   Other Regulations.
   
71.0509   Liquid Disposal.
   
71.0510   Aircraft Carrying or Suspected of Carrying Explosives.
§ 71.0501   Cleaning Fluids.
   No person shall use inflammable volatile liquid having a flash point of less
than 110°F on the airport in the cleaning of aircraft engines, propellers,
appliances, or for any other purpose, unless such operations are conducted in
open air, or in a room specifically set aside for that purpose, which room must
be properly fireproofed and equipped with adequate and readily accessible fire
extinguishing apparatus. The Airport Manager shall designate in advance the
open air areas for the cleaning of aircraft as described above.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0502   Smoking.
   No person may smoke on any airport apron or ramps, in any hangar or shop, in
any aircraft on the airport, or in any other place on or adjacent to the
airport where smoking is specifically prohibited.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0503   Storage.
   (a)   No person shall keep or store any inflammable liquids, gases, signal
flares or other similar material in the hangars or in any building on the
airport; provided that such materials may be kept in an aircraft in the proper
receptacles installed in the aircraft for such purpose, or in rooms or areas
specifically approved for such storage by the Airport Manager, or in National
Board of Fire Underwriters’ approved safety cans.
   (b)   No person shall keep or store lubricating or waste oils in or about
the hangars; provided that such material may be kept in rooms specifically
designated by the Airport Manager for oil storage or in original unopened,
sealed containers, or in containers or receptacles approved by National Board
of Fire Underwriters.
   (c)   Lessees and concessionaires shall provide suitable metal receptacles
with metal covers for the storage of waste, rags, and other rubbish. All used
waste and rags or other rubbish shall be removed by the lessees and
concessionaires daily, or in regular scheduled pickups, but not less than once
a week. Lessees may contract with other agencies or persons for removal of this
material. Method and pickup point are subject to approval of the Airport
Manager.
   (d)   Gasoline, oil and solvent drums or receptacles shall not be stored on
apron and ramp areas in excess of mounts actually needed as current stock. Any
material of this type that is kept enclosed and covered shall be in a housing
of a design and type as approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0504   Apron Surface Areas and Floor Surface.
   Each person to whom space on the airport is leased, assigned, or made
available for use shall keep the space free and clean of oil, grease, or other
foreign materials that could cause a fire hazard or a slippery or otherwise
unsafe condition.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0505   Doping.
   (a)   “Doping” processes shall be conducted only in properly designated,
fireproofed and ventilated rooms or buildings in which all illumination,
wiring, heating, ventilation equipment, switches, outlets, and fixtures shall
be explosion-proof, spark proof, and vapor-proof, and all windows and doors
shall open easily.
   (b)   “Doping” of airplanes in open areas outside of buildings is allowed
with the prior approval of the Airport Manager, who shall designate the area in
which the doping may be done. The doping processes shall be done in the
designated area in which all illumination, wiring, heating, ventilation
equipment, switches, outlets, and fixtures shall be explosion-proof, spark-
proof, and vapor-proof.
   (c)   No person shall enter or work in a dope room or designated doping area
while doping processes are being conducted unless such person wears spark-proof
shoes. No person shall smoke while doping. The room, building, or area and the
process for doping shall comply with the requirements of the Industrial Safety
Division of the State of California.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0506   Fueling Operations.
   The following rules govern the fueling and defueling of aircraft:
   (a)   No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the engine is running,
or being warmed by applications of exterior heat, or while such aircraft is in
a storage hangar or enclosed space.
   (b)   No person shall smoke within 50 feet of an aircraft being fueled or
defueled.
   (c)   No person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver, or switch
electrical appliances off or on in an aircraft during fueling or defueling
except commercial airliners located at gate positions.
   (d)   During refueling or defueling, the aircraft and the fueling dispensing
retrieval apparatus shall both be grounded to a point or points of zero
electrical potential.
   (e)   When filling a fuel tender from storage tanks, two attendants shall be
required when a nonlocking valve is in use on the fill-pipe and control for
said valve is continually in the attendant’s hand to maintain fuel flow.
   (f)   No person shall use any material during fueling or defueling of
aircraft which is likely to cause a spark or be a source of ignition.
   (g)   Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of all persons
engaged in fueling or defueling aircraft.
   (h)   No person shall start the engine of any aircraft when there is any
fuel on the ground under such aircraft.
   (i)   Fueling hoses and equipment shall be maintained in a safe, sound and
nonleaking condition and shall be of design and make approved by National Board
of Fire Underwriters.
   (j)   All hoses, funnels, and appurtenances used in fueling and defueling
operations shall be equipped with a grounding device to prevent ignition of
volatile liquids.
   (k)   All fueling and defueling of aircraft shall be conducted at least 50
feet from any hangar or other building.
   (l)   No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while passengers are on board
the aircraft unless a passenger-loading ramp is in place at the cabin door of
the aircraft, the aircraft door is in open position, and a cabin attendant is
present at or near the cabin door.
   (m)   Persons engaged in the fueling and defueling of aircraft shall
exercise care to prevent overflow of fuel. Persons responsible shall take
proper measures to remove volatile liquid when it is spilled during transfer.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0507   Fire Equipment.
   (a)   No person shall remove or cause to be removed from its holder,
container, reel or bracket, any equipment or device used in fire protection,
except in case of emergency or fire. In any event, such equipment shall not be
taken from any hangar or building for standby use by any person or for any use
other than for which it is intended, without permission from the Airport
Manager. Use of such equipment shall be immediately reported to the Airport
Manager.
   (b)   Each tenant or lessee of a hangar, shop facility, or other operational
area specified by the Airport Manager on the airport shall supply and maintain
adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishers, approved by Underwriters
Laboratories for the hazard involved, as required by the local, State or
Federal regulations.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0508   Other Regulations.
   All regulations and recommendations of the California Industrial Safety
Division, National Fire Protection Association, the FAA, the fire code as
locally adopted, and rules established by the Director or Airport Manager shall
be adhered to with regard to all aspects of fueling and handling of
inflammables.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0509   Liquid Disposal.
   No fuel, oils, dopes, paints, solvents or acids shall be disposed of or
dumped in drains, basins or ditches or elsewhere on the airport.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0510   Aircraft Carrying or Suspected of Carrying Explosives.
   (a)   Persons having knowledge of an aircraft carrying or suspected of
carrying explosive materials will so advise the Airport Manager immediately.
   (b)   Landing or taxiing aircraft with passengers aboard will unload
passengers at a reasonable distance from the terminal area ramp and then
immediately be moved to such other area as may be designated by the Airport
Manager. Only engines affecting unloading of passengers should be shut off to
enable subsequent moving of aircraft with a minimum of delay.
   (c)   Parked aircraft shall be evacuated and moved by owner or operator to
an area designated by the Airport Manager.
   (d)   Inspection of the aircraft and subsequent declaration of safety or
hazardous condition shall be the responsibility of the aircraft owner or
operator. Inspection shall be accomplished immediately after parking and
evacuation.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
CHAPTER 6: COMMERCIAL OR BUSINESS ACTIVITY
Section
   
71.0601   Conduct of Commercial or Business Activity.
   
71.0602   Business Location Requirements.
   
71.0603   Storage of Equipment.
§ 71.0601   Conduct of Commercial or Business Activity.
   (a)   No person shall engage in any business or commercial activity of any
nature whatsoever on the airport, including flight instruction and aircraft and
engine repair without a written contract or permit with the County or CSA for
such activity subject to the following exceptions:
      (1)   An owner of an aircraft who performs repair upon that aircraft,
providing such individual is properly permitted to do such work under current
FAA regulations, and, providing further that such work is conducted so as not
to create any hazard or nuisance to any other aircraft, person, or operator
upon the airport, and provided further that such work is conducted in a
location approved by the Airport Manager. Any person holding a current and
appropriate FAA mechanic’s certificate may assist an owner, instruct an owner,
or supervise such permitted work without remuneration when that owner himself
performs such repairs.
      (2)   An owner may perform a maintenance service for himself or herself.
      (3)   A person holding a current FAA flight instruction certificate who
gives occasional flight instruction, without pay or other remuneration, to an
owner of an aircraft in that owner’s aircraft.
   (b)   Any person required to obtain a permit or contract, must pay the
applicable fees and obtain a permit from the Airport Manger prior to providing
services or goods to an aircraft owner.
   (c)   The County or CSA may require permits from individuals or companies to
perform maintenance on aircraft under unusual circumstances, i.e., repair to
flyaway status by owner of aircraft not based upon airport; aircraft of unusual
design, size, or age; aircraft and the components for which there is no
qualified licensed operator upon the airport.
   (d)   The County or CSA may refuse to issue a contract or permit under the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The person applying for the permit is in violation of any provision
of this Chapter or has been excluded from any airport for cause under any
applicable section of this Title or has had any contract with the County or CSA
terminated by the County or CSA at or before the effective date of the
requested permit.
      (2)   No space is available for the intended operation when space is
necessary for the conduct of said proposed operations.
      (3)   The proposed activity will cause a nuisance or hazard by the nature
of said operation and its location to the users of the airport.
      (4)   The person applying for the permit has unfulfilled obligations
remaining in an existing or prior contract or permit.
   (e)   Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the registered owner of a
private aircraft from offering said aircraft for sale or from selling said
aircraft.
   (f)   Any individual or company desiring to sell aviation fuel to the public
shall provide services commonly associated with traditional fixed base
operators, inclusive of hangar storage, pilot lounges and briefing areas, and
aircraft parking areas.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0602   Business Location Requirements.
   All persons engaged in business or commercial activity on the airport will
be required to conduct said business or activity within the boundaries of the
airport from a building or structure presently located on the airport or to be
constructed by mutual contractual agreement in accordance with a master plan
approved by the Board. These provisions are not applicable to individuals
receiving temporary, one-time permits from the Airport Manager.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 3975, passed - -2006)
§ 71.0603   Storage of Equipment.
   No tenant or lessee of a hangar, shop facility, or other operational area
specified by the Airport Manager on the airport shall store or stack equipment
or material of a type or in such a manner as to be a hazard to persons or
property.
(Am. Ord. 2132, passed - -1977; Am. Ord. 2228, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 3975,
passed - -2006)
TITLE 8: DEVELOPMENT CODE
Chapter
DIVISION 1: DEVELOPMENT CODE AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY
   
81.01.   Purpose and Effect of Development Code
      
81.01.010   Title
      
81.01.020   Purpose and Intent of Development Code
      
81.01.030   Authority for Regulating Land Uses
      
81.01.040   Responsibility for Administration
      
81.01.050   Applicability of Development Code
      
81.01.060   Partial Invalidation of Development Code
      
81.01.070   Legal Defense Fee Responsibility
      
81.01.080   Use of Headings
      
81.01.090   Effect of General Plan Adoption or Development Code Changes on
Projects in Progress
   
81.02.   Interpretation of Regulations
      
81.02.010   Purpose of Chapter
      
81.02.020   Rules of Interpretation
DIVISION 2: LAND USE ZONING DISTRICTS AND ALLOWED LAND USES
   
82.01.   Land Use Plan, Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays
      
82.01.010   Purpose
      
82.01.020   Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.01.030   Overlays
   
82.02.   Allowed Land Uses and Development
      
82.02.010   Purpose
      
82.02.020   General Requirements for Development and New Land Uses
      
82.02.030   Allowed Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements
      
82.02.040   Exemptions from Planning Permit Requirements
      
82.02.050   Special Developments
      
82.02.060   Temporary Uses
   
82.03.   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.03.010   Purpose
      
82.03.020   Purposes and Location of the Agricultural and Resource Management
Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.03.030   Minimum Area for Designation
      
82.03.040   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements
      
82.03.050   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Subdivision Standard
      
82.03.060   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Site
Planning and Building Standards
      
82.03.070   FW Land Use Zoning District Additional Standards
   
82.04.   Residential Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.04.010   Purpose
      
82.04.020   Purposes and Location of the Residential Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.04.030   Minimum Area for Designation
      
82.04.040   Residential Land Use Zoning District Allowed Uses and Permit
Requirements
      
82.04.050   Residential Land Use Zoning District Subdivision Standards
      
82.04.060   Residential Land Use Zoning District Site Planning and Building
Standards
   
82.05.   Commercial Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.05.010   Purpose
      
82.05.020   Purposes and Location of the Commercial Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.05.030   Minimum Area for Designation
      
82.05.040   Commercial Land Use Zoning District Allowed Uses and Permit
Requirements
      
82.05.050   Commercial Land Use Zoning District Subdivision Standards
      
82.05.060   Commercial Land Use Zoning District Site Planning and Building
Standards
   
82.06.   Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.06.010   Purpose
      
82.06.020   Purposes and Location of the Industrial and Special Purpose Land
Use Zoning Districts
      
82.06.030   Minimum Area for Designation
      
82.06.040   Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Allowed
Uses and Permit Requirements
      
82.06.050   Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Subdivision
Standards
      
82.06.060   Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Site
Planning and Building Standards
      
82.06.070   Adopted Planned Development Applications
   
82.07.   Additional Agriculture (AA) Overlay
      
82.07.010   Purpose
      
82.07.020   Location Requirements
      
82.07.030   Development Standards
      
82.07.040   Land Use Limitations
   
82.08.   Agricultural Preserve (AP) Overlay
      
82.08.010   Purpose
      
82.08.020   Location Requirements
      
82.08.030   Development Standards
      
82.08.040   Land Use Limitations
   
82.09.   Airport Safety (AR) Overlay
      
82.09.010   Purpose
      
82.09.020   Location Requirements
      
82.09.030   Airport Safety Review Areas
      
82.09.040   Applicable Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plans
      
82.09.050   Review Procedures
      
82.09.060   Development Standards
   
82.10.   Alternate Housing (AH) Overlay
      
82.10.010   Purpose
      
82.10.020   Location Requirements
      
82.10.030   Development Standards
   
82.11.   Biotic Resources (BR) Overlay
      
82.11.010   Purpose
      
82.11.020   Location Requirements
      
82.11.030   Application Requirements
      
82.11.040   Conditions of Approval
      
82.11.050   Professional Qualifications
   
82.12.   Cultural Resources Preservation (CP) Overlay
      
82.12.010   Purpose
      
82.12.020   Location Requirements
      
82.12.030   Application Requirements
      
82.12.040   Development Standards
      
82.12.050   Native American Monitor
   
82.13.   Fire Safety (FS) Overlay
      
82.13.010   Purpose
      
82.13.020   Location Requirements
      
82.13.030   Fire Safety Overlay Area
      
82.13.040   Application Requirements
      
82.13.050   General Development Standards
      
82.13.060   (Reserved)
      
82.13.070   (Reserved)
      
82.13.080   (Reserved)
      
82.13.090   Alternate Hazard Protection Measures
   
82.14.   Floodplain Safety (FP) Overlay
      
82.14.010   Authority and Purpose.
      
82.14.020   Location Requirements
      
82.14.030   Applicability
      
82.14.040   Floodplain Safety Review Areas
      
82.14.050   Development Standards for Floodplain Safety Review Areas
      
82.14.060   Variances.
      
82.14.070   Boundary Changes
   
82.15.   Geologic Hazard (GH) Overlay
      
82.15.010   Purpose
      
82.15.020   Location Requirements
      
82.15.030   Professional Reports
      
82.15.040   Development Standards
   
82.16.   Hazardous Waste (HW) Overlay
      
82.16.010   Purpose
      
82.16.020   Location Requirements
      
82.16.030   Development Standards
   
82.17.   Mineral Resources (MR) Overlay
      
82.17.010   Purpose
      
82.17.020   Location Requirements
      
82.17.030   Application Requirements
      
82.17.040   Development Standards
   
82.18.   Noise Hazard (NH) Overlay
      
82.18.010   Purpose
      
82.18.020   Location Requirements
      
82.18.030   Development Standards
   
82.19.   Open Space (OS) Overlay
      
82.19.010   Purpose
      
82.19.020   Location Requirements
      
82.19.030   Special Requirements for Natural Resources
      
82.19.040   Development Criteria within Scenic Areas.
      
82.19.050   Development Standards for Trails
   
82.20.   Paleontologic Resources (PR) Overlay
      
82.20.010   Purpose
      
82.20.020   Location Requirements
      
82.20.030   Criteria for Site Evaluation for Paleontologic Resources
      
82.20.040   Paleontologist Qualifications
   
82.21.   Sign Control (SC) Overlay
      
82.21.010   Purpose
      
82.21.020   Location Requirements
      
82.21.030   Development Standards
   
82.22.   Sphere Standards (SS) Overlay
      
82.22.010   Purpose
      
82.22.020   Location Requirements
      
82.22.030    Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Adelanto
      
82.22.040   Development Standards within the Sphere of the Town of Apple Valley
      
82.22.050   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Barstow
      
82.22.060   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Big Bear
Lake
      
82.22.070   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Chino
      
82.22.080   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Colton
      
82.22.090   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Fontana
      
82.22.100   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Hesperia
      
82.22.110   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Highland
      
82.22.120   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Loma Linda
      
82.22.130   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Montclair
      
82.22.140   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Needles
      
82.22.150   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Rancho
Cucamonga
      
82.22.160   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Redlands
      
82.22.170   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Rialto
      
82.22.180   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of San
Bernardino
      
82.22.190   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Twentynine
Palms
      
82.22.200   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Upland
      
82.22.210   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Victorville
      
82.22.220   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Yucaipa
   
82.23.   Community Plans, Specific Plans and Area Plans
      
82.23.010   Purpose
      
82.23.020   Adopted Community Plans
      
82.23.030   Adopted Specific Plans
      
82.23.040   Adopted Area Plans
   
82.24.   Bear Valley Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.25.   Bloomington Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.26.   Crest Forest Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.27.   Hilltop Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.28.   Homestead Valley Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.29.   Joshua Tree Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.30.   Lake Arrowhead Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.31.   Lucerne Valley Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.32.   Lytle Creek Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.33.   Morongo Valley Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.34.   Muscoy Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.35.   Oak Glen Community Plan (Reserved)
   
82.36.   Oak Hills Community Plan
      
82.36.010   General Provisions
      
82.36.020   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.36.030   Residential Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.36.040   Commercial Land Use Zoning Districts
      
82.36.050   Industrial and Special Use Land Use Zoning Districts
   
82.37.   Phelan/Pinon Hills Community Plan (Reserved)
DIVISION 3: COUNTYWIDE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
   
83.01.   General Performance Standards
      
83.01.010   Purpose
      
83.01.020   Applicability
      
83.01.030   Modification of Standards
      
83.01.040   Air Quality
      
83.01.050   Electrical Disturbances
      
83.01.060   Fire Hazards
      
83.01.070   Heat
      
83.01.080   Noise
      
83.01.090   Vibration
      
83.01.100   Waste Disposal
      
83.01.110   External Commercial or Industrial Activity on Private Property
   
83.02.   General Development and Use Standards
      
83.02.010   Purpose
      
83.02.020   Applicability
      
83.02.030   Clear Sight Triangles
      
83.02.040   Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions
      
83.02.050   Parcel Area Measurements and Exceptions
      
83.02.060   Screening and Buffering
      
83.02.070   Setback Regulations and Exceptions
      
83.02.080   Allowed Projections/Structures Within Setbacks
   
83.03.   Affordable Housing Incentives - Density Bonus
      
83.03.010   Purpose
      
83.03.020   Applicability.
      
83.03.030   Eligibility for Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions
      
83.03.040   Allowed Density Bonuses
      
83.03.050   Allowed Incentives or Concessions
      
83.03.060   Parking Requirements in Density Bonus Projects
      
83.03.070   Bonus and Incentives for Housing with Child Care Facilities
      
83.03.080   Continued Availability
      
83.03.090   Location and Type of Designated Units
      
83.03.100   Processing of Bonus Requests
      
83.03.110Density Bonus Agreement
      
83.03.120   Control of Resale
      
83.03.130   Judicial Relief, Waiver of Standards
   
83.04.   Conditional Grading Compliance
      
83.04.010   Purpose
      
83.04.020   Applicability
      
83.04.030   Quality Control Engineer’s Role and Responsibilities
      
83.04.040   Developer’s Deposit
      
83.04.050   Building Official Authority
      
83.04.060   Authority to Contract
      
83.04.070   Enforcement
      
83.04.080   Compliance with Dust Control Regulations
   
83.05.   Dedications and Installations of Street and Trail Improvements
      
83.05.010   Purpose
      
83.05.020   Applicability
      
83.05.030   Dedication of Street and/or Highway Right-of-Way
      
83.05.040   Dedication and Installation of Trail Right-of-Way
      
83.05.050   Installation of Street Improvements
      
83.05.060   Delayed Improvements
      
83.05.070   Waiver or Modification of Dedication and/or Street Improvement
Requirements
      
83.05.080   Building Official Determination
   
83.06.   Fences, Hedges, and Walls
      
83.06.010   Purpose
      
83.06.020   Applicability
      
83.06.030   General Height Limitations
      
83.06.040   Measurement of Fence or Wall Height
      
83.06.050   Walls Required Between Different Land Use Zoning Districts
      
83.06.060   Special Wall and Fencing Requirements
      
83.06.070   Prohibited Fence Materials
   
83.07.   Light Trespass
      
83.07.010   Title
      
83.07.020   Purpose
      
83.07.030   Definitions
      
83.07.040   Applicability
      
83.07.050   Valley Requirements.
      
83.07.060   Mountain and Desert Requirements.
      
83.07.070   Conflicts with Other Laws.
      
83.07.080   Application of Ordinance to Legal Non-conforming Lighting.
      
83.07.090   Enforcement and Penalties.
   
83.08.   Hillside Grading Standards
      
83.08.010   Purpose
      
83.08.020   Applicability
      
83.08.030   Hillside Grading Review
      
83.08.040   Hillside Grading Standards
   
83.09.   Infrastructure Improvement Standards
      
83.09.010   Purpose
      
83.09.020   Applicability
      
83.09.030   Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Valley Region
      
83.09.040   Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Mountain Region
      
83.09.050   Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Desert Region
      
83.09.060   Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Countywide
   
83.10.   Landscaping Standards
      
83.10.010   Purpose
      
83.10.020   Applicability
      
83.10.030   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
      
83.10.040   Modification to the Landscaping Requirements
      
83.10.050   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
      
83.10.060   Landscape Area Requirements
      
83.10.070   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
      
83.10.080   Regional Landscaping Standards
      
83.10.090   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
      
83.10.100   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
      
83.10.110   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
      
83.10.120   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
   
83.11.   Parking And Loading Standards
      
83.11.010   Purpose
      
83.11.020   Applicability
      
83.11.030   General Parking Provisions
      
83.11.040   Number of Parking Spaces Required
      
83.11.050   Adjustments to Parking Requirements
      
83.11.060   Disabled Parking Requirements
      
83.11.070   Development Standards
      
83.11.080   Landscape Requirements for Parking Areas
      
83.11.090   Parking and Loading Development Standards
      
83.11.100   Commercial Vehicle Parking in Residential Areas
   
83.12.   Road System Design Standards
      
83.12.010   Purpose
      
83.12.020   Applicability
      
83.12.030   Road System Design Standards
   
83.13.   Sign Regulations
      
83.13.010   Purpose
      
83.13.020   Applicability
      
83.13.030   Sign Permits and Exemptions
      
83.13.035   Comprehensive Sign Program for Crest Forest
      
83.13.040   Prohibited Signs
      
83.13.050   On-Site Signs
      
83.13.060   Off-Site Signs
      
83.13.070   Temporary Signs
      
83.13.080   Standards for All Types of Signs
      
83.13.090   Standards for Specific Types of Signs
      
83.13.100   Sign Standards for Specific Uses
      
83.13.110   Enforcement
      
83.13.120   Nonconforming Signs
      
83.13.130   Abandoned Signs
   
83.14.   Transportation Control Measures
      
83.14.010   Purpose
      
83.14.020   Applicability
      
83.14.030   Transportation Control Measures Development Standards
   
83.15.   Conditional Compliance for Water Quality Management Plans
      
83.15.010   Purpose
      
83.15.020   Applicability
      
83.15.030   Quality Control Engineer’s Role and Responsibilities
      
83.15.040   Developer’s Deposit
      
83.15.050   Land Development Engineering Authority
      
83.15.060   Authority to Contract
      
83.15.070   Expenditure of Funds
DIVISION 4: STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES AND ACTIVITIES
   
84.01.   Accessory Structures and Uses
      
84.01.010   Purpose and Severability.
      
84.01.020   General Development Standards
      
84.01.030   Agricultural Accessory Structures and Uses
      
84.01.040   Commercial and Industrial Accessory Structures and Uses
      
84.01.050   Residential Accessory Structures and Uses
      
84.01.060   Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.
   
84.02.   Adult Businesses
      
84.02.010   Purpose
      
84.02.020   Definitions
      
84.02.030   Location and Buffer Requirements
      
84.02.040   Establishment of an Adult Business
      
84.02.050   Operating Standards
   
84.03.   Agritourism Enterprises
      
84.03.010   Purpose
      
84.03.020   Applicability
      
84.03.030   Permit Requirements and Development Standards
   
84.04.   Animal Keeping
      
84.04.010   Purpose
      
84.04.020   Applicability
      
84.04.030   General Development Standards
      
84.04.040   Exotic Animals
      
84.04.050   Commercial Kennels and/or Catteries
      
84.04.060   Private Kennels and/or Catteries
      
84.04.070   Animal Keeping Allowed as Primary Use
      
84.04.080   Animal Keeping Allowed with Conditional Use Permit
      
84.04.090   Animal Keeping Allowed as Accessory Use
   
84.05.   Bed and Breakfast Uses
      
84.05.010   Purpose
      
84.05.020   Applicability
      
84.05.030   Types of Bed and Breakfast Uses
      
84.05.040   Permit and Tax Requirements
      
84.05.050   Development Standards
      
84.05.060   Additional Standards for Bed and Breakfast Inns/Lodges
   
84.06.   Cemeteries
      
84.06.010   Purpose
      
84.06.020   Applicability
      
84.06.030   Permit Requirements
      
84.06.040   Development Standards
   
84.07.   Commercial and Industrial Transitional Uses
      
84.07.010   Purpose
      
84.07.020   Applicability
      
84.07.030   Development Standards
   
84.08.   (Repealed by Ord. 4341, passed - -2018)
   
84.09.   Firewood Storage
      
84.09.010   Purpose
      
84.09.020   Applicability
      
84.09.030   Development Standards - Nonresidential Land Use Zoning Districts
      
84.09.040   Development Standards - Residential Land Use Zoning Districts
   
84.10.   Garage Sales
      
84.10.010   Purpose
      
84.10.020   Applicability
      
84.10.030   Standards
   
84.11.   Hazardous Waste Facilities
      
84.11.010   Purpose
      
84.11.020   Applicability
      
84.11.030   Permit Requirements
   
84.12.   Home Occupations
      
84.12.010   Purpose
      
84.12.020   Applicability
      
84.12.030   Classes of Home Occupations Described
      
84.12.040   Allowed Land Use Zoning Districts and Permit Requirements
      
84.12.050   Prohibited Home Occupations
      
84.12.060   Allowed Home Occupations in Desert Region
      
84.12.070   Development Standards Applicable to all Classes
      
84.12.080   Class I Home Occupation Standards
      
84.12.090   Class II Home Occupation Standards
      
84.12.100   Class III Home Occupation Standards
      
84.12.110   Other Restrictions on Home Occupations
      
84.12.120   Nonconforming Home Occupations
   
84.13.   Massage Services
      
84.13.010   Purpose
      
84.13.020   Applicability
      
84.13.030   Development Standards
   
84.14.   Mobile Home Parks
      
84.14.010   Purpose
      
84.14.020   Applicability
      
84.14.030   Enforcement Authority
      
84.14.040   Definitions
      
84.14.050   Development Standards
      
84.14.060   (Reserved)
      
84.14.070   Bonds to Guarantee Improvements
      
84.14.080   Mobile Home Park Subdivisions
   
84.15.   (Reserved)
   
84.16.   Multi-Family Residential Development Standards
      
84.16.010   Purpose
      
84.16.020   Applicability
      
84.16.030   Processing
      
84.16.040   Development Standards Applicable to All Multi-Family Projects
      
84.16.050   Development Standards for Multi-Family Projects - Up To 19 Units
      
84.16.060   Development Standards for Multi-Family Projects - 20 or More Units
      
84.16.070   Common Amenities and Facilities - Four or More Units
      
84.16.080   Design Guidelines for Multi-Family Projects - 20 or More Units
   
84.17.   Nonconforming Uses and Structures
      
84.17.010   Purpose
      
84.17.020   Applicability
      
84.17.030   Continuation of Nonconforming Uses and Structures
      
84.17.040   Termination of Nonconforming Use
      
84.17.050   Removal or Alterations of Nonconforming Uses
      
84.17.060   Nonconforming Commercial Chicken Ranch
      
84.17.070   Other Nonconforming Uses
      
84.17.080   Alteration of Nonconforming Uses
      
84.17.090   Conversion of Nonconforming Retail Land Use to Nonconforming
Restaurant Land Use in the Mountain Region Only.
   
84.18.   Planned Development Standards
      
84.18.010   Purpose
      
84.18.020   Applicability
      
84.18.030   Development Standards
      
84.18.040   Design Standards
   
84.19.   Recycling Facilities
      
84.19.010   Purpose
      
84.19.020   Applicability
      
84.19.030   Modification of Standards
      
84.19.040   Permit Requirements
      
84.19.050   Site Clean-Up Required
      
84.19.060   Standards for Small Collection Facilities
      
84.19.070   Standards for Large Collection Facilities
      
84.19.080   Light Processing Facilities
      
84.19.090   Heavy Processing Facilities
   
84.20.   Service Stations
      
84.20.010   Purpose
      
84.20.020   Applicability
      
84.20.030   Development Standards
   
84.21.   Single-Family Residential Dwellings
      
84.21.010   Purpose
      
84.21.020   Applicability
      
84.21.030   Minimum Residential Construction Standards
   
84.22.   Small Lot Residential Development
      
84.22.010   Purpose
      
84.22.020   Applicability
      
84.22.030   Development Requirements
   
84.23.   Licensed Residential Care Facilities
      
84.23.010   Purpose
      
84.23.020   Applicability
      
84.23.030   Development Standards
   
84.24.   Solid Waste/Recyclable Materials Storage
      
84.24.010   Purpose
      
84.24.020   Applicability
      
84.24.030   Storage Areas for Multi-Family Uses
      
84.24.040   Storage Areas for Nonresidential Uses
      
84.24.050   Location Standards
      
84.24.060   Design and Construction Standards
   
84.25.   Temporary Structures and Uses
      
84.25.010   Purpose
      
84.25.020   Applicability
      
84.25.030   Exempt Temporary Structures and Uses
      
84.25.040   Structures and Uses Allowed with Temporary Use Permit
      
84.25.050   Additional Development Standards
      
84.25.060   Interim Operation of Activities Requiring a Conditional Use Permit
      
84.25.070   Camping or Occupancy of Temporary Structure Prohibited.
   
84.26.   Wind Energy Systems H–Accessory
      
84.26.010   Purpose
      
84.26.020   Applicability
      
84.26.030   Development Standards
   
84.27.   Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
      
84.27.010   Purpose
      
84.27.020   Applicability
      
84.27.030   Structure Height
      
84.27.040   Separation from Residences
      
84.27.050   Minimizing Impacts
      
84.27.060   Review Procedures
      
84.27.070   Project Notices
      
84.27.080   Review Factors
      
84.27.090   Abandoned Sites
      
84.27.100   Elevation of Approvals
      
84.27.110   Interjurisdictional Review
   
84.28.   Short-Term Residential Rentals
      
84.28.010   Purpose
      
84.28.020   Applicability
      
84.28.030   Definitions
      
84.28.040   Permit Required
      
84.28.050   Application Process
      
84.28.060   Occupancy Standards
      
84.28.070   Conditions of Operation
      
84.28.080   Enforcement
      
84.28.090   Suspension of Permit
      
84.28.100   Revocation of Permit
      
84.28.110   Hosting Platform Requirements
   
84.29.   Renewable Energy Generation Facilities
      
84.29.010   Purpose
      
84.29.020   Applicability and Land Use Zoning Districts
      
84.29.030   Wind Energy Development Standards
      
84.29.035   Required Findings for Approval of a Commercial Solar Energy
Facility.
      
84.29.040   Solar Energy Development Standards
      
84.29.050   Special Fencing Standards
      
84.29.060   Additional Wind and Solar Energy Development Standards
      
84.29.070   Decommissioning Requirements
   
84.30.   Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Plan Implementation
      
84.30.010   Purpose
      
84.30.020   Applicability and Land Use Zoning Districts
      
84.30.030   GHG Performance Standards
   
84.31.   Reasonable Accommodation in Housing Development for Disabled
Individuals
      
84.31.010   Purpose
      
84.31.020   Notice to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process
      
84.31.030   Requesting Reasonable Accommodation
      
84.31.040   Decision on Application
      
84.31.050   Required Findings
      
84.31.060   Waiver of Time Periods
      
84.31.070   Notice of Decision
      
84.31.080   Amendments or Revisions
      
84.31.090   Expiration of Grants of Reasonable Accommodation
   
84.32.   Small Unlicensed Residential Care Facilities
      
84.32.010   Purpose.
      
84.32.020   Applicability.
      
84.32.030   Performance Standards for Unlicensed Residential Care Facilities.
      
84.32.040   Existing Nonconforming Unlicensed Residential Care Facilities.
   
84.33.   Emergency Shelters
      
84.33.010   Purpose.
      
84.33.020   Applicability.
      
84.33.030   Development Standards for Emergency Shelters.
   
84.34.   Commercial Cannabis Activity
      
84.34.010   Purpose.
      
84.34.020   Definitions.
      
84.34.030   Prohibition of Commercial Cannabis Activity.
      
84.34.040   Exemption for Cultivation by Specified Persons.
      
84.34.050   Exemption for Primary Caregiver Affiliated with Licensed Facility.
      
84.34.060   Landlords.
      
84.34.070   Application with other laws.
      
84.34.080   Items Used to Facilitate Unlawful Cannabis Cultivation
   
84.35.   Industrial Hemp
      
84.35.010   Purpose
      
84.35.020   Prohibited Activities
      
84.35.030   Applicability
      
84.35.040   Definitions
      
84.35.050   Permit Requirements
      
84.35.060   Approval Requirements for Industrial Hemp Activities
      
84.35.070   General Development Standards
      
84.35.080   Outdoor Industrial Hemp Operational Standards
      
84.35.090   Manufacturing Facilities Operational Standards
      
84.35.100   Administration and Enforcement
      
84.35.110   Registered Hemp Entity Responsible for Violations
      
84.35.120   Limitations on County Liability
 
DIVISION 5: PERMIT APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
   
85.01.   Permit Application Filing and Processing
      
85.01.010   Purpose of Division
      
85.01.020   Organization
      
85.01.030   Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions
   
85.02.   Basic Review Procedures
      
85.02.010   Purpose
      
85.02.020   Public Hearing
      
85.02.030   Staff Review with Notice
      
85.02.040   Staff Review without Notice
      
85.02.050   Alternate Review Procedures
   
85.03.   Application Procedures
      
85.03.010   Purpose
      
85.03.020   Applications for Land Use Decisions
      
85.03.030   Development Review Committee
      
85.03.040   Environmental Review
      
85.03.050   Concurrent Applications
      
85.03.060   Application Forms and Information Packets
      
85.03.070   Pre-application Review
      
85.03.080   Notice of Pending Land Use Decisions
      
85.03.090   Conditions of Approval
      
85.03.100   Automatic Conditions
      
85.03.110   Post Decision Notice
      
85.03.120   Expiration of Inactive Applications
   
85.04.   ABC Licensing
      
85.04.010   Purpose
      
85.04.020   ABC Licensing
      
85.04.030   Procedures
   
85.05.   Certificate of Land Use Compliance
      
85.05.010   Purpose
      
85.05.020   Procedures
   
85.06.   Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit
      
85.06.010   Purpose
      
85.06.020   Applicability
      
85.06.030   Procedures
      
85.06.040   Findings Required
      
85.06.050   Projects That Do Not Qualify for a Minor Use Permit
      
85.06.060   DRC Consideration
      
85.06.070   Agricultural Support Services
      
85.06.080   Alteration to Nonconforming Uses
      
85.06.090   Hazardous Waste Facilities
      
85.06.100   Surface Mining and Reclamation Plan Applications
      
85.06.110   Post Decision Procedures
   
85.07.   Flood Hazard Development Reviews
      
85.07.010   Purpose
      
85.07.020   (Reserved)
      
85.07.030   Floodplain Development Standards Review Procedures.
   
85.08.   Site Plan Permits
      
85.08.010   Purpose
      
85.08.020   Applicability
      
85.08.030   Procedures
   
85.09.   Tenant Review
      
85.09.010   Purpose
      
85.09.020   Applicability
      
85.09.030   Procedures
   
85.10.   Planned Development Permits
      
85.10.010   Purpose
      
85.10.020   Applicability
      
85.10.030   Procedures
      
85.10.040   Review Authority
      
85.10.050   Findings
      
85.10.060   Concurrent Subdivision Applications
      
85.10.070   Development Plans
      
85.10.080   Time Limits and Expiration
      
85.10.090   Planned Development Permit Amendments
      
85.10.100   Post Decision Procedures
   
85.11.   Pre-construction Flood Hazard Mitigation and Erosion Control
Inspection
      
85.11.010   Purpose
      
85.11.015   Scope
      
85.11.020   Flood Hazard Mitigation Required
      
85.11.030   Erosion Control Plan and Inspection Required
   
85.12.   Revisions to an Approved Action
      
85.12.010   Purpose
      
85.12.020   Procedures
      
85.12.030   Minor Revisions to an Approved Action
   
85.13.   Sign Location Plans
      
85.13.010   Purpose
      
85.13.020   Procedures
   
85.14.   Special Use Permits
      
85.14.010   Purpose
      
85.14.020   Types of Special Use Permits and Review Authorities
      
85.14.030   Procedures
      
85.14.040   General Provisions
      
85.14.050   Special Uses
      
85.14.060   Findings for Specific Special Uses
   
85.15.   Temporary Use Permits
      
85.15.010   Purpose
      
85.15.020   Types of Temporary Use Permits and Review Authorities
      
85.15.030   Minor Short-Term Activities
      
85.15.040   Temporary Use Permit Required
      
85.15.050   Procedures
      
85.15.060   Review Authority
      
85.15.070   Exempt Short-Term Activities
      
85.15.080   Allowed Short-Term Activities
      
85.15.090   Development Standards
      
85.15.100   Application Requirements
      
85.15.110   Findings and Decision
      
85.15.120   Post Decision Procedures
   
85.16.   Temporary Special Event Permits
      
85.16.010   Purpose
      
85.16.020   Review Authority and Procedure
      
85.16.030   Procedures
      
85.16.040   Post Decision Procedures
   
85.17.   Variances
      
85.17.010   Purpose
      
85.17.020   Applicability
      
85.17.030   Procedures
      
85.17.040   Minor Variances
      
85.17.050   Application Requirements
      
85.17.060   Findings and Decision
      
85.17.070   Conditions of Approval
      
85.17.080   Post Decision Procedures
   
85.18.   Accessory Wind Energy System Permit
      
85.18.010   Purpose
      
85.18.020   Applicability
      
85.18.030   Procedures
      
85.18.040   Abandonment
   
85.19.   Food Truck Event Permits
      
85.19.010   Purpose
      
85.19.020   Permit Required for Food Truck Events
   
85.20.   Unlicensed Residential Care Facilities Permit
      
85.20.010   Purpose
      
85.20.020   Applicability
      
85.20.030   Procedures
   
85.21   Adult Business Regulatory Permit
      
85.21.010   Purpose
      
85.21.020   Permit Required/Applicability
      
85.21.030   Issuance of Permit/Procedures
      
85.21.040   Inspection
      
85.21.050   Suspension or Revocation of an Adult Business Regulatory Permit
      
85.21.060   Appeal Procedures
      
85.21.070   Transfer of Adult Business Regulatory Permit
      
85.21.080   Violations
      
85.21.090   Applicability of Chapter to Existing Adult Businesses
      
85.21.100   Regulations Non-Exclusive
DIVISION 6: DEVELOPMENT CODE ADMINISTRATION
   
86.01.   Planning Agency
      
86.01.010   Establishment of Planning Agency
      
86.01.020   Functions of Planning Agency
      
86.01.030   Procedures
   
86.02.   Development Review Committee
      
86.02.010   Establishment
      
86.02.020   Membership
      
86.02.030   Duties of the DRC
      
86.02.040   Findings
      
86.02.050   Meeting Dates and Procedures
   
86.03.   Environmental Review Committee
      
86.03.010   Establishment
      
86.03.020   Membership
      
86.03.030   Stipend and Expenses
      
86.03.040   Duties of the ERC
      
86.03.050   Meeting Dates and Procedures
   
86.04.   Floodplain Administrator
      
86.04.010   Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator
   
86.05.   Decisions by the Review Authority
      
86.05.010   Referral to Next Succeeding Review Authority
   
86.06.   Time Limitations
      
86.06.010   Purpose
      
86.06.020   Effective Date of Permits
      
86.06.030   Applications Deemed Approved
      
86.06.040   Permits to Run with the Land
      
86.06.050   Performance Guarantees
      
86.06.060   Time Limits and Extensions
      
86.06.070   Changes to an Approved Project
      
86.06.080   Resubmittals
      
86.06.090   Covenants of Easements
   
86.07.   Public Hearings
      
86.07.010   Purpose
      
86.07.020   Notice of Hearing
      
86.07.030   Scheduling of Hearing
      
86.07.040   Hearing Procedure
      
86.07.050   Recommendation by Commission
      
86.07.060   Post-Decision Notice
      
86.07.070   Effective Date of Decision
   
86.08.   Appeals
      
86.08.010   Appeal of a Land Use Decision
      
86.08.020   Application for the Appeal of a Land Use Decision
      
86.08.030   Time for Filing an Appeal
      
86.08.040   Notice of Appeal
      
86.08.050   Authority of Appeal Body
      
86.08.060   Withdrawal of Appeal
      
86.08.070   Judicial Review
   
86.09.   Enforcement
      
86.09.010    Purpose
      
86.09.020    Permits and Licenses
      
86.09.030    Authority for Enforcement
      
86.09.040   Unlawful to Violate Development Code Provisions
      
86.09.050    Violations of the Development Code Declared Public Nuisance
      
86.09.060    Unlawful to Refuse or Fail to Comply with Conditions of Land Use
Approval
      
86.09.070   Property Not in Compliance with Conditions of Land Use Approval
Declared a Public Nuisance
      
86.09.080    Enforcement
      
86.09.090    Criminal Actions
      
86.09.100    Civil Actions
      
86.09.110    Administrative Citation Actions
      
86.09.120    Filing a Notice of Pendency
      
86.09.130    Filing a Notice of Action
      
86.09.140    Initial Investigation Procedures
      
86.09.150    Inspections
      
86.09.160    Stop Work Orders
      
86.09.170    Revocation or Modification of Permits or Approvals
      
86.09.180    Recovery of Costs
      
86.09.190    Additional Permit Processing Fees
      
86.09.200    Reinspection Fees
      
86.09.210    Documentation
   
86.10.   Agricultural Preserves/Land Conservation Contract Actions
      
86.10.010   Purpose
      
86.10.020   Procedures
   
86.11.   Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plans
      
86.11.010   Purpose
      
86.11.020   Procedures
      
86.11.030   Findings
      
86.11.040   Consistency with the Plan
   
86.12.   Amendments
      
86.12.010   Purpose
      
86.12.020   Initiation of Amendment
      
86.12.030   Processing, Notice, and Hearings
      
86.12.040   Commission Action on Amendment
      
86.12.050   Board Action on Amendment
      
86.12.060   Findings and Decision
      
86.12.070   Effective Dates
   
86.13.   Development Agreement Adoption and Amendment
      
86.13.010   Purpose
      
86.13.020   Applications
      
86.13.030   Procedures
      
86.13.040   Action by the Commission and Board
      
86.13.050   Amendment or Cancellation
      
86.13.060   Recordation
      
86.13.070   Agreement Review
      
86.13.080   Modification or Termination
   
86.14.   Specific Plan Adoption and Amendment
      
86.14.010   Purpose
      
86.14.020   Intent
      
86.14.030   Applicability
      
86.14.040   Initiation and Presubmittal Requirements
      
86.14.050   Preparation and Content
      
86.14.060   Application Filing, Processing, and Review
      
86.14.070   Adoption of Specific Plan
      
86.14.080   Implementation and Amendments
      
86.14.090   Adopted Specific Plans
   
86.15.   Post-Disaster Rebuilding
      
86.15.010   Purpose
      
86.15.020   Applicability of Provisions
      
86.15.030   Definitions
      
86.15.040   General Provisions
      
86.15.050   Modifications of the Provisions of this Development Code
      
86.15.060   Permits and Procedures
      
86.15.070   CEQA Exemption
      
86.15.080   Appeals
DIVISION 7: SUBDIVISIONS
   
87.01.   Subdivision Ordinance Applicability and Administration
      
87.01.010   Purpose
      
87.01.020   Authority
      
87.01.030   Applicability
      
87.01.040   Definitions
      
87.01.050   Responsibility for Administration
      
87.01.060   Advisory Agency
      
87.01.070   Authority for Subdivision Decisions
      
87.01.080   Type of Subdivision Approval Required
      
87.01.090   Applications Deemed Approved
      
87.01.100   Exceptions to Subdivision Standards
      
87.01.110   Appeals
      
87.01.120   Enforcement of Subdivision Regulations
   
87.02.   Tentative Map Filing and Processing
      
87.02.010   Purpose
      
87.02.020   Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents
      
87.02.030   Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing
      
87.02.040   Evaluation of Application
      
87.02.050   Review and Decision
      
87.02.060   Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval
      
87.02.070   Conditions of Approval
      
87.02.080   Effective Date of Tentative Map Approval
      
87.02.090   Changes to Approved Tentative Map or Conditions
      
87.02.100   Effect of Tentative Map Approval, Completion of Subdivision Process
      
87.02.110   Vesting Tentative Maps
      
87.02.120   Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration
      
87.02.130   Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps
   
87.03.   Parcel Maps and Final Maps
      
87.03.010   Purpose
      
87.03.020   Parcel Maps
      
87.03.030   Waiver of Parcel Map
      
87.03.040   Parcel Map Form and Content
      
87.03.050   Filing and Processing of Parcel Maps
      
87.03.060   Parcel Map Approval
      
87.03.070   Final Maps
      
87.03.080   Final Map Form and Content
      
87.03.090   Filing and Processing of Final Maps
      
87.03.100   Final Map Approval
      
87.03.110   Composite Development Plans
      
87.03.120   Amendments to Recorded Parcel or Final Maps
   
87.04.   Additional Subdivision Procedures
      
87.04.010   Purpose
      
87.04.020   Certificates of Compliance
      
87.04.030   Condominiums and Condominium Conversions
      
87.04.040   Lot Line Adjustment
      
87.04.050   Official Maps
      
87.04.060   Parcel Merger
      
87.04.070   Reversion to Acreage
      
87.04.080   Resident Initiated Mobile Home Park Conversion
   
87.05.   Dedications and Exactions
      
87.05.010   Purpose
      
87.05.020   Applicability
      
87.05.030   Dedications
      
87.05.040   Acceptance of Dedications
   
87.06.   Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements
      
87.06.010   Purpose
      
87.06.020   Applicability of Design and Improvement Standards
      
87.06.030   Subdivision Design Standards
      
87.06.040   Site Preparation and Grading for Subdivision Construction
      
87.06.050   Subdivision Improvement Requirements
   
87.07.   Improvement Plans, Installation, and Security
      
87.07.010   Purpose
      
87.07.020   Improvement Plans
      
87.07.030   Installation of Improvements
      
87.07.040   Improvement Agreements, Lien Agreements and Securities
   
87.08.   Soils Reports
      
87.08.010   Purpose
      
87.08.020   Preliminary Soils Report
      
87.08.030   Final Soils Report
      
87.08.040   Geologic Investigation and Report
DIVISION 8: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND CONSERVATION
   
88.01.   Plant Protection and Management
      
88.01.010   Purpose
      
88.01.020   Applicability
      
88.01.030   Exempt Activities
      
88.01.040   Regulated Trees and Plants and General Permit
      
88.01.050   Native Tree or Plant Removal Permits
      
88.01.060   Desert Native Plant Protection
      
88.01.070   Mountain Forest and Valley Tree Conservation
      
88.01.080   Riparian Plant Conservation
      
88.01.090   Tree Protection from Insects and Disease
   
88.02.   Soil and Water Conservation
      
88.02.010   Purpose
      
88.02.020   Applicability
      
88.02.030   Exempt Activities
      
88.02.040   Dust Control - Desert Region
      
88.02.050   Wind-Borne Soil Erosion
   
88.03.   Surface Mining and Land Reclamation
      
88.03.010   Purpose
      
88.03.020   Incorporation of SMARA and State Regulations
      
88.03.030   Applicability
      
88.03.040   Permit, Plan, And Financial Assurance Requirements
      
88.03.050   Vested Rights
      
88.03.060   Application Filing, Processing, and Review
      
88.03.070   Additional Conditions of Approval
      
88.03.080   Financial Assurances
      
88.03.090   Reclamation Standards
      
88.03.100   Interim Management Plans
      
88.03.110   Annual Report
      
88.03.120   Inspections
      
88.03.130   Violations and Penalties
      
88.03.140   Post-Approval Procedures
DIVISION 9: PUBLIC FACILITIES FINANCING
   
89.01.   Drainage Facilities Financing
      
89.01.010   Purpose
      
89.01.020   Establishment of Area Drainage Plans
      
89.01.030   Fee Collection and Accounting
      
89.01.040   Drainage Fee Calculation
      
89.01.050   Credit and Exceptions
      
89.01.060   Surplus and Refunds
      
89.01.070   Subject Areas
   
89.02.   Recreational Facilities Financing
      
89.02.010   Purpose and General Provisions
      
89.02.020   Jurisdiction Limitations
      
89.02.030   Requirements
      
89.02.040   Procedure
      
89.02.050   Exemptions
   
89.03.   Transportation Facilities Financing
      
89.03.010   Purpose
      
89.03.020   Establishment of Local Area Transportation Facilities Plans
      
89.03.030   Fee Payment
      
89.03.040   Local Transportation Facilities
      
89.03.050   Fee Calculation
      
89.03.060   Agreements between the County and a Developer
      
89.03.070   Exclusions
      
89.03.080   Refunds
      
89.03.090   Subject Areas
DIVISION 10: DEFINITIONS
   
810.01.   Definitions
      
810.01.010   Purpose
      
810.01.020   Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases
      
810.01.030   Definitions, A.
      
810.01.040   Definitions, B.
      
810.01.050   Definitions, C.
      
810.01.060   Definitions, D.
      
810.01.070   Definitions, E.
      
810.01.080   Definitions, F.
      
810.01.090   Definitions, G.
      
810.01.100   Definitions, H.
      
810.01.110   Definitions, I.
      
810.01.120   Definitions, J.
      
810.01.130   Definitions, K.
      
810.01.140   Definitions, L.
      
810.01.150   Definitions, M.
      
810.01.160   Definitions, N.
      
810.01.170   Definitions, O.
      
810.01.180   Definitions, P.
      
810.01.190   Definitions, Q.
      
810.01.200   Definitions, R.
      
810.01.210   Definitions, S.
      
810.01.220   Definitions, T.
      
810.01.230   Definitions, U.
      
810.01.240   Definitions, V.
      
810.01.250   Definitions, W.
      
810.01.260   Definitions, X.
      
810.01.270   Definitions, Y.
      
810.01.280   Definitions, Z.
FIGURES
   
Figure 82-1   Trails - Low Use and Natural Areas/Urban #1
   
Figure 82-2   Trails - Low Use and Natural Areas
   
Figure 82-3   Trails - Urban
   
Figure 82-4   Trails - Low Use and Natural Areas/Urban #2
   
Figure 83-1   Clear Sight Triangles
   
Figure 83-2   Screening and Buffering
   
Figure 83-3   Location and Measurement of Setbacks
   
Figure 83-4   Rear Setbacks on Irregularly Shaped Parcels
   
Figure 83-5   Allowed Fence Height in Residential Land Use Zoning Districts
   
Figure 83-6   Development Follows Natural Topography
   
Figure 83-7   Characteristics of Manufactured Slopes
   
Figure 83-8   Patterns of Landscaping
   
Figure 83-9   Variations in Cut and/or Fill Slopes
   
Figure 83-10   Manufactured Slopes Located at Rear of Lot
   
Figure 83-11   Retaining Walls for Side Setbacks
   
Figure 83-12   Drains Follow Topography
   
Figure 83-13   Retaining Walls Along Streets and in Setbacks
   
Figure 83-14   Streets and Lots Follow Contours
   
Figure 83-15   Preserve Natural Features
   
Figure 83-16   Off-Street Parking Dimensions
   
Figure 84-1   Siting of Multi-Family Structure(s) Parallel to Public Rights-of-
Way
   
Figure 84-2   Minimum Separation Between Multi-Family Structures
   
Figure 84-3   Design Elements Establish Hierarchy of Space
   
Figure 84-4   Laundry Room Location and Features
   
Figure 84-5   Management Office in Central Location
   
Figure 84-6   Dwelling Unit Oriented to Street
   
Figure 84-7   Clustering of Multi-Family Dwelling Units
   
Figure 84-8   “Eyes of the Street”
   
Figure 84-9   Access to Open Space
   
Figure 84-10   Connected Open Spaces
   
Figure 84-11   Play Areas for Different Ages
   
Figure 84-12   Height Transition
   
Figure 84-13   Examples of Window Styles
   
Figure 84-14   Typical Roof Types
   
Figure 84-15   Mailboxes
   
Figure 810-1   Lot Types
   
Figure 810-2   Setbacks
TABLES
   
Table 82-1   Land Use Zoning Districts
   
Table 82-2   Overlays
   
Table 82-3   Minimum Area For Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use
Zoning District Designation
   
Table 82-4   Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Agricultural and
Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts
   
Table 82-4A   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Minimum Lot Size Valley Region
   
Table 82-4B   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Minimum Lot Size Mountain Region
   
Table 82-4C   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Minimum Lot Size Desert Region
   
Table 82-5A   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Development Standards Valley Region
   
Table 82-5B    Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Development Standards Mountain Region
   
Table 82-5C    Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Development Standards Desert Region
   
Table 82-6    Minimum Area For Residential Land Use Zoning District Designation
   
Table 82-7    Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Land
Use Zoning Districts
   
Table 82-8A   Residential Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size Valley
Region
   
Table 82-8B   Residential Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size Mountain
Region
   
Table 82-8C   Residential Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size Desert
Region
   
Table 82-9A   Residential Land Use Zoning District Development Standards Valley
Region
   
Table 82-9B   Residential Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
   
Table 82-9C   Residential Land Use Zoning District Development Standards Desert
Region
   
Table 82-10   Minimum Area for Commercial Land Use Zoning District Designation
   
Table 82-11   Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial Land Use
Zoning Districts
   
Table 82-12A   Commercial Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size Valley
Region
   
Table 82-12B   Commercial Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size Mountain
Region
   
Table 82-12C   Commercial Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size Desert
Region
   
Table 82-13A   CR, CN, and CO Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
   
Table 82-13B   CG, CS, AND CH Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
   
Table 82-14A   CR, CN, AND CO Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
   
Table 82-14B   CG, CS, AND CH Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
   
Table 82-15A   CR, CN, AND CO Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
   
Table 82-15B   CG, CS, AND CH Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
   
Table 82-16   Minimum Area For Industrial and Special Use Land Use Zoning
District Designation
   
Table 82-17   Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Industrial and
Special Purpose Land Use Zoning Districts
   
Table 82-18A   Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Minimum
Lot Size Valley Region
   
Table 82-18B   Industrial and Special Purpose District Minimum Lot Size
Mountain Region
   
Table 82-18C   Industrial and Special Purpose District Minimum Lot Size Desert
Region
   
Table 82-19A   IC and IR Land Use Zoning District Development Standards Valley
Region
   
Table 82-19B   IN and SD Land Use Zoning District Development Standards Valley
Region
   
Table 82-20A   IC and IR Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
   
Table 82-20B   IN and SD Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
   
Table 82-21A   IC and IR Land Use Zoning District Development Standards Desert
Region
   
Table 82-21B   IN and SD Land Use Zoning District Development Standards Desert
Region
   
Table 82-22   Animals Allowed in AA (Additional Agricultural) Overlay
   
Table 82-23   Urban Standards (Maximum Accessibility)
   
Table 82-24   Low Use and Natural Area Standards
   
Table 82-25   Sphere Standards Overlays
   
Table 83-1   Storage Standards for Flammable Liquids and Gases
   
Table 83-2   Noise Standards for Stationary Noise Sources
   
Table 83-3   Noise Standards for Adjacent Mobile Noise Sources
   
Table 83-4   Noise Standards for Other Structures
   
Table 83-5   Allowed Projections into Setbacks
   
Table 83-6   Maximum Height of Fences, Hedges, and Walls Within Setbacks
   
Table 83-7   Shielding Requirements For Outdoor Lighting In the Mountain Region
and Desert Region
   
Table 83-8   Slope Categories
   
Table 83-9   Infrastructure Improvement Standards Valley Region
   
Table 83-10   Infrastructure Improvement Standards Mountain Region
   
Table 83-11   Infrastructure Improvement Standards Desert Region
   
Table 83-12   Minimum Landscaped Area
   
Table 83-13   Minimum Quantities of Plant Materials
   
Table 83-14   Minimum Plant Sizes
   
Table 83-15   Parking Requirements by Land Use
   
Table 83-16   Transportation Control Measures
   
Table 83-17   Required Number of Parking Spaces for Disabled
   
Table 83-18   Minimum Off-Street Parking Dimensions
   
Table 83-19   Minimum Aisles
   
Table 83-20   Road System Design Standards
   
Table 83-21   On-Site Signs in Office Commercial (CO) Land Use Zoning District
   
Table 83-22   On-Site Signs in Neighborhood Commercial (CN) Land Use Zoning
District
   
Table 83-23   On-Site Signs in Rural Commercial (CR) Land Use Zoning District
   
Table 83-24   On-Site Signs in Highway Commercial (CH) Land Use Zoning District
   
Table 83-25   On-Site Signs in General Commercial (CG) Land Use Zoning District
   
Table 83-26   On-Site Signs in Service Commercial (CS) Land Use Zoning District
   
Table 83-27   On-Site Signs in Community Industrial (IC) Land Use Zoning
District
   
Table 83-28   On-Site Signs in Regional Industrial (IR) Land Use Zoning
District
   
Table 83-29   On-Site Signs in Institutional (IN) Land Use Zoning District
   
Table 83-30   On-Site Signs in Special Development (SD) Land Use Zoning
District
   
Table 84-1   Permit Requirements and Development Standards for Agritourism
Enterprises
   
Table 84-2   Minimum Parcel Sizes for Commercial Kennels and/or Catteries
   
Table 84-3   Animal Keeping Allowed as Primary Use
   
Table 84-4   Animal Keeping Allowed with Conditional Use Permit
   
Table 84-5   Animal Keeping Allowed as Accessory Use
   
Table 84-6   Standards for Bed and Breakfast Uses
   
Table 84-7   Allowed Land use zoning districts and Permit Requirements for Home
Occupations
   
Table 84-8   Parcel Size and Density Standards for Mobile Home Parks
   
Table 84-9   Minimum Separation Between Multi-Family Structures
   
Table 84-10   Minimum Setbacks for Multi-Family Structures
   
Table 84-11   Minimum Dwelling Unit Sizes in Multi-Family Development
   
Table 84-12   Minimum On-Site Recreation Amenities for Multi-Family Projects
   
Table 84-13   On-Site Recreational Amenities - Thresholds for Allowable
Densities
   
Table 84-14   Minimum Size of Community Room or Structure
   
Table 84-15   Multi-Family Development Minimum Common Storage Areas Required
   
Table 84-16   Nonresidential Structures Minimum Storage Areas Required (Sq.
Ft.)
   
Table 84-17   Maximum Tower Heights for Accessory Wind Energy Systems
   
Table 84-18   Maximum Heights of Wireless Telecommunications Towers
   
Table 84-19   Permit Requirements for Industrial Hemp
   
Table 85-1   Review Authority
   
Table 85-2   Distance Requirements for Noticing Purposes
   
Table 85-3   Special Use Permits
   
Table 85-4   Temporary Use Permits
   
Table 85-5   Types of Minor Variances Allowed
   
Table 87-1   Subdivision Review Authority
 
Editor's Note:
   Ordinance 4046, passed April 8, 2008, repealed and reenacted Title 8.
DIVISION 1: DEVELOPMENT CODE AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY
CHAPTER 81.01: PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT CODE
Section
   
81.01.010   Title.
   
81.01.020   Purpose and Intent of Development Code.
   
81.01.030   Authority for Regulating Land Uses.
   
81.01.040   Responsibility for Administration.
   
81.01.050   Applicability of Development Code.
   
81.01.060   Partial Invalidation of Development Code.
   
81.01.070   Legal Defense Fee Responsibility.
   
81.01.080   Use of Headings.
   
81.01.090   Effect of General Plan Adoption or Development Code Changes on
Projects in Progress.
§ 81.01.010 Title.
   Title 8 of the San Bernardino County Code shall be known as the San
Bernardino Development Code, hereafter referred to as “this Development Code.”
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 81.01.020 Purpose and Intent of Development Code.
   The purpose of this Development Code is to implement the San Bernardino
General Plan by classifying and regulating the uses of land and structures
within unincorporated San Bernardino County; by preserving and protecting the
County’s important agricultural, cultural, natural, open space and scenic
resources; and by protecting and promoting the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare of residents and businesses in the
County. More specifically, the purposes of this Development Code are to:
   (a)   Provide standards and guidelines for the continuing orderly growth and
development of the County that will assist in protecting the character and
identity of San Bernardino County and its distinct communities;
   (b)   Conserve and protect the County’s important agriculture, cultural,
natural, open space and scenic resources;
   (c)   Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to
plan transportation, water supply, sewerage, energy, drainage/flood control and
other public facilities and utilities;
   (d)   Encourage the most appropriate uses of land in order to prevent
overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population, and maintain
and protect the value of property; and
   (e)   Ensure compatibility between different types of development and land
use.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 81.01.030 Authority for Regulating Land Uses.
   The Development Code is enacted based on the authority vested in the County
of San Bernardino by the State of California, including but not limited to:
   (a)   Local Ordinances and Regulations (California Constitution, Article XI,
§ 7)
   (b)   Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code §§ 65000 et seq.)
   (c)   Airport Approaches Zoning Law (Government Code §§ 50485 et seq.)
   (d)   Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act (Public Resources Code §§
2621 et seq.)
   (e)   California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code §§ 21000
et seq.)
   (f)   Desert Native Plants Act (Food and Agricultural Code §§ 80001 et seq.)
   (g)   Land Conservation Act of 1965 (Williamson Act) (Government Code §§
51200 et seq.)
   (h)   Mobilehome Parks Act (Health and Safety Code §§ 18200 et seq.)
   (i)   Subdivision Map Act (Government Code §§ 66410 et seq.)
   (j)   Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Public Resources Code §§
2710 et seq.)
   (k)   Z’berg-Nejedly Forest Practice Act of 1973 (Public Resources Code §§
4526 et seq.)
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 81.01.040 Responsibility for Administration.
   This Development Code shall be administered by the County Board of
Supervisors, the Planning Commission, the Director of Land Use Services, the
Land Use Services Department, and any other departments, groups, or individuals
identified in this Development Code in compliance with Title 1 (Government and
Administration) of the County Code and in this Development Code, particularly
Division 6 (Development Code Administration).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 81.01.050 Applicability of Development Code.
   This Development Code applies to all land, land uses, activities,
structures, subdivisions, and development within the unincorporated areas of
the County of San Bernardino, as provided by this Section.
   (a)   New Land Uses or Structures, Changes to Land Uses or Structures.
Compliance with the requirements of this Development Code is necessary in order
for a person to lawfully establish, occupy, maintain, construct, reconstruct,
alter, expand or replace any pertinent use of land or structure.
   (b)   Issuance of Building or Grading Permits. The Building Official may
only issue building, grading, or other construction permits after all
applicable requirements of this Development Code, and all other applicable
statutes, ordinances and regulations have been met.
   (c)   Subdivision of Land. Any subdivision of land proposed within the
County shall be consistent with:
      (1)   The minimum lot size requirements of Tables
82-4A,
B, and
C (Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot
Size), Tables
82-8A,
B, and
C (Residential Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size), Tables
82-12A,
B, and
C (Commercial Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size), and Tables
82-18A,
B, and
C (Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size);
      (2)   
Division 9 (Subdivisions); and
      (3)   All other applicable requirements of this Development Code.
   (d)   California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). All development projects
subject to discretionary review shall also be subject to environmental review
in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
   (e)   Effect of Development Code. An existing land use is lawful only when
it was legally established in compliance with all regulations applicable at the
time the use was established and when it is operated and maintained in
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Development Code, including
Chapter 84.17 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures).
   (f)   Relationship to General Plan. All of the provisions of this
Development Code, as well as any land use authorized by this Development Code,
shall be consistent with the San Bernardino County General Plan, which is the
overall policy document of the County, hereafter referred to as the “General
Plan.” This Development Code and the Land Use Map portion of the General Plan
are the primary tools used by the County to implement the goals, objectives,
policies, and strategies established in the General Plan.
   (g)   Relationship to Other Regulations, Easements, Etc. Where this
Development Code imposes a greater restriction upon the uses or design of
structures or land, or upon the height of structures, or requires larger open
spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or
by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Development Code
shall control.
   (h)   Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this Development Code
constitute minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, and
welfare, unless stated otherwise (for example, height limits and parcel
coverage requirements for structures, and the numbers and sizes of signs
allowed are maximums, not minimums). When this Development Code provides for
discretion on the part of a County official or body, that discretion may be
exercised to impose more stringent requirements where they are deemed necessary
to promote public health and safety, orderly land development and all other
purposes of this Development Code.
   (i)   Conflicts with Development Code or General Plan. County-issued
licenses or permits for uses or structures that conflict with the provisions of
this Development Code or the General Plan shall be null and void and shall not
support any claim to a vested right to develop. See also §
81.02.020 (Rules of Interpretation).
   (j)   Uses or Activities Exempt under State or Federal Law. The provisions
of this Development Code shall not apply to any uses or activities that are
exempt from local regulation under or preempted by State or Federal law.
   (k)   Other Requirements May Apply. Nothing in this Development Code
eliminates the need for obtaining any permit, approval, or entitlement required
by other provisions of the County Code or complying with the regulations of any
County department, or any regional, Special Districts, State, or Federal
agency.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 81.01.060 Partial Invalidation of Development Code.
   If any division, chapter, section, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this Development Code is for any reason held to be invalid,
unconstitutional, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
Development Code. The Board of Supervisors hereby declares that it would have
adopted this Development Code and each division, chapter, section, subdivision,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any
one or more portions of this Development Code may be declared invalid,
unconstitutional, or unenforceable.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 81.01.070 Legal Defense Fee Responsibility.
   (a)   Applicant’s Agreement to Indemnify and Hold Harmless. As a condition
of approval of a land use application, the applicant shall agree to defend,
indemnify, and hold harmless the County or its agents, officers, and employees
from any claim, action, or proceeding against the County or its agents,
officers, or employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul an approval of the
County, an advisory agency, appeal board or legislative body concerning the map
or permit or any other action relating to or arising out of County approval.
   (b)   County’s Duty to Notify Applicant and Cooperate in Defense. Any
condition of approval imposed in compliance with this Development Code shall
include a requirement that the County act reasonably to promptly notify the
applicant of any claim, action, or proceeding and that the County cooperate
fully in the defense.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 81.01.080 Use of Headings.
   The headings of the divisions, chapters, sections, subdivisions, and clauses
of this Development Code, together with the accompanying illustrations,
examples, and explanatory notes, are inserted as a matter of convenience and in
no way define, limit, or enlarge the scope or meaning of this Development Code
or any of its provisions.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 81.01.090 Effect of General Plan Adoption or Development Code Changes on
Projects in Progress.
   The adoption of a General Plan or the enactment of this Development Code, or
any amendment to either, may have the effect of imposing different standards on
a new land use than those that applied to existing development. (For example,
this Development Code or a future amendment could require more off-street
parking spaces for a particular land use than former regulations.) The
following provisions determine how the General Plan with an effective date of
April 12, 2007, and the requirements of this Development Code will apply to a
development project that is in progress at the time the General Plan or the
Development Code goes into effect.
   (a)   Projects with Pending Applications. Applications that have been
accepted as complete, in compliance with State law (Government Code § 65943),
by the Department before April 12, 2007, shall be processed in compliance with
the regulations and requirements in effect at the time the application was
accepted as complete. Also, applications that have been submitted to the Land
Use Services Department that could be accepted as compete but for additional
reports required to make an environmental determination for the project, shall
be processed in compliance with the regulations and requirements in effect at
the time the application was filed if all required reports are submitted by
July 11, 2007. However, applications for extensions of time shall be governed
by this Development Code.
   (b)   Land Use Permits Approved on or Before April 12, 2007. If a land use
permit, not including a land use zoning district change or General Plan
amendment, is approved on or before April 12, 2007, in the case of the General
Plan or on or before April 12, 2007, in the case of this Development Code, the
following shall apply:
      (1)   The establishment of structures and land uses shall be allowed in
compliance with the requirements of the land use permit provided that:
         (A)   The structures and uses are consistent with the General Plan and
Development Code in existence at the time of the land use permit approval; and
         (B)   The land use permit has not expired.
      (2)   A Building Permit, Grading Permit, or other development permit may
be granted, provided that:
         (A)   The structures and uses are consistent with the General Plan and
Development Code in existence at the time of the land use permit approval; and
         (B)   The land use permit has not expired.
      (3)   The establishment of structures and land uses shall be exempt from
the two following requirements, provided that the structures and land uses
comply with the provisions of the approved land use permit:
         (A)   The structures or land uses must be allowed in the currently
applicable land use zoning district; and
         (B)   The structures or land uses must meet the currently applicable
development standards contained in this Development Code;
   (c)   Building Permits Approved on or Before April 12, 2007.
      (1)   Building permits for structures or land uses (other than single-
family residential uses), for which land construction plans have been submitted
and fees paid on or before April 12, 2007, shall be exempt from the two
following requirements; provided, however, that the proposed land use must be
of the same fundamental land use category (i.e., multi-family residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural) as that designated in the General Plan:
         (A)   The structures or land uses must be allowed in the currently
applicable land use zoning district; and
         (B)   The structures or land uses must meet the currently applicable
development standards contained in this Development Code.
      (2)   Building permits issued under this Subdivision (b) shall be issued
on or before April 12, 2007.
   (d)   Modifications. Significant modifications to the land uses and
structures permitted in compliance with Subdivisions (a) and (b), above, shall
not be permitted without full compliance with the currently applicable General
Plan and this Development Code:
   (e)   Extension of Permit Expiration Dates. The expiration date of land use
permits, other than land use zoning district changes or General Plan
amendments, which were approved on or before April 12, 2007, may be extended
under §
86.06.060 (Time Limits and Extensions) for the period which would otherwise be
allowed under that Section, but in no event beyond April 12, 2007, without
satisfying the requirement that extensions be found consistent with the General
Plan as is required under §
86.06.060 (Time Limits and Extensions). This Subdivision shall apply only to
those approvals that expire between March 13, 2007 and April 12, 2007.
Applications that are found to be consistent with the then applicable General
Plan may be granted the maximum extension allowed under this Development Code
without regard to the above limitations.
   (f)   Subdivision Maps. Subdivision maps shall be processed in compliance
with the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 81.02: INTERPRETATION OF REGULATIONS
Section
   
81.02.010   Purpose of Chapter.
   
81.02.020   Rules of Interpretation.
§ 81.02.010 Purpose of Chapter.
   This Chapter provides rules for resolving questions about the meaning or
applicability of any part of this Development Code. The provisions of this
Chapter are intended to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of
the provisions of this Development Code and the General Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 81.02.020 Rules of Interpretation.
   (a)   Authority. The Director shall have the responsibility and authority to
interpret the meaning and applicability of all provisions and requirements of
this Development Code, subject to appeal to the Commission in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
   (b)   Permissive Code. In the interpretation and application of the
provisions of this Development Code, it shall be declared to be a permissive
code. Any use not specifically allowed shall be prohibited, except as otherwise
provided in §
82.02.030 (Allowed Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements) or in §
82.02.040 (Exemptions from Planning Permit Requirements).
   (c)   Language.
      (1)   Abbreviated Titles and Phrases. For the purpose of brevity, and
unless otherwise indicated, the following phrases, names of personnel and
decision-making bodies are shortened in this Development Code. The County of
San Bernardino is referred to hereafter as the “County.” The Land Use Services
Department is referred to as the “Department.” The County Director of Land Use
Services is referred to as the “Director.” The Board of Supervisors is referred
to as the “Board.” The Planning Commission is referred to as the “Commission.”
The State of California is referred to as the “State.” The County of San
Bernardino Code is referred to as “the County Code.” The California Subdivision
Map Act is referred to as the “Map Act.”
      (2)   Terminology. When used in this Development Code, the words “shall,”
“will,” “is to,” and “are to” are always mandatory. “Should” and “encourage”
are not mandatory but are strongly recommended; “may” is permissive. The
present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense
includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the
plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates
otherwise. The words “include,” “includes,” and “including” mean “including but
not limited to . . ..” The terms “amend,” “modify,” and “revise,” all mean “to
change.” The term “waive” means “to eliminate a requirement.” The use of the
word “approval” includes approval with conditions. The use of the words
“appropriate” or “applicable” means “as determined by the applicable Review
Authority, or if not identified, by the Director.” The word “structure”
includes “buildings and/or structures.”
      (3)   Number of Days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this
Development Code, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or
given as provided in this Development Code, the number of days shall be
calendar days, unless business days are specified. Time limits will extend to
the following business day where the last of the specified number of days falls
on a day that the County is not open for business, except as otherwise provided
for by the Map Act.
      (4)   State Law Requirements. Where this Development Code references
applicable provisions of State law (for example, the California Government
Code, Map Act, Public Resources Code, etc.), the reference shall be interpreted
to be the applicable State law provisions as they may be amended from time to
time.
   (d)   Calculations - Rounding. Where provisions of this Development Code
require calculations to determine applicable requirements, any fractional/
decimal results of the calculations shall be rounded as provided by this
Subdivision.
      (1)   Number of Lots. The fractional/decimal results of calculations of
the number of parcels allowed through subdivision based on a minimum lot area
requirement shall be rounded down to the next lowest whole number.
      (2)   Residential Density. The fractional/decimal results of calculations
of the number of housing units allowed within a land use zoning district shall
be rounded down to the next lowest whole number.
      (3)   All Other Calculations. Unless otherwise specifically addressed in
this Development Code, for all calculations required by this Development Code
other than those described in Subdivisions (1) and (2), the fractional/decimal
results of calculations shall be rounded to the next highest whole number when
the fraction/decimal is 0.5 or more, and to the next lowest whole number when
the fraction is less than 0.5.
   (e)   Conflicting Requirements. Any conflicts between different requirements
of this Development Code, or between this Development Code and other
regulations, shall be resolved as follows.
      (1)   Development Code Provisions. In the event of any conflict between
the provisions of this Development Code, the most restrictive requirement shall
control, except in case of any conflict between the land use zoning district
regulations of
Division 2 (Land Use Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and the provisions of
Division 3 (Countywide Development Standards), the provisions of
Division 3 shall control.
      (2)   Development Agreements or Specific Plans. In the event of any
conflict between the requirements of this Development Code and standards
adopted as part of any Development Agreement or Specific Plan, the requirements
of the Development Agreement or Specific Plan shall control.
      (3)   County Code Provisions. In the event of any conflict between
requirements of this Development Code and other regulations of the County, the
most restrictive requirement shall control.
      (4)   Mitigation Measures. In the event of any conflict between the
requirements of this Development Code and mitigation measures adopted as part
of a certified environmental impact report or approved negative declaration,
the most restrictive shall control.
   (f)   Interpretation of Land Use District Boundaries.
      (1)   If there is uncertainty about the location of any primary or
overlay land use district boundary shown on the Land Use Plan or sectional Land
Use District Maps, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the
Director as follows:
         (A)   Where a district boundary approximately follows a lot, alley, or
street line, the lot line and street and alley centerlines shall be construed
as the district boundary.
         (B)   In unsubdivided property, and where a district boundary divides
a parcel and the boundary line location is not specified by dimensions printed
on the land use district map, the location of the boundary will be determined
by using the scale appearing on the map.
         (C)   Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or
abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverts shall
apply to the vacated or abandoned street or alley.
      (2)   If the Director determines that the above rules do not resolve
uncertainty about a boundary location, the Commission shall determine the
location of the boundary.
   (g)   Illustrations. The figures, diagrams and other graphics used
throughout this Development Code are for illustration purposes only and to the
extent any are in conflict with the written provisions, the written provisions
shall govern.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
DIVISION 2: LAND USE ZONING DISTRICTS AND ALLOWED LAND USES
CHAPTER 82.01: LAND USE PLAN, LAND USE ZONING DISTRICTS, AND OVERLAYS
Section
   
82.01.010   Purpose.
   
82.01.020   Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts.
   
82.01.030   Overlays.
§ 82.01.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes the primary and overlay land use zoning districts
applied to property within the County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.01.020 Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts.
   The Land Use Plan and the Land Use Zoning District Maps have been adopted as
part of the General Plan by ordinance and resolution. This Development Code
implements the goals and policies contained in the General Plan and contains
the development standards and regulations for the land use zoning districts.
   (a)   Land Use Zoning Districts Established. The County shall be divided
into primary districts and overlays that implement the San Bernardino County
General Plan. The land use zoning districts shown in
Table 82-1 and the overlays shown in
Table 82-2 are hereby established and shall be shown on the Land Use Plan.
   (b)   Amendments. Changes, additions, and amendments to the Land Use Plan
may be determined and defined from time-to-time by ordinance adopting sectional
Land Use Zoning District Maps covering portions of the County, each of which
shall become, upon final adoption and certification by the Clerk of the Board,
part of the Land Use Plan. Map changes, additions, and amendments shall be
processed, considered, and approved or denied in compliance with
Chapter 86.12 (Amendments).
   (c)   Purposes of Land Use Zoning Districts. The purposes of the land use
zoning districts are as follows:
      (1)   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts.
         (A)   AG (Agriculture). The AG (Agriculture) land use zoning district
provides sites for commercial agricultural operations, agriculture support
services, rural residential uses and similar and compatible uses. Open space
and recreation uses may occur on non-farmed lands within this AG (Agriculture)
land use zoning district.
         (B)   RC (Resource Conservation). The RC (Resource Conservation) land
use zoning district provides sites for open space and recreational activities,
single-family homes on very large parcels and similar and compatible uses.
         (C)   FW (Floodway). The FW (Floodway) land use zoning district
provides sites for animal keeping, grazing, crop production, and similar and
compatible uses.
         (D)   OS (Open Space). The OS (Open Space) land use zoning district
provides sites for open space and recreational uses, and similar and compatible
uses.
      (2)   Residential Land Use Zoning Districts.
         (A)   RL (Rural Living). The RL (Rural Living) land use zoning
district provides sites for rural residential uses, incidental agricultural
uses, and similar and compatible uses.
         (B)   RS (Single Residential). The RS (Residential) land use zoning
district provides sites for single-family residential uses, incidental
agricultural and recreational uses, and similar and compatible uses.
         (C)   RM (Multiple Residential). The RM (Multiple Residential) land
use zoning district provides sites for multiple residential uses, mixed
residential uses, and similar and compatible non-residential uses and
activities.
      (3)   Commercial Land Use Zoning Districts.
         (A)   CR (Rural Commercial). The CR (Rural Commercial) land use zoning
district provides sites for retail trade and personal services, repair
services, lodging services, recreation and entertainment services,
transportation services, and similar and compatible uses. Agriculture and
residential uses allowed also but are secondary in importance.
         (B)   CN (Neighborhood Commercial). The CN (Neighborhood Commercial)
land use zoning district provides sites for retail trade and personal services,
repair services, lodging services, professional services, recreation and
entertainment services, and similar and compatible uses.
         (C)   CO (Office Commercial). The CO (Office Commercial) land use
zoning district provides sites for professional services, and similar and
compatible uses.
         (D)   CG (General Commercial). The CG (General Commercial) land use
zoning district provides sites for retail trade and personal services, lodging
services, office and professional services, recreation and entertainment
services, wholesaling and warehousing, contract/construction services,
transportation services, open lot services, and similar and compatible uses.
         (E)   CS (Service Commercial). The CS (Service Commercial) land use
zoning district provides sites for a mixture of heavy commercial uses and light
industrial uses, including light manufacturing uses, and similar and compatible
uses.
         (F)   CH (Highway Commercial). The CH (Highway Commercial) land use
zoning district provides sites for retail trade and personal services, lodging
services, office and professional services, recreation and entertainment
services, wholesaling and warehousing, contract/construction services,
transportation services, open lot services, and similar and compatible uses.
      (4)   Industrial Land Use Zoning Districts.
         (A)   IC (Community Industrial). The IC (Community Industrial) land
use zoning district provides sites for light industrial uses such as light
manufacturing uses, wholesale/warehouse services, contract/construction
services, transportation services, agriculture support services, incidental
commercial and accessory residential uses, and similar and compatible uses.
These uses shall have limited outside storage.
         (B)   IR (Regional Industrial). The IR (Regional Industrial) land use
zoning district provides sites for heavy industrial uses that have the
potential to generate severe negative impacts, incidental commercial uses,
agricultural support services, salvage operations, and similar and compatible
uses.
      (5)   Special Purpose Land Use Zoning Districts.
         (A)   IN (Institutional). The IN (Institutional) land use zoning
district provides sites for public and quasi-public uses facilities, and
similar and compatible uses.
         (B)   SD (Special Development). The SD (Special Development) land use
zoning district provides sites for a combination of residential, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, open space and recreation uses, and similar and
compatible uses.
         (C)   SP (Specific Plan). The SP (Specific Plan) land use zoning
district provides sites for a combination of residential, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, open space, recreational and similar and compatible
uses as determined by the Specific Plan.
Table 82-1
Land Use Zoning Districts
Land Use Zoning District Land Use Zoning District Applicable Development Code
Symbol                   Name                     Chapter/Section
Table 82-1
Land Use Zoning Districts
Land Use Zoning District Land Use Zoning District Applicable Development Code
Symbol                   Name                     Chapter/Section
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts
AG                       Agriculture              82.03
RC                       Resource Conservation    82.03
FW                       Floodway                 82.03
OS                       Open Space               82.03
Residential Land Use Zoning Districts
RL                       Rural Living             82.04
RS                       Single Residential       82.04
RM                       Multiple Residential     82.04
Commercial Land Use Zoning Districts
CR                       Rural Commercial         82.05
CN                       Neighborhood Commercial  82.05
CO                       Office Commercial        82.05
CG                       General Commercial       82.05
CS                       Service Commercial       82.05
CH                       Highway Commercial       82.05
Industrial Land Use Zoning Districts
IC                       Community Industrial     82.06
IR                       Regional Industrial      82.06
Special Purpose Land Use Zoning Districts
IN                       Institutional            82.06
SD                       Special Development      82.06
SP                       Specific Plan            82.06
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009)
§ 82.01.030 Overlays.
   (a)   Purpose. The overlays established by §
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts), and detailed in
Chapters
82.13 through
82.19 are intended to guide development within the overlays by providing
standards that apply to proposed development in addition to the standards and
regulations of the primary land use zoning district, where important community,
site, environmental, safety, compatibility, or design issues require particular
attention in project planning. The overlays are shown in
Table 82-2.
   (b)   Purpose of Individual Overlays. The purpose of each overlay is
described in Chapters
82.07 through
82.22.
   (c)   Mapping of Overlays. The applicability of one or more overlays to a
specific site is shown by the overlay district symbol established by
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays), being
appended as a suffix to the symbol for the primary land use zoning district on
the Land Use Plan. Overlays are applied to property through the amendment
process in
Chapter 86.12 (Amendments).
   (d)   Allowed Land Uses, Permit Requirements, Development Standards. Except
as may be otherwise provided by this Division for a specific overlay:
      (1)   Any land use normally allowed in the primary land use zoning
district by this Division may be allowed within a overlay, subject to any
additional requirements of the overlay;
      (2)   Development and new land uses within a overlay shall obtain the
planning approvals required by this Division for the primary land use zoning
district; and
      (3)   Development and new land uses within an overlay shall comply with
all applicable development standards of the primary land use zoning district,
the standards established for the specific overlay by Chapters
82.13 through
82.19, and all other applicable provisions of this Development Code (e.g.,
Division 3 - Site Planning and General Development Standards). In the event of
any conflict between an overlay requirement and a primary land use zoning
district requirement, the most restrictive shall control.
Table 82-2
Overlays
Overlay Symbol Overlay Name Applicable Development Code Chapter/Section
Table 82-2
Overlays
Overlay Symbol Overlay Name                    Applicable Development Code
                                               Chapter/Section
Overlays
AA(1)          Additional Agriculture          82.07
AP(1)          Agricultural Preserve           82.08
AR(2)          Airport Safety                  82.09
AH(2)          Alternate Housing               82.10
BR(2)          Biotic Resources                82.11
CP(2)          Cultural Resources Preservation 82.12
FS(2)          Fire Safety                     82.13
FP(2)          Flood Plain Safety              82.14
GH(2)          Geologic Hazard                 82.15
HW(2)          Hazardous Waste                 82.16
MR(2)          Mineral Resources               82.17
NH(2)          Noise Hazard                    82.18
OS(2)          Open Space                      82.19
PR(2)          Paleontologic Resources         82.20
SC(1)          Sign Control                    82.21
SS(3)          Sphere Standards                82.22
Notes:
   (1)   Included as a suffix to the land use designation on the Land Use
Zoning District Maps.
   (2)   Not included on the Land Use Zoning District Map, but a separate map.
   (3)   Only applied to the city sphere of influence area designated in
Chapter 82.22.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4098,
passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
CHAPTER 82.02: ALLOWED LAND USES AND DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
82.02.010   Purpose.
   
82.02.020   General Requirements for Development and New Land Uses.
   
82.02.030   Allowed Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements.
   
82.02.040   Exemptions from Planning Permit Requirements.
   
82.02.050   Special Developments.
   
82.02.060   Temporary Uses.
§ 82.02.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter describes the County’s requirements for the approval of
proposed development and new land uses. The planning permit requirements
established by this Development Code for specific types of development are in
Chapters
82.03 through
82.23.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.02.020 General Requirements for Development and New Land Uses.
   Each land use and/or structure shall be established, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, moved or replaced in compliance with the following
requirements.
   (a)   Allowed Use. The land use shall be allowed by this Development Code in
the land use zoning district applied to the site. The basis for determining
whether a use is allowed is described in §
82.02.030 (Allowed Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements).
   (b)   Permit and Approval Requirements. Any planning permit or other
approval required by §
82.02.030 (Allowed Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements) shall be
obtained before the issuance of any required grading, building, or other
construction permit, and before the proposed use is constructed, otherwise
established or put into operation, unless the proposed use is listed in §
82.02.040 (Exemptions from Planning Permit Requirements).
   (c)   Development Standards, Conditions of Approval. Each land use and
structure shall comply with the development standards of this Division,
applicable standards and requirements in
Division 3 (Countywide Development Standards), and
Division 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities), and any
applicable conditions imposed by a previously granted planning permit.
   (d)   Legal Parcel. The site of a proposed development or new land use shall
be a parcel that was legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act
and
Division 7 (Subdivisions).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.02.030 Allowed Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements.
   (a)   Allowed Land Uses. The uses of land allowed by this Development Code
in each land use zoning district are listed in Chapters
82.03 through
82.22, together with the type of planning permit required for each use. Each
listed land use is defined in
Division 10 (Definitions).
      (1)   Establishment of an Allowed Use.
         (A)   Any one or more land uses identified by the land use tables in
Chapters
82.03 through
82.22 as being allowed within a specific land use zoning district may be
established on any parcel within that land use zoning district, subject to the
planning permit requirements of Subdivision (c), and compliance with all
applicable requirements of this Development Code.
         (B)   Where a single parcel is proposed for development with two or
more allowed land uses, the overall project shall be subject to the highest
permit level required by Subdivision (c) for any individual use.
      (2)   Use Not Listed.
         (A)   A use not listed in any land use table in Chapters
82.03 through
82.22, and determined by the Director to not be included in
Division 10 (Definitions) under the definition of a listed land use, is not
allowed except as otherwise provided in §
82.02.040 (Exemptions from Planning Permit Requirements).
         (B)   A use that is not listed in a land use table within a particular
land use zoning district is not allowed within that district, except as
otherwise provided §
82.02.040.
      (3)   Similar and Compatible Use May Be Allowed. The Director may
determine that a proposed land use not listed in any land use table or
Division 10 (Definitions) is allowed as follows:
         (A)   Required Findings. The Director may determine that a proposed
use is similar to, and compatible with a listed use and may be allowed, only
after first making all of the following findings with the determination:
            (I)   The characteristics of, and activities associated with the
use are similar to one or more of the listed uses, and will not involve a
greater intensity than the uses listed in the district;
            (II)   The use will be consistent with the purposes of the
applicable land use zoning district;
            (III)   The use will be consistent with the General Plan, and any
applicable specific plan;
            (IV)   The use will be compatible with the other uses allowed in
the land use zoning district; and
            (V)   The use is not listed as allowed in another land use zoning
district.
         (B)   Findings in Writing. A determination that a use qualifies as a
similar and compatible use, and the findings supporting the determination,
shall be in writing.
         (C)   Applicable Standards and Permit Requirements. When the Director
determines that a proposed, but unlisted, use is similar and compatible to a
listed use, the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed
use in determining where it is allowed, what permits are required, and what
other standards and requirements of this Development Code apply.
         (D)   Referral for Determination. The Director may refer the question
of whether a proposed use qualifies as a similar and compatible use directly to
the Commission for a determination at a public meeting.
         (E)   Appeal. A determination of similar and compatible use may be
appealed in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
   (b)   Permit Requirements. Chapters
82.03 through
82.22 provide tables showing allowed land use types that are:
      (1)   “A” Uses. Allowed without any land use review but may be subject to
Building Permits. These uses are shown as “A” uses in the tables;
      (2)   “P” Uses. Allowed subject to compliance with all applicable
provisions of this Development Code, subject to first obtaining a Site Plan
Permits (
Chapter 85.08). These are shown as “P” uses in the tables;
      (3)   “M/C” Uses. Allowed subject to the approval of a Minor Use Permit
issued in compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit), unless the use does
not qualify for a Minor Use Permit in compliance with §
85.06.050 (Projects That Do Not Qualify for a Minor Use Permit) in which case
the use shall require a Conditional Use Permit. These uses are shown as “M/C”
uses in the tables;
      (4)   “CUP” Uses. Allowed subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit
(
Chapter 85.06), and shown as “CUP” uses in the tables.
      (5)   “MUP” Uses. Allowed subject to approval of a Minor Use Permit (
Chapter 85.06), and shown as “MUP” uses in the tables.
      (6)   “PD” Uses. Allowed subject to the approval of a Planned Development
Permit (
Chapter 85.10), and shown as “PD” uses in the tables;
      (7)   “SUP” Uses. Allowed subject to the approval of a Special Use
Permits (
Chapter 85.14), and shown as “SUP” uses in the tables;
      (8)   “S” Uses. Allowed subject to the type of County approval required
by a specific provision of
Division 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities), and shown as “S”
uses in the tables;
      (9)   “TSP” Uses. Allowed subject to the provisions in
Chapter 85.16 (Temporary Special Events Permits), and shown as “TSP” in the
tables;
      (10)   “TUP” Uses. Allowed subject to the provisions in
Chapter 84.25 (Temporary Structures and Uses) and approval of a Temporary Use
Permit (
Chapter 85.15), and shown as “TUP” uses in the tables; and
      (11)   “—“ Uses. Not allowed in particular land use zoning districts, and
shown as “—“ in the tables.
   (c)   Additional Permit Requirements. A land use authorized through the
approval of a Site Plan Permit, Minor Use Permit, Conditional Use Permit,
Planned Development Permit, or other permit required by this Division may also
require a Building Permit and/or other permit required by the County Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.02.040 Exemptions from Planning Permit Requirements.
   The planning permit requirements of this Development Code do not apply to
the land uses, structures, and activities identified by this Section. These are
allowed in all land use zoning districts subject to compliance with this
Section.
   (a)   General Requirements for Exemption. The land uses, structures, and
activities identified by Subdivision (b) below are exempt from the planning
permit requirements of this Development Code only when:
      (1)   The use, activity or structure is established and operated in
compliance with the setback requirements, height limits, and all other
applicable standards of this Division (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed
Land Uses), and Division 3 (Countywide Development Standards), Division 4
(Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities) and, where applicable,
Chapter 84.17 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures); and
      (2)   Any permit or approval required by regulations other than this
Development Code is obtained (for example, a Building Permit).
   (b)   Exempt Activities and Land Uses. The following are exempt from the
planning permit requirements of this Development Code when in compliance with
Subdivision (a) above.
      (1)   Decks, Paths and Driveways. Decks, platforms, on-site paths, and
driveways that are not required to have a Building Permit or Grading Permit.
      (2)   Fences and Walls. See
Chapter 83.06 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls).
      (3)   Interior Remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the
gross floor area of the structure, or change the permitted use of the
structure.
      (4)   Repairs and Maintenance.
         (A)   Single-Family Dwellings. Ordinary repairs to, and maintenance
of, single-family dwellings or any related accessory structures.
         (B)   Multi-Family, and Non-Residential Structures. Ordinary repairs
to, and maintenance of multi-family residential and nonresidential structures,
if:
            (I)   The work does not change the approved land use of the site or
structure, or add to, enlarge or expand the land use and/or structure; and
            (II)   Any exterior repairs employ the same materials and design as
the original construction.
      (5)   Small, Portable Residential Accessory Structures. A single portable
structure per lot or unit, including pre-manufactured storage sheds or other
small structures in residential zones, that are exempt from Building Permit
requirements in compliance with the County Code and the California Building
Code. Additional structures may be approved in compliance with §
84.01.050 (Residential Accessory Structures and Uses), where allowed by the
applicable zone.
      (6)   Solar Collectors, Accessory to Residential Uses of 19 Units or
Fewer. The addition of solar collectors to the roof or side of a building,
provided that the collectors comply with applicable height limit requirements;
and ground-mounted solar collectors that comply with the setback requirements
and height limitations of the applicable zone and are not visible from off the
site.
      (7)   Spas, Hot Tubs, and Fish Ponds. Portable spas, hot tubs, and
constructed fish ponds, and similar equipment and structures that do not:
exceed 120 square feet in total area including related equipment; contain more
than 2,000 gallons of water; or exceed three feet in depth.
      (8)   Utilities. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance
by a public utility or public agency of utilities intended to service existing
or nearby approved developments shall be permitted in any zone. These include:
water; gas; electric; supply or disposal systems; including wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire-alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants, etc., but not including new transmission lines and
structures. Commercial satellite and wireless communications antennas are not
exempt, and are instead subject to
Chapter 84.27 (Wireless Telecommunications Facilities).
      (9)   Noncommercial Receive-Only Antennas. The following noncommercial,
receive only antennas for the sole use of a resident occupying a residential
structure shall not be regulated by this Development Code:
         (A)   A ground or structure-mounted, radio or satellite dish antenna
that does not project above the roof ridge line and does not have a diameter
greater than one meter (39 inches); and
         (B)   Roof-mounted radio or television aerials not exceeding 75 feet
in overall height.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4245,
passed - -2014)
§ 82.02.050 Special Developments.
   Special Developments shall be allowed in any land use zoning district with
the approval of a Planned Development Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.10 (Planned Development Permits).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.02.060 Temporary Uses.
   Requirements for establishing a temporary use (for example, a construction
yard, seasonal sales lot, special event, temporary office trailer, etc.) are in
Chapter 84.25 (Temporary Structures and Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.03: AGRICULTURAL AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT LAND USE ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
   
82.03.010   Purpose.
   
82.03.020   Purposes and Location of the Agricultural and Resource Management
Land Use Zoning Districts.
   
82.03.030   Minimum Area for Designation.
   
82.03.040   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements.
   
82.03.050   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Subdivision Standards.
   
82.03.060   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Site
Planning and Building Standards.
   
82.03.070   FW Land Use Zoning District Additional Standards.
§ 82.03.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter lists the land uses that may be allowed within the agricultural
and resource management land use zoning districts established by the General
Plan and listed in
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays),
determines the type of planning permit/approval required for each use, and
provides basic standards for site layout and building size.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.03.020 Purposes and Location of the Agricultural and Resource Management
Land Use Zoning Districts.
   The purposes of the individual agricultural and resource management land use
zoning districts and the locations where they are applied are as specified in
the General Plan and as described in
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.03.030 Minimum Area for Designation.
   The agricultural and resource land use zoning districts shall be applied
through the General Plan amendment process (
Chapter 86.12) only to sites with the minimum areas indicated in
Table 82-3.
Table 82-3
Minimum Area For Agricultural and Resource Management
Land Use Zoning District Designation
Land Use Zoning District   Minimum Area for Designation
AG (Agriculture)           100 acres
RC (Resource Conservation) 200 acres
FW (Floodway)              No Minimum Area Required
OS (Open Space)            No Minimum Area Required
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.03.040 Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements.
   (a)   General Permit Requirements. 
Table 82-3 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Development Code in each
agricultural and resource land use zoning district established by
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays), in
compliance with §
82.02.030 (Allowed Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements).
   (b)   Requirements for Certain Specific Land Uses. Where the last column in
Table 82-4 (Specific Use Regulations) includes a Section number, the referenced
Section may affect whether the use requires a Site Plan Permit, Conditional Use
Permit, Minor Use Permit, Planned Development Permit, or other County approval,
and/or may establish other requirements and standards applicable to the use.
Table 82-4
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Agricultural and Resource
Management Land Use Zoning Districts
Land Use                   Permit Required by District
See Division 10                                        Specific Use Regulations
(Definitions) for land use RC AG FW OS
definitions
Table 82-4
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Agricultural and Resource
Management Land Use Zoning Districts
Land Use                   Permit Required by District
See Division 10                                        Specific Use Regulations
(Definitions) for land use RC     AG     FW   OS
definitions
Agricultural, Resource & Open Space Uses
Agricultural support       M/C    M/C    CUP  —
services
Animal keeping             S      S      S    —      84.04
Community gardens          A      A      A    —
Crop production,
horticulture, orchard,     A      A      A    —
vineyard
Industrial hemp
cultivation - Small scale  P      P      P    —      84.35
(minimum 1-acre lot size)
Industrial hemp
cultivation - Large scale  CUP    CUP    CUP  —      84.35
(minimum 5-acre lot size)
Livestock operations       S      S      S    —      84.04
Natural resources          CUP    CUP    CUP  —      88.03
development (mining)
Nature preserve (accessory P(1)   P(1)   P(1) P(1)
uses)
Lake, reservoir            M/C    M/C    M/C  M/C
Pond                       A      A      A    A
Winery                     M/C    M/C    —  —
Industry, Manufacturing & Processing, Wholesaling
Composting operations      CUP    CUP    —  —
Hazardous waste facilities CUP    CUP    —  —      84.11
Industrial use requiring   CUP    CUP    —  —
extensive buffering
Recycling facilities       S      S      —  —      84.19
Recreation, Education & Public Assembly
Agritourism enterprises    S      S      —  —      84.03
Campgrounds                M/C    M/C    —  —
Conference/convention      CUP    CUP    —  —
facility
Equestrian facility        M/C    M/C    —  —
Fitness/health facility    M/C    —    —  —
Library, museum, art       M/C    M/C    —  —
gallery, outdoor exhibit
Meeting facility, public   CUP    CUP    —  —
or private
Park, playground           M/C    M/C    —  —
Places of worship          CUP    CUP    —  —
Recreational vehicle park  CUP(2)
Rural sports and           CUP    CUP    —  —
recreation
School - College or        CUP    CUP    —  —
university
School - Private           CUP    CUP    —  —
School - Specialized       CUP    CUP    —  —
education/training
Residential(7)
Accessory use or structure A(3)   A(3)   —  —      84.01
- Residential
Guest housing              A(3)   A(3)   —  —      84.01
Accessory dwelling unit    A(4)   A(4)   —  —      84.01
Junior accessory dwelling  A(4)   (A)(4) —  —      84.01
unit
Single dwelling            A      A      —  —
Retail
Produce stands (200 sq.
ft. or less on lots that   A(5)   A      —  —      84.03
are 10,000 sq. ft. or
greater)
Services - Business & Professional
Medical services -         M/C    M/C    —  —
Hospital
Medical services -         M/C    M/C    —  —
Rehabilitation centers
Office - Accessory         P      P      —  —
Office - Government        M/C    M/C    —  —
Services - General
Cemetery including pet     CUP    CUP    —  —
cemeteries
Commercial kennels and
catteries - min lot 2.5    M/C    M/C    —  —
acres
Emergency shelter          —    CUP    —  —      84.33
Home occupation            SUP    SUP    —  —      84.12
Licensed residential care
facility of 6 or fewer     A      A      —  —
persons
Licensed residential care
facility of 7 or more      M/C    M/C    —  —      84.23
persons
Lodging - Bed and          SUP    SUP    —  —
breakfast inn (B&B)
Public safety facility     M/C    M/C    —  —
Short-term residential     SUP    SUP    —  —      84.28
rentals
Unlicensed residential
care facility of 6 or      RCP    RCP    —  —      84.32
fewer persons
Unlicensed residential
care facility of 7 or more M/C    M/C    —  —
persons
Transportation, Communications & Infrastructure
Broadcasting antennae and  M/C    M/C    —  —
towers
Electrical power           CUP    CUP    —  —
generation
Pipelines, transmission
lines, and control         (6)    (6)    (6)  (6)
stations(6)
Renewable energy           CUP    CUP    CUP  —
generation facilities
Sewage treatment and       CUP    CUP    —  —
disposal facility
Solid waste disposal       CUP    CUP    —  —
Transportation facility    CUP    CUP    —  —
Utility facility           CUP    CUP    CUP  —
Wind energy system,        S      S      S    —      84.26
accessory
Wireless
telecommunications         S      S      S    —      84.27
facility
Other
Accessory structures and   A      A      A    A        84.01
uses
Temporary special events   TSP    TSP    TSP  TSP      85.16
Temporary structures and   TUP    TUP    TUP  TUP      84.25
uses
 
Key
Key
    Allowed use (no planning permit         Planned Development Permit required
A   required)                           PD  (
                                            Chapter 85.10)
    Permitted Use; Site Plan Permit         Special Use Permit required (
P   required (                          SUP Chapter 85.14)
    Chapter 85.08)
                                        S   Permit requirement set by Specific
    Minor Use Permit required; unless a     Use Regulations (Division 4)
    Conditional Use Permit required in      Temporary Special Events Permit
M/C compliance with §                  TSP required (
    85.06.050 (Projects That Do Not         Chapter 85.16)
    Qualify for a Minor Use Permit)         Unlicensed Residential Care
                                        RCP Facilities Permit (
                                            Chapter 85.20)
CUP Conditional Use Permit required (   TUP Temporary Use Permit required (
    Chapter 85.06)                          Chapter 85.15)
MUP Minor Use Permit required (         — Use not allowed
    Chapter 85.06)
 
Notes:
Notes:
(1)   CUP required if maximum building coverage exceeds 10,000 sq. ft., the use
will have more than 20 employees per shift, or if not exempt from CEQA; may
qualify for a MUP in compliance with §
85.06.020 (Applicability).
(2)   Density of the recreational vehicles in a Recreational Vehicle Park shall be
limited to 4 per acre.
(3)   Use allowed as an accessory use only, on the same site as a residential use
allowed by this table.
(4)   Use allowed as an accessory use only with standards, on the same site as a
residential use allowed by this table.
(5)   In Phelan/Pinon Hills Community Plan area, a maximum 6 sq. ft. advertising
sign shall be allowed.
(6)   Pipelines, transmission lines, and control station uses are regulated and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission. See alternate review procedures in §
85.02.050 (Alternate Review Procedures).
(7)   Supportive housing or transitional housing that is provided in single-,
two-, or multi-family dwelling units, group residential, parolee-probationer home,
residential care facilities, or boarding house uses shall be permitted,
conditionally permitted or prohibited in the same manner as the other single-,
two- or multi-family dwelling units, group residential, parolee-probationer home,
residential care facilities, or boarding house uses under this Code.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014;
Am. Ord. 4251, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4341, passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4383,
passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4393, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 82.03.050 Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District
Subdivision Standards.
   (a)   Each subdivision shall comply with the minimum parcel size
requirements shown in Tables
82-4A,
82-4B and
82-4C for the applicable land use zoning district.
   (b)   The minimum parcel size requirements for a specific subdivision are
determined by the review authority as part of subdivision approval. The review
authority may require one or more parcels within a specific subdivision to be
larger than the minimums required by these tables based on potential
environmental impacts, the physical characteristics of the site or surrounding
parcels, and/or other factors.
   (c)   See also the standards in §
83.02.050 (Parcel Area Measurements and Exceptions).
Table 82-4A
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Valley Region
Land Use Minimum Lot Lot Dimensions                             Maximum Width
Zoning   Area        Minimum        Minimum Width Minimum Depth to Depth Ratio
District             Frontage Width
Table 82-4A
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot
Size
Valley Region
Land Use             Lot Dimensions
Zoning   Minimum Lot Minimum                                   Maximum Width
District Area        Frontage    Minimum Width  Minimum Depth  to Depth Ratio
                     Width
AG       10 acres(1) NA          300 ft.        300 ft.        1:4
RC       40 acres    150 ft.     300 ft.        300 ft.        1:4
FW       10 acres    NA          60 ft.         100 ft         1:4
OS       No          No          No requirement No requirement No requirement
         requirement requirement
Notes:
(1)   Except where modified by map suffix. The various designations within
the AG Land Use Zoning District shall be limited to AG, AG-20, AG-40, AG-80
and AG-160.
 
Table 82-4B
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Mountain Region
Land Use Minimum Lot Lot Dimensions                             Maximum Width
Zoning   Area        Minimum        Minimum Width Minimum Depth to Depth Ratio
District             Frontage Width
Table 82-4B
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot
Size
Mountain Region
Land Use             Lot Dimensions
Zoning   Minimum Lot Minimum                                   Maximum Width
District Area        Frontage    Minimum Width  Minimum Depth  to Depth Ratio
                     Width
AG(1)    10 acres(2) NA          300 ft.        300 ft.        1:4
RC       40 acres    150 ft.     300 ft.        300 ft.        1:4
FW       10 acres    NA          60 ft.         100 ft.        1:3
OS       No          No          No requirement No requirement No requirement
         requirement requirement
Notes:
(1)   Limited to the Oak Glen Community Plan area only.
(2)   Except where modified by map suffix. The various designations within
the AG Land Use Zoning District shall be limited to AG, AG-20, AG-40, AG-80
and AG-160.
 
Table 82-4C
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Desert Region
                     Lot Dimensions
Land Use Minimum Lot Minimum                                    Maximum Width
Zoning   Area        Frontage Width Minimum Width Minimum Depth to Depth Ratio
District
Table 82-4C
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot
Size
Desert Region
                     Lot Dimensions
Land Use Minimum Lot Minimum                                   Maximum Width
Zoning   Area        Frontage    Minimum Width  Minimum Depth  to Depth Ratio
District             Width
AG       10 acres(1) NA          300 ft.        300 ft.        1:4
RC       40 acres    150 ft.     300 ft.        300 ft.        1:4
FW       10 acres    NA          60 ft.         100 ft.        1:4
OS       No          No          No requirement No requirement No requirement
         requirement requirement
Notes:
(1)   Except where modified by map suffix. The various designations within
the AG Land Use Zoning District shall be limited to AG, AG-20, AG-40, AG-80
and AG-160.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.03.060 Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Site
Planning and Building Standards.
   Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land
uses and structures shall be designed, constructed, and established in
compliance with the requirements in Tables
82-5A,
82-5B, and
82-5C, in addition to the applicable standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and
loading, etc.) in
Division 3 (Countywide Development Standards) and
Division 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities).
Table 82-5A
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Development
Standards
Valley Region
Valley Region Development Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Feature                   AG          RC                    FW       OS
                          Agriculture Resource Conservation Floodway Open Space
Table 82-5A
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Development
Standards
Valley Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Valley Region          AG             RC             FW          OS
Development Feature    Agriculture    Resource       Floodway    Open Space
                                      Conservation
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as applicable.
                       1 unit per 10  1 unit per 40
                       acres;         acres;
                       accessory      accessory
                       dwellings as   dwellings as   Residential Residential
   Maximum density  allowed by     allowed by     Not Allowed Not Allowed
                       Chapter 84.01  Chapter 84.01
                       (Accessory     (Accessory
                       Structures and Structures and
                       Uses)          Uses)
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 4 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            25 ft.         25 ft.         75 ft.      25 ft.
   Side - Street sid25 ft.         25 ft.         25 ft.      25 ft.
   Side - Interior  15 ft.         15 ft.         15 ft.      15 ft.
(each)
   Rear             15 ft.         15 ft.         15 ft.      15 ft.
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage NA             NA             NA          NA
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.         35 ft.         35 ft.      35 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
 
Table 82-5B
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Development
Standards
Mountain Region
Mountain Region     Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature AG(1)       RC Resource Conservation FW       OS
                    Agriculture                          Floodway Open Space
Table 82-5B
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Development
Standards
Mountain Region
Mountain Region        Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    AG(1)          RC Resource    FW          OS
                       Agriculture    Conservation   Floodway    Open Space
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as applicable.
                       1 unit per 10  1 unit per 40
                       acres;         acres;
                       accessory      accessory
                       dwellings as   dwellings as   Residential Residential
   Maximum density  allowed by     allowed by     Not Allowed Not Allowed
                       Chapter 84.01  Chapter 84.01
                       (Accessory     (Accessory
                       Structures and Structures and
                       Uses)          Uses)
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            35 ft.         25 ft.         25 ft.      25 ft.
   Side - Street sid30 ft.         25 ft.         25 ft.      25 ft.
   Side - Interior  30 ft.         15 ft.         15 ft.      15 ft.
(each)
   Rear             35 ft.         15 ft.         15 ft.      15 ft.
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage NA             NA             NA          NA
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.         35 ft.         25 ft.      35 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Limited to the Oak Glen Community Plan area only.
 
Table 82-5C
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Development
Standards
Desert Region
Desert Region Development Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Feature                   AG          RC                    FW       OS
                          Agriculture Resource Conservation Floodway Open Space
Table 82-5C
Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning District Development
Standards
Desert Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Desert Region          AG             RC             FW          OS
Development Feature    Agriculture    Resource       Floodway    Open Space
                                      Conservation
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as applicable.
                       1 unit per 10  1 unit per 40
                       acres;         acres;
                       accessory      accessory
                       dwellings as   dwellings as   Residential Residential
   Maximum density  allowed by     allowed by     Not Allowed Not Allowed
                       Chapter 84.01  Chapter 84.01
                       (Accessory     (Accessory
                       Structures and Structures and
                       Uses)          Uses)
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapters 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            25 ft.         25 ft.         75 ft.      25 ft.
   Side - Street sid25 ft.         25 ft.         25 ft.      25 ft.
   Side - Interior  15 ft.         15 ft.         15 ft.      15 ft.
(each)
   Rear             15 ft.         15 ft.         15 ft.      15 ft.
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage NA             NA             NA          NA
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.         35 ft.         35 ft.      35 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008)
§ 82.03.070 FW Land Use Zoning District Additional Standards.
   (a)   No structure or use shall be constructed, located or substantially
improved and no land shall be graded or developed in the area designated as
floodway, except upon approval of a plan which provides that the proposed
development will not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (b)   Proposed land use permits within the FW district shall comply with all
of the requirements necessary for the approval of a permit in the Floodplain
Overlay.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.04: RESIDENTIAL LAND USE ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
   
82.04.010    Purpose.
   
82.04.020    Purposes and Location of the Residential Land Use Zoning
Districts.
   
82.04.030    Minimum Area for Designation.
   
82.04.040    Residential Land Use Zoning District Allowed Uses and Permit
Requirement.
   
82.04.050    Residential Land Use Zoning District Subdivision Standards.
   
82.04.060    Residential Land Use Zoning District Site Planning and Building
Standards.
§ 82.04.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter lists the land uses that may be allowed within the residential
land use zoning districts established by the General Plan and listed in
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, and Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays),
determines the type of planning permit/approval required for each use, and
provides basic standards for site layout and building size.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.04.020 Purposes and Location of the Residential Land Use Zoning Districts.
   The purposes of the individual residential land use zoning districts and the
locations where they are applied are as specified in the General Plan and as
described in
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.04.030 Minimum Area for Designation.
   The residential land use zoning districts shall be applied through the
General Plan amendment process (
Chapter 86.12) only to sites with the minimum areas indicated in
Table 82-6.
 
Table 82-6
Minimum Area For Residential Land Use
Zoning District Designation
Land Use Zoning District  Minimum Area for Designation
RL (Rural Living)         30 acres
RS (Single Residential)   10 acres
RM (Multiple Residential) 10 acres
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.04.040 Residential Land Use Zoning District Allowed Uses and Permit
Requirements.
   (a)   General Permit Requirements.  
Table 82-7 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Development Code in each
residential land use zoning district established by
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, and Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays), in
compliance with §
82.02.030 (Allowed Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements).
   (b)   Requirements for Certain Specific Land Uses. Where the last column in
Table 82-7 (Specific Use Regulations) includes a Section number, the referenced
Section may affect whether the use requires Land Use Review, or Conditional Use
Permit or Minor Use Permit, or other County approval, and/or may establish
other requirements and standards applicable to the use.
Table 82-7
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Land Use Zoning
Districts
Land Use                   Permit Required by District
See Division 10                                        Specific Use Regulations
(Definitions) for land use RL(1) RS RM
definitions
Table 82-7
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Land Use Zoning
Districts
Land Use                   Permit Required by District
See Division 10                                        Specific Use Regulations
(Definitions) for land use RL(1)  RS     RM
definitions
Agricultural, Resource & Open Space Uses
Accessory crop production  A(2)   A(2)   A(2)          84.01
Agricultural accessory     A      A      A              
structure - 1,000 sf max.
Agricultural accessory
structure - up to 10,000   A      —    —            
sf max. on 5 ac. or less
Agricultural accessory
structure - greater than   M/C    —    —            
10,000 sf on 5 ac. or less
Agricultural support       CUP    —    —            
services
Animal keeping             S      S      S             84.04
Community gardens          A      CUP    A              
Crop production,
horticulture, orchard,     A      —    —            
vineyard, nurseries
Industrial hemp
cultivation - Small scale  P      —    —           84.35
(minimum 1-acre lot size)
Industrial hemp
cultivation - Large scale  CUP    —    —           84.35
(minimum 5-acre lot size)
Livestock operations       CUP    —    —           84.04
Natural resources          CUP    —    —           88.03
development (mining)
Nature preserve (accessory M/C    —    —            
uses)
Lake                       M/C    CUP    —            
Pond                       A      A      M/C            
Industry, Manufacturing & Processing, Wholesaling
Composting operations      CUP    —    —            
Recycling facilities -
reverse vending machine,   S      —    —           84.19
accessory
Recreation, Education & Public Assembly Uses
Agritourism enterprises    S      —    —           84.03
Campgrounds(3)             CUP    —    —            
Commercial entertainment - CUP    —    —            
Indoor(3)
Conference/convention      CUP    —    —            
facility(3)
Equestrian facility(3)     M/C    S(4)   —            
Golf course(3)             CUP    —    —            
Library, museum, art
gallery, outdoor exhibit   M/C    M/C    M/C            
(3)
Meeting facility, public   CUP    CUP    CUP            
or private(3)
Park, playground(3)        P      P      P              
Places of worship          CUP    CUP    CUP            
Rural sports and           M/C    —    —            
recreation(3)
School - College or        CUP    CUP    —            
university
School - Private           CUP    CUP    —            
School - Specialized       CUP    —    —            
education/training
Sports or entertainment    CUP    —    —            
assembly(3)
Residential(10)
Accessory structures and   A      A      A             84.01
uses
Group residential
(sorority, fraternity,     —    —    M/C           —
boarding house, private
residential club, etc.)
Guest house                A      A      A             84.01
Mobile home park/
manufactured home land-    CUP    CUP    CUP           84.14
lease community
Multiple dwelling, 2 to 3
units, attached or         —    —    A             84.16
detached
Multiple dwelling, 4 to 19
units, attached or         —    —    A             84.16
detached
Multiple dwelling, 20 to
49 units, attached or      —    —    MUP           84.16
detached
Multiple dwelling, 50 or
more units, attached or    —    —    CUP           84.16
detached
Parolee and/or probationer —    —    CUP            
home
Accessory dwelling unit    A(5)   A(5)   A(5)          84.01
Junior accessory dwelling  A(5)   A(5)   A(5)          84.01
unit
Single dwelling            A      A      A(6)           
Retail
Produce stand              A(7)   A(7)   A(7)           
Services - General
Cemetery, including pet    CUP    CUP    —           84.06
cemeteries
Child care - Family day
care home (up to 14        A      A      A              
children)
Child care - Day care      M/C    M/C    M/C            
center
Commercial kennels and
catteries - min lot 2.5    M/C/S  —    —           84.04
acres (over 15 animals)
Emergency shelter          —    —    CUP           84.33
Home occupation            SUP    SUP    SUP           84.12
Licensed residential care
facility of 6 or fewer     A      A      A             84.23
persons
Licensed residential care
facility of 7 or more      —    —    CUP           84.23
persons
Lodging - Bed and          SUP(8) SUP(8) SUP(8)        84.05
breakfast inn (B&B)
Public safety facility     M/C    M/C    M/C            
Short-term residential     SUP    SUP    SUP           84.28
rentals
Unlicensed residential
care facility with 6 or    RCP    RCP    RCP           84.32
fewer persons
Unlicensed residential
care facility with 7 or    —    —    CUP            
more persons
Transportation, Communications & Infrastructure
Broadcasting antennae and  M/C    —    —            
towers
Electrical power           CUP    —    —            
generation
Pipelines, transmission
lines, and control         (9)    (9)    (9)            
stations(9)
Renewable energy           CUP    —    —           84.29
generation facilities
Sewage treatment and       CUP    CUP    CUP            
disposal facility
Solid waste disposal       CUP    CUP    CUP            
Telecommunications         S      S      S             84.27
facility
Transportation facility    M/C    M/C    M/C            
Utility facility           CUP    CUP    CUP            
Wind energy accessory      S      S      S             84.26
Wireless
telecommunications         S      S      S             84.27
facility
Other
Accessory structures and   A      A      A             84.01
uses
Temporary special events   TSP    TSP    TSP           84.25
Temporary structures and   TUP    TUP    TUP           84.25
uses
 
Key
Key
     Allowed use (no planning permit       Planned Development Permit required
A    required)                         PD  (
                                           Chapter 85.10)
     Permitted Use; Site Plan Permit       Special Use Permit required (
P    required (                        SUP Chapter 85.14)
     Chapter 85.08)
                                       S   Permit requirement set by Specific
     Minor Use Permit required; unless     Use Regulations (Division 4)
     a Conditional Use Permit required     Temporary Special Events Permit
M/C  in compliance with §             TSP required (
     85.06.050 (Projects That Do Not       Chapter 85.16)
     Qualify for a Minor Use Permit)       Unlicensed Residential Care
                                       RCP Facilities Permit (
                                           Chapter 85.20)
CUP  Conditional Use Permit required ( TUP Temporary Use Permit required (
     Chapter 85.06)                        Chapter 85.15)
MU P Minor Use Permit required (       — Use not allowed
     Chapter 85.06)
 
Notes:
Notes:
(1)   For projects within the Oak Glen Community Plan Area, all non-agritourism
uses shall comply with the agritourism hours of operation standard [§
84.03.030(b)(3)] and the agritourism noise/amplified sound regulations [§
84.03.030(b)(5)].
(2)   Use allowed as an accessory use only with standards, on the same site as a
residential use allowed by this table.
(3)   For projects within the Oak Glen Community Plan Area, these uses shall
comply with the agritourism development standards provided in Table 84-1 in §
84.03.030. The permit requirements presented this table shall prevail over any
permit requirement listed in Table 84-1.
(4)   A boarding facility only with a Home Occupation Permit.
(5)   Use allowed as an accessory use only, on the same site as a residential use
allowed by this table.
(6)   Single dwellings will only be allowed within an RM Land Use Zoning District
when sewer service is not available or the lot is less than one-half acre.
(7)   In the Phelan/Pinon Hills Community Plan area on lots greater than 10,000
sq. ft. with a maximum 200 sq. ft. structure for storage and sales and a maximum 6
sq. ft. advertising sign; in RS and RM, can only operate for 72 hours per month.
(8)   A CUP shall be required for three or more rooms.
(9)   These uses are regulated and approved by the Public Utilities Commission.
See alternate review procedures in
Chapter 85.02.
(10)   Supportive housing or transitional housing that is provided in single-,
two-, or multi-family dwelling units, group residential, parolee-probationer home,
residential care facilities, or boarding house uses shall be permitted,
conditionally permitted or prohibited in the same manner as the other single-,
two- or multi-family dwelling units, group residential, parolee-probationer home,
residential care facilities, or boarding house uses under this Code.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010;
Am. Ord. 4162, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4251,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4304, passed - -2016; Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am.
Ord. 4341, passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4383, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4393, passed
- -2020; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021; Am. Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 82.04.050 Residential Land Use Zoning District Subdivision Standards.
   (a)   Each subdivision shall comply with the minimum parcel size
requirements shown in Tables
82-8A,
82-8B and
82-8C for the applicable land use zoning district.
   (b)   The minimum parcel size requirements for a specific subdivision are
determined by the review authority as part of subdivision approval. The review
authority may require one or more parcels within a specific subdivision to be
larger than the minimums required by these tables based on potential
environmental impacts, the physical characteristics of the site or surrounding
parcels, and/or other factors.
   (c)   See also the standards in §
83.02.050 (Parcel Area Measurements and Exceptions).
Table 82-8A
Residential Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Valley Region
Land Use Zoning                  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Minimum Lot Area Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                             Depth Ratio
Table 82-8A
Residential Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Valley Region
Land Use Zoning Minimum Lot    Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Area           Minimum Width  Minimum Depth    Maximum Width to
                                                               Depth Ratio
                                                               1:3 for less
RL              2.5 acres(1)   150 ft.        150 ft.          than 10 acres;1:
                                                               4 for 10 or more
                                                               acres
                               60 ft for less 100 ft for less  1:3 for less
RS              7,200 sq. ft.  than 1 acre;   than 1 acre; 150 than 10 acres;
                (1)            150 ft for 1   ft for 1 acre or 1:4 for 10 or
                               acre or more   more             more acres
RM              10,000 sq. ft. 60 ft.         100 ft.          1:3
Notes:
(1)   Except where modified by map suffix. The various designations within the
RL Land Use Zoning District shall be limited to RL, RL-5, RL-10, RL-20 and RL-
40. The various designations within the RS Land Use Zoning District shall be
limited to RS, RS-10M, RS-14M, RS-20M and RS-1.
 
Table 82-8B
Residential Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Mountain Region
Land Use Zoning                  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Minimum Lot Area Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                             Depth Ratio
Table 82-8B
Residential Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Mountain Region
Land Use Zoning Minimum Lot    Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Area           Minimum Width    Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                              Depth Ratio
                                                              1:3 for less
RL              2.5 acres(1)   150 ft.          150 ft.       than 10 acres;
                                                              1:4 for 10 or
                                                              more acres
                               60 ft. for                     1:3 for less
RS              7,200 sq. ft.  interior lot; 70 100 ft.       than 10 acres;
                (1)            ft. for corner                 1:4 for 10 or
                               lot                            more acres
RM              10,000 sq. ft. 60 ft.           100 ft.       1:3
Notes:
(1)   Except where modified by map suffix. The various designations within the
RL Land Use Zoning District shall be limited to RL, RL-5, RL-10, RL-20 and RL-
40. The various designations within the RS Land Use Zoning District shall be
limited to RS, RS-10M, RS-14M, RS-20M and RS-1.
 
Table 82-8C
Residential Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Desert Region
Land Use Zoning                  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Minimum Lot Area Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                             Depth Ratio
Table 82-8C
Residential Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Desert Region
Land Use Zoning Minimum Lot     Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Area            Minimum Width   Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                              Depth Ratio
                                                              1:3 for less
RL              2.5 acres(1)    150 ft.         150 ft.       than 10 acres;
                                                              1:4 for 10 or
                                                              more acres
                                60 ft. for less 100 ft. for   1:3 for less
                7,200 sq. ft(1) than 1 acre;    less than 1   than 10 acres;
RS              (2)             140 ft for 1    acre; 150 ft. 1:4 for 10 or
                                acre or more    for 1 acre or more acres
                                                more
RM              10,000 sq. ft.  60 ft.          100 ft.       1:3
Notes:
(1)   Except where modified by map suffix. The various designations within the
RL Land Use Zoning District shall be limited to RL, RL-5, RL-10, RL-20 and RL-
40. The various designations within the RS Land Use Zoning District shall be
limited to RS, RS-10M, RS-14M, RS-20M and RS-1.
(2)   The minimum residential lot size in the RS Land Use Zoning District in
the Phelan-Pinon Hills Community Plan area shall be one acre.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.04.060 Residential Land Use Zoning District Site Planning and Building
Standards.
   Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land
uses and structures shall be designed, constructed, and established in
compliance with the requirements in Tables
82-9A,
82-9B and
82-9C, in addition to the applicable standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and
loading, etc.) in
Division 3 (Countywide Development Standards) and
Division 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities).
Table 82-9A
Residential Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature RL Rural Living RS Single Residential RM Multiple
                                                          Residential
Table 82-9A
Residential Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    RL Rural Living   RS Single          RM Multiple
                                         Residential        Residential
                       Housing density. The actual number of units allowed will
Density                be determined by the County through subdivision or
                       planning permit approval, as applicable.
Minimum density        No minimum        No minimum         11 units per acre
                                                            (6)
                       1 unit per 2.5    4 units per acre
                       acres(1);         (1); accessory     20 units per acre;
                       accessory         dwellings as       accessory dwellings
                       dwellings as      allowed by         as allowed by
Maximum density(5)     allowed by        Chapter 84.01      Chapter 84.01
                       Chapter 84.01     (Accessory         (Accessory
                       (Accessory        Structures and     Structures and
                       Structures and    Uses)              Uses)
                       Uses)
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            25 ft.            25 ft.(2)          25 ft.(2)
                       Local street - 15 Local street - 15  Local street - 15
   Side - Street sidft.; Collector or ft.; Collector or  ft.; Collector or
                       wider - 25 ft.    wider - 25 ft.     wider - 25 ft.
                       Lot 75 wide or
   Side - Interior  less - 5 ft. on   5 ft. on one side, 5 ft. on one side,
(each)                 one side, 10 ft.  10 ft. on other    10 ft. on other
                       on other; Other
                       lots - 15 ft.
   Rear             15 ft.            15 ft.             15 ft.
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
                                         Lot less than
                                         20,000 sq. ft -
                                         Entire building
   Maximum coverage 20 percent        envelope(3); Lot   60 percent
                                         of 20,000 sq. ft.
                                         or larger - 40
                                         percent(4)
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.            35 ft.             45 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Map suffix may modify.
(2)   A Final Map or Parcel Map may establish front yard setbacks of no less
than 22 feet, provided that the average setback of all parcels in the
subdivision is 25 feet.
(3)   Setback, Building Code, and Composite Development Plan requirements still
apply.
(4)   The maximum lot coverage allowed in
Chapter 82.06,
Table 82-21A will prevail for allowed institutional land uses.
(5)   The maximum density may be greater when modified by Chapter 83.03
(Affordable Housing Incentives - Density Bonus).
(6)   If a parcel is adjacent to a lower density Land Use Zoning District and
is not required to connect to sewer, property owners can subdivide/develop
below the minimum density.
 
Table 82-9B
Residential Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature RL Rural Living RS Single Residential RM Multiple
                                                          Residential
Table 82-9B
Residential Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    RL Rural Living RS Single           RM Multiple
                                       Residential         Residential
                       Housing density. The actual number of units allowed
Density                will be determined by the County through subdivision or
                       planning permit approval, as applicable.
Minimum density        No minimum      No minimum          5 units per acre(5)
                       1 unit per 2.5  4 units per acre
                       acres(1);       (1); accessory      20 units per acre;
                       accessory       dwellings as        accessory dwellings
                       dwellings as    allowed by          as allowed by
Maximum density(4)     allowed by      Chapter 84.01       Chapter 84.01
                       Chapter 84.01   (Accessory          (Accessory
                       (Accessory      Structures and      Structures and
                       Structures and  Uses)               Uses)
                       Uses)
                       Minimum setbacks required. See Chapters 83.02 for
Setbacks               exceptions, reductions, and encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
                                       Lot less than       Lot less than
                                       14,000 sq. ft. = 15 14,000 sq. ft. = 15
   Front            25 ft.          ft.; lots 14,000    ft.; lots 14,000
                                       sq. ft. or larger = sq. ft. or larger =
                                       25 ft.              25 ft.
   Side - Street sid25 ft.          15 ft.              15 ft.
   Side - Interior                  20 percent of lot   20 percent of lot
(each)                 20 ft.          width, need not     width, need not
                                       exceed 15 ft.(2)    exceed 15 ft.(2)
   Rear             20 ft.          15 ft.              15 ft.
   Accessory        See
structures             Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses)
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage 20 percent      40 percent(3)       60 percent
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.          35 ft.              45 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Map suffix may modify.
(2)   The side yard setback standards in the Fire Safety Overlay (
Chapter 82.13) shall prevail.
(3)   The maximum lot coverage allowed in
Chapter 82.06,
Table 82-21B will prevail for allowed institutional land uses.
(4)   The maximum density may be greater when modified by
Chapter 83.03 (Affordable Housing Incentives - Density Bonus).
(5)   If a parcel is adjacent to a lower density Land Use Zoning District and
is not required to connect to sewer, property owners can subdivide/develop
below the minimum density.
 
Table 82-9C
Residential Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature RL Rural Living RS Single Residential RM Multiple
                                                          Residential
Table 82-9C
Residential Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    RL Rural Living  RS Single           RM Multiple
                                        Residential         Residential
                       Housing density. The actual number of units allowed will
Density                be determined by the County through subdivision or
                       planning permit approval, as applicable.
Minimum density        No minimum       No minimum          5 or 11 units per
                                                            acre(8)(9)
                       1 unit per 2.5   4 units per acre
                       acres(1);        (1); accessory      20 units per acre;
                       accessory        dwellings as        accessory dwellings
                       dwellings as     allowed by          as allowed by
Maximum density(7)     allowed by       Chapter 84.01       Chapter 84.01
                       Chapter 84.01    (Accessory          (Accessory
                       (Accessory       Structures and      Structures and
                       Structures and   Uses)               Uses)
                       Uses)
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            25 ft.           25 ft.(2)           25 ft.(2)
                                        Local street - 15   Local street - 15
   Side - Street sid25 ft.           ft.(3); Collector   ft.; Collector or
                                        or wider - 25 ft.   wider - 25 ft.
                       Lot 75 wide or
   Side - Interior  less - 5 ft. on  5 ft. on one side,  5 ft. on one side,
(each)                 one side, 10 ft. 10 ft. on other(4)  10 ft. on other
                       on other; Other
                       lots - 15 ft.
   Rear             15 ft.           15 ft.              15 ft.
   Accessory        See
structures             Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses)
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
                                        Lot less than
                                        20,000 sq. ft. -
                                        Entire building
   Maximum coverage 20 percent       envelope(5) Lot of  60 percent
                                        20,000 sq. ft. or
                                        larger - 40 percent
                                        (6)
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.           35 ft.              45 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Map suffix may modify.
(2)   A Final Map or Parcel Map may establish front yard setbacks of no less
than 22 feet, provided that the average setback of all parcels in the
subdivision is 25 feet.
(3)   This setback shall be 25 feet in the Phelan-Pinon Hills Community Plan
area.
(4)   This setback shall be 10 feet on both sides in the Phelan-Pinon Hills
Community Plan area.
(5)   Setback, Building Code, and Composite Development Plan requirements still
apply.
(6)   The maximum lot coverage allowed in
Chapter 82.06, Table 82-21C will prevail for allowed institutional land uses.
(7)   The maximum density may be greater when modified by
Chapter 83.03 (Affordable Housing Incentives - Density Bonus).
(8)   In areas served by piped water, sewer and paved roads, the minimum
density shall be 11 units per acre.
(9)   If a parcel is adjacent to a lower density Land Use Zoning District and
is not required to connect to sewer, property owners can subdivide/develop
below the minimum density.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4121, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4393, passed - -2020;
Am. Ord. 4415, passed - - 2021)
CHAPTER 82.05: COMMERCIAL LAND USE ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
   
82.05.010   Purpose.
   
82.05.020   Purposes and Location of the Commercial Land Use Zoning Districts.
   
82.05.030   Minimum Area for Designation.
   
82.05.040   Commercial Land Use Zoning District Allowed Uses and Permit
Requirements.
   
82.05.050   Commercial Land Use Zoning District Subdivision Standards.
   
82.05.060   Commercial Land Use Zoning District Site Planning and Building
Standards.
§ 82.05.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter lists the land uses that may be allowed within the commercial
land use zoning districts established by the General Plan and listed in §
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts), determines the type of
planning permit/approval required for each use, and provides basic standards
for site layout and building size.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.05.020 Purposes and Location of the Commercial Land Use Zoning Districts.
   The purposes of the individual commercial land use zoning districts and the
locations where they are applied are as specified in the General Plan and as
described in
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.05.030 Minimum Area for Designation.
   The commercial land use zoning districts shall be applied through the
General Plan amendment process (
Chapter 86.12) only to sites with the minimum areas indicated in
Table 82-10.
Table 82-10
Minimum Area for Commercial Land Use Zoning District Designation
Land Use Zoning District Minimum Area for Designation
Table 82-10
Minimum Area for Commercial Land Use Zoning District Designation
Land Use Zoning District     Minimum Area for Designation
CR (Rural Commercial)        2.5 acres
CN (Neighborhood Commercial) 1 acre
CO (Office Commercial)       5 acres
CG (General Commercial)      5 acres
CS (Service Commercial)      5 acres
CH (Highway Commercial)      5 acres
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.05.040 Commercial Land Use Zoning District Allowed Uses and Permit
Requirements.
   (a)   General Permit Requirements.  
Table 82-11 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Development Code in
each commercial land use zoning district established by
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, and Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays), in
compliance with §
82.01.020 (Allowed Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements).
   (b)   Requirements for Certain Specific Land Uses. Where the last column in
Table 82-11 (Specific Use Regulations) includes a Section number, the
referenced Section may affect whether the use requires Land Use Review, or
Conditional Use Permit or Minor Use Permit, or other County approval, and/or
may establish other requirements and standards applicable to the use.
Table 82-11
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial Land Use Zoning
Districts
Land Use                   Permit Required by District
See Division 10                                        Specific Use Regulations
(Definitions) for land use CR CN CO CG CS CH
definitions
Table 82-11
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial Land Use Zoning
Districts
Land Use                  Permit Required by District              Specific
See Division 10                                                    Use
(Definitions) for land    CR     CN   CO   CG      CS      CH      Regulations
use definitions
Agricultural, Resource & Open Space Uses
Agriculture support       P(2)   —  —  P(1, 2) P(2)    —
services
Industry, Manufacturing & Processing, Wholesaling
Construction contractor   M/C    —  —  —     M/C     —
storage yard
Firewood contractor       P(2)   —  —  —     P(2)    —     84.09
Manufacturing Operations  M/C(3  —  —  —     P(2)    —
I                         )
Motor vehicle storage/    CUP    —  —  —     CUP     CUP
Impound facility
Recycling facilities -    SUP    SUP  SUP  SUP     SUP     SUP     84.19
Small collection facility
Recycling facilities -    CUP    —  CUP  CUP     CUP     CUP     84.19
Large collection facility
Recycling facilities -    CUP    —  —  CUP     CUP     —     84.19
Light processing facility
Recycling facilities,
reverse vending machine   A      A    A    A       A       A       84.19
(accessory only)
Salvage operations -      M/C(4
within enclosed           )      —  —  —     M/C     —
structures
Storage - Personal        M/C    —  —  M/C     P(2)    —
storage (mini-storage)
Storage - Recreational    CUP    —  —  —     CUP     CUP
vehicles
Storage Warehouse, Indoor M/C    —  —  —     —     —
Storage
Wholesaling and           M/C(4  —  —  P(1,2)  P(2)    —
distribution              )
Recreation, Education & Public Assembly
Adult business            —    —  —  ABP     —     —     84.02
Commercial entertainment  P(2)   P(2) —  P(2)    P(2)    P(2)
- Indoor
Commercial entertainment  P(2)   —  —  P(2)    P(2)    P(2)
- Outdoor
Conference/convention     M/C    —  M/C  M/C     M/C     M/C
facility(4, 5)
Equestrian facility       M/C    —  M/C  M/C     M/C     M/C
Fitness/health facility   P(2)   P(2) —  P(2)    P(2)    P(2)
(5)
Golf course               M/C    —  —  —     M/C     M/C
Library, museum, art
gallery, outdoor exhibit  M/C    —  —  M/C     M/C     M/C
(5)
Meeting facility, public  CUP    CUP  CUP  CUP     CUP     CUP
or private(5)
Park, playground          M/C    —  —  —     —     —
Places of worship         CUP    CUP  CUP  CUP     CUP     CUP
Recreational vehicle park M/C    —  —  —     M/C     M/C
Rural sports and          CUP    —  —  —     CUP     CUP
recreation
School - College or       M/C    —  M/C  M/C     M/C     M/C
university(5)
School - Private(5)       M/C    —  M/C  M/C     M/C     M/C
School - Specialized      M/C    —  M/C  M/C     M/C     M/C
education/training(5)
Sports or entertainment   CUP    —  —  CUP     CUP     CUP
assembly
Theater(5)                M/C    —  —  M/C     M/C     M/C
Residential(10)
Accessory dwelling
(caretakers residence,    P(6)   P(6) P(6) P(6)    P(6)    P(6)    84.01
etc.)
Accessory use or
structure - Residential   A      P(6, P(6, P(6, 7) P(6, 7) P(6, 7) 84.01
(conforming and non-             7)   7)
conforming uses)
Group residential
(sorority, fraternity,       M  �  �   M/   M/   M/C
boarding house, private                    C   
residential club, etc.)
Guest housing             P(7)   —  —  —     —     —     84.01
Live/work unit            M/C    M/C  M/C  M/C     M/C     M/C
Mobile home park/
manufactured home land-   CUP    —  —  —     —     —     84.14
lease community
Multiple dwelling, up to
19 units, attached or     A      —  —  —     —     —     84.16
detached
Multiple dwelling, 20 or  CUP    —  —  —     —     —     84.16
more units
Parolee and/or               C  �  �   CU   CU   CUP
probationer home
Residential use only as
part of a mixed use       PD     —  PD   PD      PD      PD      84.16
project
Accessory dwelling unit   A      —  —  —     —     —     84.01
Single dwelling           A      —  —  —     —     —
Retail
Auto and vehicle sales    P(2)   —  —  P(2)    P(2)    —
and rental
Bar, tavern               P(2)   M/C  —  P(2)    P(2)    —
Building and landscape    M/C    —  —  M/C     M/C     —
materials sales - Indoor
Building and landscape    M/C    —  —  M/C     M/C     —
materials sales - Outdoor
Construction and heavy
equipment sales and       M/C    —  —  —     M/C     —
rental
Convenience store         P(2)   P(2) P(2) P(2)    P(2)    P(2) 
Fuel dealer (propane for  M/C    —  —  —     M/C     —
home and farm use, etc.)
General retail            M/C    —  —  P(2)    P(2)    —
Groceries, specialty      M/C    M/C  —  P(2)    P(2)    —
foods
Manufactured home, boat,  P(2)   —  —  M/C     M/C     —
or RV sales
Night club                P(2)   M/C  —  M/C     P(2)    —
Restaurant, café, coffee P(2)   P(2) P(2) P(2)    P(2)    P(2)
shop
Service station           M/C    M/C  —  M/C     M/C     M/C
Second hand stores,       P      —  —  P       P       —
pawnshops
Shopping center           M/C    M/C  —  M/C     M/C     M/C
Swap meet, outdoor        M/C    —  —  M/C     M/C     —
market, auction yard
Warehouse retail          P(2)   —  —  P(2)    P(2)    —
Services - Business & Professional
Medical services -        —    —  CUP  —     —     —
Hospital                              ( 5)
Medical services -        —    —  CUP  —     —     —
Rehabilitation center
Office - Accessory        P(6)   P(6) P(6) P(6)    P(6)    P(6)
Professional services     P(2)   P(2) P    P(2)    P(2)    —
Services - General
Bail bond service within
1 mile of correctional    P      —  P    P       P       P
institution
Cemetery including pet    CUP    CUP  CUP  CUP     CUP     CUP     84.06
cemeteries
Child care - Day care     M/C    M/C  M/C  M/C     M/C     —
center
Convenience and support   P(2)   P(2) —  P(2)    P(2)    P(2)
services
Emergency shelter         CUP    CUP  CUP  A       A       CUP        84.33
Equipment rental          P(2)   —  —  P(2)    P(2)    —
Home occupation           SUP    SUP  SUP  SUP     SUP     SUP     84.12
Kennel or cattery - 2.5-  M/C/ S —  —  —     M/C/ S  —     84.04
acre minimum lot area
Licensed Residential Care
Facility of 6 or fewer    M/C    —  —  M/C     M/C     M/C     84.23
persons
Licensed Residential Care
Facility of 7 or more     M/C    —  —  M/C     M/C     M/C     84.23
persons
Lodging - Bed and         SUP    —  —  —     —     —     84.05
breakfast inn (B&B)
Lodging - Hotel or motel  P(2)   P(2, —  P(2, 8) P(2, 8) P(2)
- 20 or fewer guest rooms        8)
Lodging - Hotel or motel
- More than 20 guest      M/C    —  —  M/C     M/C     M/C
rooms
Personal services         P(2)   P(2) —  P(2)    P(2)    P(2)
Public safety facility    M/C    M/C  —  —     M/C     M/C
Unlicensed Residential
Care Facility of 6 or     RCP    —  —  RCP     RCP     RCP     84.32
fewer persons
Unlicensed Residential
Care Facility of 7 or     M/C    —  —  M/C     M/C     M/C
more persons
Vehicle services - Major  M/C    —  —  —     M/C     M/C
repair/body work
Vehicle services - Minor  P(2)   —  —  P(2)    P(2)    P(2)
maintenance/repair
Transportation, Communications & Infrastructure
Ambulance, taxi, or
limousine dispatch        P(2)   —  —  —     P(2)    P(2)
facility
Broadcasting antennae and M/C    —  —  M/C     M/C     —
towers
Broadcasting studio       P(2)   —  —  P(2)    P(2)    —
Parking lots and          P(6)   P(6) P(6) P(6)    P(6)    P(6)
structures, accessory
Pipelines, transmission
lines, and control        (9)    (9)  (9)  (9)     (9)     (9)
stations(9)
Renewable Energy          CUP    CUP  CUP  CUP     CUP     CUP     84.29
Generation Facilities
Sewage treatment and      CUP    —  —  —     —     CUP
disposal facility
Transportation facility   M/C    M/C  M/C  M/C     M/C     M/C
Truck Stop                M/C    —  —  —     M/C     M/C
Truck Terminal            —    —  —  —     M/C     —
Utility facility          CUP    —  —  —     CUP     —
Wind energy system,       S      S    S    S       S       S       84.26
accessory
Wireless
telecommunications        S      S    S    S       S       S       84.27
facility
Other
Accessory structures and  P      P    P    P       P       P          84.01
uses
Off-Site Signs            —    —  —  CUP     —     CUP     83.13.060
Off-Site Signs (Freeway   —    —  —  CUP     —     CUP     83.13.060
Oriented)
Temporary special events  TSP    TSP  TSP  TSP     TSP     TSP     84.25
Temporary uses and        TUP    TUP  TUP  TUP     TUP     TUP     84.25
activities
 
Key
Key
    Allowed use (no planning permit         Planned Development Permit required
A   required)                           PD  (
                                            Chapter 85.10)
ABP Adult Business Regulatory Permit    SUP Special Use Permit required (
                                            Chapter 85.14)
    Permitted Use; Site Plan Permit         Permit requirement set by Specific
P   required (                          S   Use Regulations (Division 4)
    Chapter 85.08)
    Minor Use Permit required; unless a
M/C Conditional Use Permit required in      Temporary Special Events Permit
   compliance with §                  TSP required (
    85.06.050 (Projects That Do Not         Chapter 85.16)
    Qualify for a Minor Use Permit)
    Conditional Use Permit required (       Unlicensed Residential Care
CUP Chapter 85.06)                      RCP Facilities Permit (
                                            Chapter 85.20 )
MUP Minor Use Permit required (         TUP Temporary Use Permit required (
    Chapter 85.06)                          Chapter 85.15)
                                        — Use not allowed
 
Notes:
(1)   Not allowed in the Phelan planning area.
(2)   CUP required if maximum building coverage exceeds 10,000 sq. ft., the use
will have more than 20 employees per shift, or if not exempt from CEQA; may
qualify for a MUP in compliance with §
85.06.020 (Applicability).
(3)   The use shall be allowed in Lucerne Valley with a Site Plan Permit.
(4)   The use is allowed in Lucerne Valley with a MUP.
(5)   A MUP shall not be allowed if the use requires more than 200 parking spaces.
(6)   Use allowed as an accessory use only, on the same site as a retail, service,
or industrial use allowed by this table.
(7)   Use allowed as an accessory use only, on the same site as a residential use
allowed by this table.
(8)   A CUP shall be required for this use in the Phelan planning area.
(9)   These uses are regulated and approved by the Public Utilities Commission.
See alternate review procedures in §
85.02.050.
(10)   Supportive housing or transitional housing that is provided in single-,
two-, or multi-family dwelling units, group residential, parolee-probationer home,
residential care facilities, or boarding house uses shall be permitted,
conditionally permitted or prohibited in the same manner as the other single-,
two- or multi-family dwelling units, group residential, parolee-probationer home,
residential care facilities, or boarding house uses under this Code.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010;
Am. Ord. 4162, passed --2012; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4251,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4304, passed - -2016; Ord. 4331, passed--2017; Am.
Ord. 4341, passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4383, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4393, passed
--2020; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
§ 82.05.050 Commercial Land Use Zoning District Subdivision Standards.
   (a)   Each subdivision shall comply with the minimum parcel size
requirements shown in Tables
82-12A,
82-12B and
82-12C for the applicable land use zoning district.
   (b)   The minimum parcel size requirements for a specific subdivision are
determined by the review authority as part of subdivision approval. The review
authority may require one or more parcels within a specific subdivision to be
larger than the minimums required by these tables based on potential
environmental impacts, the physical characteristics of the site or surrounding
parcels, and/or other factors.
   (c)   See also the standards in §
83.02.050 (Parcel Area Measurements and Exceptions).
Table 82-12A
Commercial Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Valley Region
Land Use Zoning Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        (1)               Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                              Depth Ratio
Table 82-12A
Commercial Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Valley Region
Land Use Zoning Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        (1)               Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                              Depth Ratio
CR              2.5               120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
CN              1 acre            120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
CO              5 acres           120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
CG              5 acres           120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
CS              5 acres           60 ft.        100 ft.       1:3
CH              5 acres           120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
Notes:
(1)   Minimum lot area may be less than specified if the subdivision
application is filed concurrently with a Planned Development, Conditional Use
Permit or Minor Use Permit application.
 
Table 82-12B
Commercial Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Mountain Region
Land Use Zoning Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        (1)               Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                              Depth Ratio
Table 82-12B
Commercial Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Mountain Region
Land Use Zoning Minimum Lot Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Area (1)    Minimum Width    Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                           Depth Ratio
                            60 ft. for
CR              2.5         interior lot; 70 100 ft.       1:3
                            ft. for corner
                            lot
                            60 ft. for
CN              1 acre      interior lot; 70 100 ft.       1:3
                            ft. for corner
                            lot
                            60 ft. for
CO              5 acres     interior lot; 70 100 ft.       1:3
                            ft. for corner
                            lot
                            60 ft. for
CG              5 acres     interior lot; 70 100 ft.       1:3
                            ft. for corner
                            lot
                            60 ft. for
CS              5 acres     interior lot; 70 100 ft.       1:3
                            ft. for corner
                            lot
                            60 ft. for
CH              5 acres     interior lot; 70 100 ft.       1:3
                            ft. for corner
                            lot
Notes:
(1)   Minimum lot area may be less than specified if the subdivision
application is filed concurrently with a Planned Development, Conditional
Use Permit or Minor Use Permit application.
 
Table 82-12C
Commercial Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Desert Region
Land Use Zoning Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        (1)               Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                              Depth Ratio
Table 82-12C
Commercial Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Desert Region
Land Use Zoning Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        (1)               Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                              Depth Ratio
CR              2.5               120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
CN              1 acre            120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
CO              5 acres           120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
CG              5 acres           120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
CS              5 acres           120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
CH              5 acres           120 ft.       120 ft.       1:3
Notes:
(1)   Minimum lot area may be less than specified if the subdivision
application is filed concurrently with a Planned Development, Conditional Use
Permit or Minor Use Permit application.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.05.060 Commercial Land Use Zoning District Site Planning and Building
Standards.
   Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land
uses and structures shall be designed, constructed, and established in
compliance with the requirements in Tables
82-13A and
B,
8-14A and
B,
82-15A and
B, in addition to the applicable standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and
loading, etc.) in
Division 3 (Countywide Development Standards) and Division 4 (Standards for
Specific Land Uses and Activities).
Table 82-13A
CR, CN, and CO Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature CR Rural Commercial CN Neighborhood CO Office Commercial
                                        Commercial
Table 82-13A
CR, CN, and CO Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    CR Rural          CN Neighborhood CO Office
                       Commercial        Commercial      Commercial
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                       applicable.
                       2 units per acre;
                       4 units per acre
                       in mobile home
                       park/manufactured Accessory       Accessory dwellings
                       home land-lease   dwellings as    as allowed by
                       community;        allowed by      Chapter 84.01
   Maximum density  accessory         Chapter 84.01   (Accessory
                       dwellings as      (Accessory      Structures and
                       allowed by        Structures and  Uses)
                       Chapter 84.01     Uses)
                       (Accessory
                       Structures and
                       Uses)
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.05 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            25 ft.            25 ft.          25 ft.
   Side - Street sid25 ft.            25 ft.          15 ft.
   Side - Interior  10 ft.(1)         10 ft.(1)       10 ft.(1)
(each)
   Rear             10 ft.(2)         10 ft.(2)       10 ft.(2)
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Maximum allowed floor area ratio (FAR).
   Maximum FAR      .3:1              .3:1            .75:1
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage 80 percent        80 percent      80 percent
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit
                       exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.            35 ft.          60 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
                       See
Infrastructure         Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards)
                       .
Landscaping            See
                       Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards)
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Only one side yard setback is required to provide for emergency
access. If the adjacent lot is not designated commercial or industrial, a
side yard shall be required along that side of the lot.
(2)   A rear yard setback is required only when the adjacent property is not
designated commercial or industrial.
 
Table 82-13B
CG, CS, AND CH Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature CG General CS Service Commercial CH Highway Commercial
                    Commercial
Table 82-13B
CG, CS, AND CH Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    CG General CS Service Commercial CH Highway Commercial
                       Commercial
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                       applicable.
   Maximum density  Accessory dwellings as allowed by
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            25 ft.     25 ft.                25 ft.
   Side - Street sid15 ft.     15 ft.                15 ft.
   Side - Interior  10 ft.(1)  10 ft.(1)             10 ft.(1)
(each)
   Rear             10 ft.(2)  10 ft.(2)             10 ft.(2)
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Maximum allowed floor area ratio (FAR).
   Maximum FAR      .5:1       .5:1                  .5:10
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage 80 percent 80 percent            80 percent
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   60 ft.     60 ft.                60 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping            See
                       Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Only one side yard setback is required to provide for emergency access.
If the adjacent lot is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard
shall be required along that side of the lot.
(2)   A rear yard setback is required only when the adjacent property is not
designated commercial or industrial.
 
Table 82-14A
CR, CN, AND CO Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature CR Rural Commercial CN Neighborhood CO Office Commercial
                                        Commercial
Table 82-14A
CR, CN, AND CO Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    CR Rural          CN Neighborhood CO Office
                       Commercial        Commercial      Commercial
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                       applicable.
                       2 units per acre;
                       4 units per acre
                       in mobile home
                       park/manufactured Accessory       Accessory dwellings
                       home land-lease   dwellings as    as allowed by
                       community;        allowed by      Chapter 84.01
   Maximum density  accessory         Chapter 84.01   (Accessory
                       dwellings as      (Accessory      Structures and
                       allowed by        Structures and  Uses)
                       Chapter 84.01     Uses)
                       (Accessory
                       Structures and
                       Uses)
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            15 ft.            15 ft.          15 ft.
   Side - Street sid15 ft.            15 ft.          15 ft.
   Side - Interior  10 ft.(1)         10 ft.(1)       10 ft.(1)
(each)
   Rear             10 ft.(2)         10 ft.(2)       10 ft.(2)
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Maximum allowed floor area ratio (FAR).
   Maximum FAR      .25:1             .25:1           .5:1
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage 80 percent        80 percent      80 percent
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit
                       exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.            35 ft.          35 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping            See
                       Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Only one side yard setback is required to provide for emergency
access. If the adjacent lot is not designated commercial or industrial, a
side yard shall be required along that side of the lot.
(2)   A rear yard setback is required only when the adjacent property is not
designated commercial or industrial.
 
Table 82-14B
CG, CS, AND CH Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature CG General CS Service Commercial CH Highway Commercial
                    Commercial
Table 82-14B
CG, CS, AND CH Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    CG General CS Service Commercial CH Highway Commercial
                       Commercial
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                       applicable.
   Maximum density  Accessory dwellings as allowed by
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            15 ft.     15 ft.                15 ft.
   Side - Street sid15 ft.     15 ft.                15 ft.
   Side - Interior  10 ft.(1)  10 ft.(1)             10 ft.(1)
(each)
   Rear             10 ft.(2)  10 ft.(2)             10 ft.(2)
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Maximum allowed floor area ratio (FAR).
   Maximum FAR      .5:1       .4:1                  .3:1
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage 80 percent 80 percent            80 percent
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.     35 ft.                35 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping            See
                       Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Only one side yard setback is required to provide for emergency access.
If the adjacent lot is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard
shall be required along that side of the lot.
(2)   A rear yard setback is required only when the adjacent property is not
designated commercial or industrial.
 
Table 82-15A
CR, CN, AND CO Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature CR Rural Commercial CN Neighborhood CO Office Commercial
                                        Commercial
Table 82-15A
CR, CN, AND CO Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    CR Rural          CN Neighborhood CO Office
                       Commercial        Commercial      Commercial
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                       applicable.
                       2 units per acre;
                       4 units per acre
                       in mobile home
                       park/manufactured Accessory       Accessory dwellings
                       home land-lease   dwellings as    as allowed by
                       community;        allowed by      Chapter 84.01
   Maximum density  Accessory         Chapter 84.01   (Accessory
                       dwellings as      (Accessory      Structures and
                       allowed by        Structures and  Uses)
                       Chapter 84.01     Uses)
                       (Accessory
                       Structures and
                       Uses)
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            25 ft.            25 ft.          25 ft.
   Side - Street sid25 ft.            25 ft.          25 ft.
   Side - Interior  10 ft.(1)         10 ft.(1)       10 ft.(1)
(each)
   Rear             10 ft.(2)         10 ft.(2)       10 ft.(2)
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Maximum allowed floor area ratio (FAR).
   Maximum FAR      .3:1              .25:1           .5:1
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage 80 percent        80 percent      80 percent
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit
                       exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.            35 ft.          35 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping            See
                       Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Only one side yard setback is required to provide for emergency
access. If the adjacent lot is not designated commercial or industrial, a
side yard shall be required along that side of the lot.
(2)   A rear yard setback is required only when the adjacent property is not
designated commercial or industrial.
 
Table 82-15B
CG, CS, AND CH Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature CG General CS Service Commercial CH Highway Commercial
                    Commercial
Table 82-15B
CG, CS, AND CH Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    CG General CS Service Commercial CH Highway Commercial
                       Commercial
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                       applicable.
   Maximum density  Accessory dwellings as allowed by
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            25 ft.     25 ft.                25 ft.
   Side - Street sid25 ft.     25 ft.                25 ft.
   Side - Interior  10 ft.(1)  10 ft.(1)             10 ft.(1)
(each)
   Rear             10 ft.(2)  10 ft.(2)             10 ft.(2)
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Maximum allowed floor area ratio (FAR).
   Maximum FAR      .5:1       .3:1                  .3:1
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces s.
   Maximum coverage 80 percent 80 percent            80 percent
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   35 ft.     35 ft.                60 ft.(3)
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping            See
                       Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Only one side yard setback is required to provide for emergency access.
If the adjacent lot is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard
shall be required along that side of the lot.
(2)   A rear yard setback is required only when the adjacent property is not
designated commercial or industrial.
(3)   In the Phelan/Pinon Hills Community Plan area, the maximum height is 35
ft.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4085,
passed - -2009)
CHAPTER 82.06: INDUSTRIAL AND SPECIAL PURPOSE LAND USE ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
   
82.06.010   Purpose.
   
82.06.020   Purposes and Location of the Industrial and Special Purpose Land
Use Zoning Districts.
   
82.06.030   Minimum Area for Designation.
   
82.06.040   Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Allowed
Uses and Permit Requirements.
   
82.06.050   Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Subdivision
Standards.
   
82.06.060   Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Site
Planning and Building Standards.
   
82.06.070   Adopted Planned Development Applications.
§ 82.06.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter lists the land uses that may be allowed within the industrial
and special purpose land use zoning districts established by the General Plan
and listed in
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays),
determines the type of planning permit/approval required for each use, and
provides basic standards for site layout and building size.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.06.020 Purposes and Location of the Industrial and Special Purpose Land
Use Zoning Districts.
   The purposes of the individual Industrial and special purpose land use
zoning districts and the locations where they are applied are as specified in
the General Plan and as described in
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.06.030 Minimum Area for Designation.
   The Industrial and special purpose land use zoning districts shall be
applied through the General Plan amendment process (
Chapter 86.12) only to sites with the minimum areas indicated in
Table 82-16.
Table 82-16
Minimum Area for Industrial and Special Use Land Use Zoning District
Designation
Land Use Zoning District Minimum Area for Designation
Table 82-16
Minimum Area for Industrial and Special Use Land Use Zoning District
Designation
Land Use Zoning District  Minimum Area for Designation
IC (Community Industrial) 5 acres
IR (Regional Industrial)  30 acres
IN (Institutional)        None required
SD (Special Development)  5 acres
SP (Specific Plan)        As specified by General Plan
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4085,
passed - -2009)
§ 82.06.040 Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Allowed
Uses and Permit Requirements.
   (a)   General Permit Requirements.  
Table 82-17 identifies the uses of land allowed by this Development Code in
each Industrial and special purpose land use zoning district established by
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, Land Use Zoning Districts, Overlays), in
compliance with §
82.02.030 (Allowed Land Uses and Planning Permit Requirements).
   (b)   Requirements for Certain Specific Land Uses. Where the last column in
Table 82-17 (Specific Use Regulations) includes a Section number, the
referenced Section may affect whether the use requires Site Plan Permit, or
Conditional Use Permit or Minor Use Permit, Planned Development Permit, or
other County approval, and/or may establish other requirements and standards
applicable to the use.
   (c)   Allowed Land Uses in the SD Land Use Zoning District. A special
development may allow intermixing of residential, commercial and industrial
uses, provided that the review authority determines that there is a specific
need for the special development standards. The Special Development Land Use
Zoning District may have a suffix to indicate the focus of a particular SD
zone. A “RES” suffix indicates that the focus is on residential Planned
Development projects. A “COM” suffix indicates that the focus is on commercial
Planned Development projects. An “IND” suffix indicates that the focus is on
industrial Planned Development projects. However, all can still have mixed uses
within these zones.
Table 82-17
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Industrial and Special Purpose
Land Use Zoning Districts
LAND USE               PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT
See Division 10                                                  Specific Use
(Definitions) for land IC IR IN SD-RES (1) SD-COM (1) SD-IND (1) Regulations
use definitions
Table 82-17
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Industrial and Special Purpose
Land Use Zoning Districts
LAND USE                  PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT               Specific
See Division 10                                 SD-   SD-COM SD-IND Use
(Definitions) for land    IC        IR    IN    RES   (1)    (1)    Regulations
use definitions                                 (1)
Agricultural, Resource & Open Space Uses
Agriculture support       P(2)      P(2)  —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
services
Animal keeping            —       —   —   S     —    —    84.04
Community gardens         —       —   —   A     —    —     
Crop production,
horticulture, orchard,    —       —   —   A     —    —     
vineyard
Industrial hemp
cultivation - Small scale —       —   —   P     —    —    84.35
(minimum 1-acre lot size)
Industrial hemp
cultivation - Large scale —       —   —   CUP   —    —    84.35
(minimum 5-acre lot size)
Natural resources         CUP       CUP   —   CUP   CUP    CUP     
development (mining)
Nature preserve           —       —   P(2)  P(2)  P(2)   P(2)    
(accessory uses)
Industry, Manufacturing & Processing, Wholesaling
Adult business            ABP       —   —   —   —    —    84.02
Construction contractor   M/C       P(2)  —   M/C   M/C(3) M/C     
storage yard
Hazardous waste operation —       CUP   —   —   —    —     
Industrial hemp - Class I
manufacturing (minimum 5- M/C       M/C   —   M/C   M/C    M/C    84.35
acre lot size)
Firewood contractor       P         P     —   —   —    M/C    84.09
Manufacturing operations  P(2)      P(2)  —   CUP   CUP(4) CUP(4)  
I                                               (4)
Manufacturing operations  — (5),  M/C   —   —   —    CUP(4)  
II                        (6)
Motor vehicle storage/    M/C       M/C   —   —   —    M/C     
Impound facility
Recycling facilities -    SUP       SUP   —   —   MUP    MUP    84.19
Small collection facility
Recycling facilities -    CUP       CUP   —   —   CUP(3) CUP    84.19
Large collection facility
Recycling facilities -    CUP       CUP   —   —   CUP(3) CUP    84.19
Light processing facility
Recycling facilities -    CUP       CUP   —   —   —    CUP    84.19
Heavy processing facility
Recycling facilities,
reverse vending machines  A         A     —   A     A      A      84.19
(accessory only)
Salvage operations -
Within an enclosed        CUP       M/C   —   —   CUP    M/C     
structure
Salvage operations -      —       CUP   —   —   —    —     
General
Storage - Personal        P(2)      P(2)  —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
storage (mini-storage)
Storage - Recreational    M/C       M/C   —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
vehicles
Storage - Warehouse,      M/C       M/C   —   —   M/C    M/C     
indoor storage
Wholesaling and           M/C       M/C   —   —   M/C    M/C     
distribution
Recreation, Education & Public Assembly
Campgrounds               —       —   —   CUP   —    —     
Commercial entertainment  M/C       —   —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
- Indoor
Conference/convention     —       —   —   CUP   CUP(4) CUP(4)  
facility                                        (4)
Equestrian facility       —       —   —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Fitness/health facility   P(2)      P(2)  —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Golf course               —       —   —   CUP   CUP(4) CUP(4)  
                                                (4)
Library, museum, art      —       —   —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
gallery, outdoor exhibit
Meeting facility, public  CUP       —   —   CUP   CUP    CUP     
or private
Park, playground          —       —   P     P     P      P       
Places of worship         CUP       CUP   CUP   CUP   CUP    CUP     
Rural sports and          —       —   —   CUP   CUP    CUP     
recreation
School - College or       M/C       M/C   M/C   M/C   M/C    M/C     
university
School - Private          M/C       M/C   M/C   M/C   M/C    M/C     
School - Specialized      M/C       M/C   M/C   M/C   M/C    M/C     
education/training
Residential(14)
Accessory dwelling (labor P(7)      P(7)  P(7)  P(7)  P(7)   P(7)   84.01
quarters, etc.)
Accessory structures and
uses - Residential        P(7,8)    P     P     P(7)  P(7)   P(7)   84.01
(conforming and non-                (7,8) (7,8)
conforming uses)
Group residential
(sorority, fraternity,    —       —   —   M/C   M/C    —     
boarding house, private
residential club, etc.)
Guest housing             —       —   —   P(8)  —    —    84.01
Live/work unit            M/C       —   —   M/C   M/C    —     
Mobile home park/
manufactured home land-   —       —   —   CUP   CUP    —     
lease community
Multiple residential use  —       —   —   PD    PD     PD      
Parolee and/or            —       —   —   CUP   CUP    —     
probationer home
Residential use with
retail, service, or       —       —   —   PD    PD     PD      
industrial use
Accessory dwelling unit   —       —   —   A(15) —    —    84.01
Single dwelling           —       —   —   A     —    —     
Retail
Auto and vehicle sales    P(2)      P(2)  —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
and rental
Bar, tavern               —       —   —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Building and landscape    P(2)      P(2)  —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
materials sales - Indoor
Building and landscape    M/C       M/C   —   —   CUP    CUP     
materials sales - Outdoor
Construction and heavy
equipment sales and       M/C       M/C   —   —   CUP    CUP     
rental
Convenience store         P(2)      P(2)  —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Fuel dealer (propane for  CUP       CUP   —   CUP   CUP    CUP     
home and farm use, etc.)
General retail - 10,000
sf or less, with or       —       —   —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
without residential unit
General retail - More
than 10,000 sf, with or   —       —   —   PD    PD     PD      
without residential unit
Manufactured home or RV   M/C       M/C   —   —   M/C    M/C     
sales
Night club                —       —   —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Restaurant, café, coffee P(2)      P(2)  —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
shop
Second hand stores,       P(2)      —   —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
pawnshops
Service station           P(2)      P(2)  —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Swap meet, outdoor        M/C       M/C   —   —   —    M/C     
market, auction yard
Warehouse retail          P(2)      P(2)  —   —   CUP    CUP     
Services - Business, Financial, Professional
Medical services -        M/C       M/C   M/C   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Hospital(4)
Medical services -        M/C       M/C   M/C   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Rehabilitation center
Office - Accessory        P(8)      P(8)  P(8)  P(8)  P(8)   P(8)    
Professional services     P(2)      —   —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Services - General
Bail bond service within
1 mile of correctional    P         P     P     —   P      P       
institution
Cemetery, including pet   —       —   —   CUP   CUP    CUP    84.06
cemeteries
Correctional institution  —(4)    —(4)CUP   —(4)—(4) —(4)  
Emergency shelter         CUP       —   —   CUP   CUP    CUP    84.33
Equipment rental          P(2)      P(2)  —   —   M/C    M/C     
Home occupation           SUP       SUP   SUP   SUP   SUP    SUP    84.12
Kennel or cattery         M/C       —   —   —   —    M/C    84.04
Licensed residential care
facility of 6 or fewer    M/C       —   —   M/C   M/C    —    84.23
persons
Licensed residential care
facility of 7 or more     M/C       —   —   M/C   M/C    —    84.23
persons
Lodging - Bed and         —       —   —   SUP   SUP(9) —     
breakfast inn (B&B)                             (9)
Lodging - Hotel or motel  —       —   —   M/C   M/C    —     
- 20 or fewer guest rooms
Lodging - Hotel or motel
- More than 20 guest      —       —   —   M/C   M/C    —     
rooms
Personal services         P(2)      —   —   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Public safety facility    M/C       M/C   M/C   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Unlicensed residential
care facility of 6 or     RCP       —   —   RCP   RCP    —    84.32
fewer persons
Unlicensed residential
care facility of 7 or     M/C       —   —   M/C   M/C    —     
more persons
Vehicle services - Major  P(2)      P(2)  —   —   M/C    M/C     
repair/body work                                      (10)
Vehicle services - Minor  P(2)      P(2)  CUP   —   M/C    M/C     
maintenance/repair                        (11 )       (10)
Veterinary clinic, animal M/C       —   —   —   M/C    M/C     
hospital
Transportation, Communications & Infrastructure
Ambulance, taxi, or
limousine dispatch        M/C       M/C   M/C   M/C   M/C    M/C     
facility
Broadcasting antennae and M/C       M/C   M/C   CUP   CUP    CUP     
towers
Parking lots, accessory   P(12)     P(12) P(12) P(12) P(12)  P(12)   
Broadcasting studio       M/C       M/C   M/C   CUP   CUP(4) CUP(4)  
                                                (4)
Communication contractor  M/C       M/C   M/C   M/C   M/C    M/C     
                                                (10)  (10)   (10)
Electrical power          CUP       CUP   CUP   —   —    —     
generation
Parking structures        P(12)     P(12) P(12) M/C   M/C    M/C     
Pipelines, transmission
lines, and control        (13)      (13)  (13)  (13)  (13)   (13)    
stations(13)
Renewable energy          CUP       CUP   CUP   —   —    —    84.29
generation facilities
Sewage treatment and      CUP       CUP   CUP   —   —    —     
disposal facility(6)
Solid waste disposal(6)   CUP       CUP   CUP   —   —    —     
Transportation facility   M/C       M/C   M/C   M/C   M/C    M/C     
Truck stop                M/C       M/C   —   —   —    M/C     
Truck terminal            M/C       M/C   —   —   —    M/C     
Utility facility          CUP       CUP   CUP   CUP   CUP    CUP     
Water treatment plants    —       CUP   CUP   —   CUP    CUP     
and storage tanks
Wind energy system,       S         S     S     S     S      S      84.26
accessory
Wireless
telecommunications        S         S     S     S     S      S      84.27
facility
Other
Accessory structures and  P         P     P     P     P      P      84.01
uses
Temporary special events  TSP       TSP   TSP   TSP   TSP    TSP    84.25
Temporary structures and  TUP       TUP   TUP   TUP   TUP    TUP    84.25
uses
 
Key
Key
     Allowed use (no planning permit       Planned Development Permit required
A    required)                         PD  (
                                           Chapter 85.10)
ABP  Adult Business Regulatory Permit  TUP Temporary Use Permit required (
                                           Chapter 85.15)
     Permitted Use; Site Plan Permit       Special Use Permit required (
P    required (                        SUP Chapter 85.14)
     Chapter 85.08)
     Minor Use Permit required; unless
     a Conditional Use Permit required     Permit requirement set by Specific
M/C  in compliance with §             S   Use Regulations (Division 4)
     85.06.050 (Projects That Do Not
     Qualify for a Minor Use Permit)
     Conditional Use Permit required (     Temporary Special Events Permit
CUP  Chapter 85.06)                    TSP required (
                                           Chapter 85.16)
     Minor Use Permit required (           Unlicensed Residential Care
MU P Chapter 85.06)                    RCP Facilities Permit (
                                           Chapter 85.20)
                                     — Use not allowed
 
Notes:
Notes:
(1)   The Special Development Land Use Zoning District may have a suffix to
indicate the focus of a particular SD zone. A “RES” suffix indicates that the
focus is on residential Planned Development projects. A “COM” suffix indicates
that the focus is on commercial Planned Development projects. An “IND” suffix
indicates that the focus is on industrial Planned Development projects. However,
all can still have mixed uses within these zones.
(2)   CUP required if maximum building coverage exceeds 10,000 sq. ft., the use
will have more than 20 employees per shift, or if not exempt from CEQA; may
qualify for a MUP in compliance with §
85.06.020 (Applicability).
(3)   This use shall be located completely within an enclosed structure.
(4)   PD Permit required if total floor area or use area exceeds 10,000 sq. ft.
(5)   Concrete batch plants in the Phelan planning area may be allowed subject to
a CUP.
(6)   Pallet manufacturing, reconditioning, and storage yards in the
unincorporated area in Fontana bounded by the I-10 on the north, Almond Ave. on
the east, 660 ft. south of Santa Ana Ave. on the south, and Mulberry Ave. on the
west that is zoned IC may be allowed subject to a CUP.
(7)   Use allowed as an accessory use only, on the same site as a retail, service,
or industrial use allowed by this table. Requires a Special Use Permit when
recreational vehicles are used for seasonal operations.
(8)   Use allowed as an accessory use only, on the same site as a residential use
allowed by this table.
(9)   A CUP shall be required for three or more rooms.
(10)   This use shall be located completely within an enclosed structure with no
exterior overnight storage of vehicles.
(11)   When associated with an institutional use.
(12)   Use allowed as an accessory use only, on the same site as a retail service,
or industrial use allowed by this table.
(13)   These uses are regulated and approved by the Public Utilities Commission.
See alternate review procedures in §
85.02.050.
(14)   Supportive housing or transitional housing that is provided in single-,
two-, or multi-family dwelling units, group residential, parolee-probationer home,
residential care facilities, or boarding house uses shall be permitted,
conditionally permitted or prohibited in the same manner as the other single-,
two- or multi-family dwelling units, group residential, parolee-probationer home,
residential care facilities, or boarding house uses under this Code.
(15)   Use allowed as an accessory use only with standards, on the same site as a
residential use allowed by this table. A Special Use Permit is required for an
accessory dwelling unit used as a short-term rental in the Mountain Region.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4188, passed - -2012;
Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4245,
passed - -2014; Am Ord. 4251, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4341, passed - -2018;
Am. Ord. 4383, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4393, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4444,
passed - -2022)
§ 82.06.050 Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Subdivision
Standards.
   (a)   Each subdivision shall comply with the minimum parcel size
requirements shown in Tables
82-18A,
82-18B and
82-18C for the applicable land use zoning district.
   (b)   The minimum parcel size requirements for a specific subdivision are
determined by the review authority as part of subdivision approval. The review
authority may require one or more parcels within a specific subdivision to be
larger than the minimums required by these tables based on potential
environmental impacts, the physical characteristics of the site or surrounding
parcels, and/or other factors.
   (c)   See also the standards in §
83.02.050 (Parcel Area Measurements and Exceptions).
Table 82-18A
Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Valley Region
Land Use Zoning                  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Minimum Lot Area Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                             Depth Ratio
Table 82-18A
Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Minimum Lot Size
Valley Region
Land Use Zoning                   Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Minimum Lot Area  Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                              Depth Ratio
IC              5 acres(1)        60 ft.        100 ft.       1:3
IR              5 acres(1)        60 ft.        100 ft.       1:3
IN              None required     60 ft.        100 ft.       1:4
                                                              Lot of less than
SD              20 acres(2) (3)  60 ft.        100 ft.       10 acres - 1:3;
                (4)                                           Lot of 10 acres
                                                              or more - 1:4
Notes:
(1)   Minimum lot area may be less than specified if the subdivision
application is filed concurrently with a Planned Development or Conditional Use
Permit application.
(2)   Except where modified by map suffix.
(3)   A suffix may be added to a Special Development Land Use Zoning District
to emphasize the focus of a specific SD zone. A “RES” suffix would indicate
that the focus of the zone is on residential development while still allowing
commercial uses. A “COM” suffix would indicate that the focus of the zone is on
commercial development while still allowing some residential uses. An “IND”
suffix would indicate that the focus of the zone is on industrial development
while still allowing other mixed uses. Also, a map suffix may allow minimum lot
area to be less than 5 acres (e.g., SD-5 = Special Development with a five-acre
minimum lot area). A map suffix may also indicate maximum dwelling units per
acre (e.g., SD-3/1 = Special Development with a maximum density of three
dwelling units per acre).
(4)   A Final Development Plan may approve lot sizes smaller than those
specified by the land use zoning district. The combination of open spaces and
concentrations of smaller lot areas shall be compatible with the land uses on
surrounding properties.
 
Table 82-18B
Industrial and Special Purpose District Minimum Lot Size
Mountain Region
Land Use Zoning                  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Minimum Lot Area Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                             Depth Ratio
Table 82-18B
Industrial and Special Purpose District Minimum Lot Size
Mountain Region
Land Use Zoning Minimum Lot     Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Area            Minimum Width    Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                               Depth Ratio
                                60 ft. for
IC              5 acres(1)      interior lot; 70 100 ft.       1:3
                                ft. for corner
                                lot
                                60 ft. for
IR              5 acres(1)      interior lot; 70 100 ft.       1:3
                                ft. for corner
                                lot
                                60 ft. for
IN              None required   interior lot; 70 100 ft.       1:3
                                ft. for corner
                                lot
                                                               Lot of less than
SD              5 acres(2) (3)  60 ft.           100 ft.       10 acres - 1:3;
                (4)                                            Lot of 10 acres
                                                               or more - 1:4
Notes:
(1)   Minimum lot area may be less than specified if the subdivision
application is filed concurrently with a Planned Development or Conditional Use
Permit application.
(2)   Except where modified by map suffix.
(3)   A suffix may be added to a Special Development Land Use Zoning District
to emphasize the focus of a specific SD zone. A “RES” suffix would indicate
that the focus of the zone is on residential development while still allowing
commercial uses. A “COM” suffix would indicate that the focus of the zone is on
commercial development while still allowing some residential uses. An “IND”
suffix would indicate that the focus of the zone is on industrial development
while still allowing other mixed uses. Also, a map suffix may allow minimum lot
area to be less than 5 acres (e.g., SD-5 = Special Development with a five-acre
minimum lot area). A map suffix may also indicate maximum dwelling units per
acre (e.g., SD-3/1 = Special Development with a maximum density of three
dwelling units per acre).
(4)   A Final Development Plan may approve lot sizes smaller than those
specified by the land use zoning district. The combination of open spaces and
concentrations of smaller lot areas shall be compatible with the land uses on
surrounding properties.
 
Table 82-18C
Industrial and Special Purpose District Minimum Lot Size
Desert Region
Land Use Zoning                  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Minimum Lot Area Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                             Depth Ratio
Table 82-18C
Industrial and Special Purpose District Minimum Lot Size
Desert Region
Land Use Zoning                  Minimum Lot Dimensions
District        Minimum Lot Area Minimum Width Minimum Depth Maximum Width to
                                                             Depth Ratio
IC              5 acres (1)      60 ft.        100 ft.       1:3
IR              5 acres (1)      60 ft.        100 ft.       1:3
IN              None required    60 ft.        100 ft.       1:3
                                                             Lot of less than
SD              5 acres(2) (3)   60 ft.        100 ft.       10 acres - 1:3;
                (4)                                          Lot of 10 acres or
                                                             more - 1:4
Notes:
(1)   Minimum lot area may be less than specified if the subdivision
application is filed concurrently with a Planned Development or Conditional Use
Permit application.
(2)   Except where modified by map suffix.
(3)   A suffix may be added to a Special Development Land Use Zoning District
to emphasize the focus of a specific SD zone. A “RES” suffix would indicate
that the focus of the zone is on residential development while still allowing
commercial uses. A “COM” suffix would indicate that the focus of the zone is on
commercial development while still allowing some residential uses. An “IND”
suffix would indicate that the focus of the zone is on industrial development
while still allowing other mixed uses. Also, a map suffix may allow minimum lot
area to be less than 5 acres (e.g., SD-5 = Special Development with a five-acre
minimum lot area). A map suffix may also indicate maximum dwelling units per
acre (e.g., SD-3/1 = Special Development with a maximum density of three
dwelling units per acre).
(4)   A Final Development Plan may approve lot sizes smaller than those
specified by the land use zoning district. The combination of open spaces and
concentrations of smaller lot areas shall be compatible with the land uses on
surrounding properties.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4098,
passed - -2010)
§ 82.06.060 Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning District Site
Planning and Building Standards.
   (a)   Site Layout and Building Standards. Subdivisions, new land uses and
structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be
designed, constructed, and established in compliance with the requirements in
Tables,
82-19A and
B,
82-20A and
B,
82-21A and
B, in addition to the applicable standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and
loading, etc.) in
Division 3 (Countywide Development Standards), and
Division 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities).
Table 82-19A
IC and IR Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
Development Feature Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
                    IC Community Industrial IR Regional Industrial
Table 82-19A
IC and IR Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
Development Feature    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
                       IC Community Industrial IR Regional Industrial
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                       applicable.
   Maximum density  Accessory dwellings as allowed by
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            25 ft.                  25 ft.
   Side - Street sid25 ft.                  25 ft.
   Side - Interior  10 ft.(1)               10 ft.(1)
(each)
   Rear             10 ft.(2)               10 ft.(2)
Floor area ratio (FAR) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) allowed.
   Maximum FAR      .45:1                   .55:1
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage 85 percent              85 percent
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   75 ft.                  150 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping            See
                       Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Only one side yard setback is required to provide for emergency access.
If the adjacent lot is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard
shall be required along that side of the lot.
(2)   A rear yard setback is required only when the adjacent property is not
designated commercial or industrial.
 
Table 82-19B
IN and SD Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
Development Feature Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
                    IN Institutional SD Special Development
Table 82-19B
IN and SD Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Valley Region
Development Feature       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
                          IN Institutional         SD Special Development
                          Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                   allowed will be determined by the County through
                          subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                          applicable.
                          Accessory dwellings as   1 unit per 40 acres(1)
                          allowed by               Accessory dwellings as
   Maximum density     Chapter 84.01 (Accessory allowed by
                          Structures and Uses)     Chapter 84.01 (Accessory
                                                   Structures and Uses)
                          Minimum setbacks required. See Chapters
                          83.05 and
Setbacks                  83.06 for exceptions, reductions, and encroachments.
                          See Division 5 for any setback requirements
                          applicable to specific land uses.
   Front               25 ft.                   25 ft.
   Side - Street side  25 ft.                   25 ft.
   Side - Interior (eac10 ft.                   10 ft.
   Rear                10 ft.                   10 ft.
Floor area ratio (FAR)    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) allowed.
   Maximum FAR         .75:1                    .5:1
Lot coverage              Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                          covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage    80 percent               80 percent
                          Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit              83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                          measurement requirements, and height limit
                          exceptions.
   Maximum height      150 ft.                  50 ft.
Accessory structures      See
                          Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure            See
                          Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping               See
                          Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                   See
                          Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                     See
                          Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Except where modified by a map suffix or when a Planned Development
application has bee approved establishing a different density.
 
   (b)   Industrial Land Use Zoning District Additional Standards. Performance
standards establishing acceptable levels of noise, vibration, air pollution,
glare, and other possible pollutants are in
Chapter 83.01 (General Performance Standards).
   (c)   SD District Additional Standards.
      (1)   Performance Standards. Performance standards establishing
acceptable levels of noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, and other possible
pollutants are in
Chapter 83.01 (General Performance Standards).
      (2)   Alternate Standards. A Final Development Plan may establish
different design standards including accessory sign standards.
      (3)   Development Plan Standards. Development Plan standards shall apply
in lieu of conflicting standards in this Development Code. All standards
established by this Development Code that do not conflict with the Development
Plan standards shall apply to the project.
Table 82-20A
IC and IR Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
Development Feature Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
                    IC Community Industrial IR Regional Industrial
Table 82-20A
IC and IR Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
Development Feature    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
                       IC Community Industrial IR Regional Industrial
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                       applicable.
   Maximum density  Accessory dwellings as allowed by
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
                       Minimum setbacks required. See Chapters
                       83.05 and
Setbacks               83.06 for exceptions, reductions, and encroachments.
                       See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            15 ft.                  15 ft.
   Side - Street sid15 ft.                  15 ft.
   Side - Interior  10 ft.(1)               10 ft.(1)
(each)
   Rear             10 ft.(2)               10 ft.(2)
Floor area ratio (FAR) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) allowed.
   Maximum FAR      .4:1                    .4:1
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage 85 percent              85 percent
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit          83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   45 ft.                  45 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping            See
                       Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Only one side yard setback is required to provide for emergency access.
If the adjacent lot is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard
shall be required along that side of the lot.
(2)   A rear yard setback is required only when the adjacent property is not
designated commercial or industrial.
 
Table 82-20B
IN and SD Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature IN Institutional SD Special Development
Table 82-20B
IN and SD Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Mountain Region
                          Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature       IN Institutional         SD Special Development
                          Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                   allowed will be determined by the County through
                          subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                          applicable.
                          Accessory dwellings as   1 unit per 40 acres(1);
                          allowed by               Accessory dwellings as
   Maximum density     Chapter 84.01 (Accessory allowed by
                          Structures and Uses).    Chapter 84.01 (Accessory
                                                   Structures and Uses)
                          Minimum setbacks required. See
                          Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks                  encroachments. See
                          Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                          specific land uses.
   Front               15 ft.                   15 ft.
   Side - Street side  15 ft.                   15 ft.
   Side - Interior (eac10 ft.                   10 ft.
   Rear                10 ft.                   10 ft.
Floor area ratio (FAR)    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) allowed.
   Maximum FAR         .5:1                     .3:1
Lot coverage              Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                          covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage    80 percent               80 percent
                          Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit              83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                          measurement requirements, and height limit
                          exceptions.
   Maximum height      30 ft.                   35 ft.
Accessory structures      See
                          Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure            See
                          Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping               See
                          Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                   See
                          Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                     See
                          Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Except where modified by a map suffix or when a Planned Development
application has bee approved establishing a different density.
 
   (b)   Industrial Land Use Zoning District Additional Standards. Performance
standards establishing acceptable levels of noise, vibration, air pollution,
glare, and other possible pollutants are in
Chapter
83.01 (General Performance Standards).
   (c)   SD Land Use Zoning District Additional Standards.
      (1)   Performance Standards. Performance standards establishing
acceptable levels of noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, and other possible
pollutants are in
Chapter 83.01 (General Performance Standards).
      (2)   Alternate Standards. A Final Development Plan may establish
different design standards including accessory sign standards.
      (3)   Development Plan Standards. Development Plan standards shall apply
in lieu of conflicting standards in this Development Code. All standards
established by this Development Code that do not conflict with the Development
Plan standards shall apply to the project.
Table 82-21A
IC and IR Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature IC Community Industrial IR Regional Industrial
Table 82-21A
IC and IR Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
                       Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature    IC Community Industrial IR Regional Industrial
                       Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                allowed will be determined by the County through
                       subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                       applicable.
   Maximum density  Accessory dwellings as allowed by
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses)
                       Minimum setbacks required. See
                       Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks               encroachments. See
                       Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                       specific land uses.
   Front            25 ft.                  25 ft.
   Side - Street sid25 ft.                  25 ft.
   Side - Interior  10 ft.(1)               10 ft.(1)
(each)
   Rear             10 ft.(2)               10 ft.(2)
Floor area ratio (FAR) Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) allowed.
   Maximum FAR      .4:1                    .6:1
Lot coverage           Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                       covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage 85 percent              85 percent
                       Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit           83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                       measurement requirements, and height limit exceptions.
   Maximum height   50 ft.(3)               75 ft.
Accessory structures   See
                       Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure         See
                       Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping            See
                       Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                See
                       Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                  See
                       Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Only one side yard setback is required to provide for emergency access.
If the adjacent lot is not designated commercial or industrial, a side yard
shall be required along that side of the lot.
(2)   A rear yard setback is required only when the adjacent property is not
designated commercial or industrial.
(3)   In the Phelan/Pinon Hills Community Plan area, the maximum height is 35
ft.
 
Table 82-21B
IN and SD Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
                    Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature IN Institutional SD Special Development
Table 82-21B
IN and SD Land Use Zoning District Development Standards
Desert Region
                          Requirement by Land Use Zoning District
Development Feature       IN Institutional         SD Special Development
                          Maximum housing density. The actual number of units
Density                   allowed will be determined by the County through
                          subdivision or planning permit approval, as
                          applicable.
                          Accessory dwellings as   1 unit per 40 acres(1);
                          allowed by               accessory dwellings as
   Maximum density     Chapter 84.01 (Accessory allowed by
                          Structures and Uses).    Chapter 84.01 (Accessory
                                                   Structures and Uses)
                          Minimum setbacks required. See
                          Chapter 83.02 for exceptions, reductions, and
Setbacks                  encroachments. See
                          Division 5 for any setback requirements applicable to
                          specific land uses.
   Front               25 ft.                   25 ft.
   Side - Street side  25 ft.                   25 ft.
   Side - Interior (eac10 ft.                   10 ft.
   Rear                10 ft.                   10 ft.
Floor area ratio (FAR)    Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) allowed.
   Maximum FAR         .5:1                     .3:1
Lot coverage              Maximum percentage of the total lot area that may be
                          covered by structures and impervious surfaces.
   Maximum coverage    80 percent               80 percent
                          Maximum allowed height of structures. See §
Height limit              83.02.040 (Height Limits and Exceptions) for height
                          measurement requirements, and height limit
                          exceptions.
   Maximum height      50 ft.                   35 ft.
Accessory structures      See
                          Chapter 84.01 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
Infrastructure            See
                          Chapter 83.09 (Infrastructure Improvement Standards).
Landscaping               See
                          Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
Parking                   See
                          Chapter 83.11 (Parking Regulations).
Signs                     See
                          Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations).
Notes:
(1)   Except where modified by a map suffix or when a Planned Development
application has bee approved establishing a different density.
 
   (b)   Industrial Land Use Zoning District Additional Standards. Performance
standards establishing acceptable levels of noise, vibration, air pollution,
glare, and other possible pollutants are in
Chapter 83.01 (General Performance Standards).
   (c)   SD Land Use Zoning District Additional Standards. 
      (1)   Performance Standards. Performance standards establishing
acceptable levels of noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, and other possible
pollutants are in
Chapter 83.01 (General Performance Standards).
      (2)   Alternate Standards. A Final Development Plan may establish
different design standards including accessory sign standards.
      (3)   Development Plan Standards. Development Plan standards shall apply
in lieu of conflicting standards in this Development Code. All standards
established by this Development Code that do not conflict with the Development
Plan standards shall apply to the project.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008)
§ 82.06.070 Adopted Planned Development Applications.
   Whenever a Planned Development application is processed and adopted by the
Board of Supervisors, a General Plan Amendment will be processed and adopted
concurrently. The General Plan Amendment will indicate that there has been some
type of change to the development standards or allowed uses within the area
included within the boundaries of the Planned Development application. This
General Plan Amendment will be annotated on the Land Use Zoning District Maps
as a suffix to the Special Development District. The suffix will include the
letters “PD” and the year of adoption and the sequence number of the specific
Planned Development application that had been approved for that specific year
[e.g. (PD-2006-01)].
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.07: ADDITIONAL AGRICULTURE (AA) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.07.010   Purpose.
   
82.07.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.07.030   Development Standards.
   
82.07.040   Land Use Limitations.
§ 82.07.010 Purpose.
   The Additional Agriculture (AA) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is intended to create, preserve, and improve areas for
small-scale and medium-scale agricultural uses utilizing productive
agricultural lands for raising, some processing, and the sale of plant crops,
animals, or their primary products. It is an overlay where agricultural uses
exist compatibly with a variety of rural residential lifestyles.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.07.020 Location Requirements.
   The AA Overlay may be applied where it will serve to protect and enhance an
area that is a neighborhood or community substantially occupied by rural-type
single dwellings on large parcels, and predominantly used for small-scale
commercial agricultural activities.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.07.030 Development Standards.
   This Chapter establishes regulations to allow animal keeping as a primary
use of land. All animal keeping land uses shall comply with public health laws
regarding proper care and the maximum number of animals.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.07.040 Land Use Limitations.
    (a)   Allowed Additional Animals. The additional animal types listed in
Table 82-22 (Animals Allowed in AA [Additional Agricultural] Overlay) shall be
allowed in the AA Overlay in order to meet the agricultural needs of the
community or region.
Table 82-22
Animals Allowed in AA (Additional Agricultural) Overlay
Animal Type Minimum Lot Area Maximum Allowed Animal Density
Table 82-22
Animals Allowed in AA (Additional Agricultural) Overlay
Animal Type                  Minimum Lot Area Maximum Allowed Animal Density
                             As per           As per
Dogs and cats                Table 84-2 in    Table 84-5 in
                             Chapter 84.04    Chapter 84.04 
Other small non-farm animals 1/2 acre         6 animals per parcel
Fish raising (maximum pond   1/2 acre         1/2-acre surface area
size)
Aviary, apiary, or similar   1 acre           1 farm per parcel
small animal farms
Rabbits and chinchillas      1 acre           50 per each 10,000 sq. ft., 200
                                              animals maximum
Poultry - Female             1 acre           99 animals maximum
                             5 acres          99 animals per each 5 acres
Poultry - Male (roosters,    1 acre           2 per genus per parcel
drakes, ganders, etc.)
                             10 acres         2 per genus per each 5 acres
Sheep, female goats, and     1/2-acre         1 animal per each 4,000 sq. ft.
similar small livestock
                             2-1/2 acres      1 animal per each 3,000 sq. ft.
Male adult goats             1 acre           1 per parcel
                             5 acres          1 per each 5 acres, 4 animals
                                              maximum
Cattle                       1 acre           1 per each 10,000 sq. ft.
                             2-1/2 acres      1 per each 7,000 sq. ft.
Horses                       1/2-acre         1 per each 10,000 sq. ft.
                             2-1/2 acres      1 per each 7,000 sq. ft.
Hogs (9 maximum)             1 acre           1 per each 20,000 sq. ft.
                             2-1/2 acres      1 per each 14,000 sq. ft.
 
   (b)   Parcel Area for Qualifying Number or Density of Animal Type. Parcel
area used to qualify one animal type shall not be reused to qualify another
animal type.
   (c)    Additional Animals Allowed with Conditional Use Permit. The following
animal-keeping uses shall be allowed with Conditional Use Permit approval.
      (1)   Commercial kennels and catteries, with a minimum site area of one
acre.
      (2)   Agricultural support services.
      (3)   Animal keeping at densities greater than, or the keeping of animal
types different than, those allowed by this Section. Commercial poultry ranches
are restricted to a minimum of ten acres.
      (4)   Cow and goat dairies, with a minimum site area of ten acres.
      (5)   Hog ranches and calf growing ranches, with a minimum site area of
five acres.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009)
CHAPTER 82.08: AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE (AP) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.08.010   Purpose.
   
82.08.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.08.030   Development Standards.
   
82.08.040   Land Use Limitations.
§ 82.08.010 Purpose.
   (a)   The Agricultural Preserve (AP) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) identifies properties within an established agricultural
preserve. The properties may be subject to a Land Conservation Contract
executed between the landowner and the Board. These agreements offer tax
advantages to the landowner and include an enumerated list of the allowed uses
for the commercial production of plant and animal products that have been found
to be compatible with agriculture.
   (b)   Because the preservation of agricultural land uses is essential to the
economic well-being of the County, the Agricultural Preserve (AP) Overlay is
intended to protect vital agricultural uses by limiting allowed land uses to
those that are compatible and supportive of agriculture and related uses and/or
agricultural by-products.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.08.020 Location Requirements.
   (a)   The AP Overlay shall be applied to properties within an Agricultural
Preserve as defined in the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (Williamson
Act), Government Code §§ 51200 et seq., and as designated upon the General Plan
land use maps.
   (b)   The AP Overlay may be applied only to properties designated in the
Resource Conservation (RC), Agriculture (AG), Rural Living (RL), and Floodway
(FW) zoning districts.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.08.030 Development Standards.
   Development and new land uses proposed within the AP Overlay shall comply
with the development standards of the applicable primary zoning district.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.08.040 Land Use Limitations.
    The rezoning of property to apply the AP Overlay shall comply with all
applicable requirements of Government Code §§ 51200 et seq. Land and land uses
proposed within an agricultural preserve must be an agricultural use or be
compatible with agricultural uses.
   (a)   Compatible Uses. The following land use types have been determined to
be compatible:
      (1)   Agricultural use, described as any use of land for the purpose of
producing an agricultural commodity, consisting of any and all plant and animal
products for commercial purposes, provided the use is permitted by the primary
zoning district and not prohibited by other law or ordinance.
      (2)   A stand for display and sale of agricultural commodities produced
on the premises or other premises within the preserve.
      (3)   Gas, electric, water, communication utility facilities, and similar
public service facilities, operated by a public agency or mutual water company.
      (4)   Public highways.
      (5)   Fire protection facilities.
      (6)   Flood control works, including channel rectification and
alteration.
      (7)   Public works required for fish and wildlife enhancement and
preservation.
      (8)   Improvements for the primary benefit of the land within the
preserve.
      (9)   State improvements described in Government Code § 51293(d).
      (10)   Single dwellings only for the use of an owner or manager of land
within the agricultural preserve, or a person employed on the land, if the use
is permitted by the applicable primary zoning district, but not exceeding three
dwellings for each parcel of not less than ten acres.
      (11)   Farm labor camps, including temporary trailer housing, subject to
all applicable requirements of this Development Code and all other applicable
laws.
      (12)   Drying, packing or other processing of an agricultural commodity
usually performed on the premises where it is produced.
      (13)   A legal use existing on the date the land is included within an
agricultural preserve, but any use since discontinued for two years shall not
be resumed unless permitted under these rules.
      (14)   A use required to be permitted by an amendment to the California
Land Conservation Act of 1965 hereafter adopted.
      (15)   “Open space uses” as defined in Government Code § 51201.
      (16)   Religious facilities. Total square footage of all structures on
site shall not exceed 12,000 square feet. Minimum parcel size shall be ten
acres, unless the parcel was created before January 1, 1991, in which case the
minimum parcel size shall be five acres.
      (17)   Agriculturally oriented schools with an approved Conditional Use
Permit, subject to provisions adopted by the Board of Supervisors on November
3, 1980 regarding compatibility within an Agricultural Preserve.
      (18)   Resource Recovery Systems designed for the use of animal or plant
products or waste for no less than 75 percent of their fuel or material source
(percent measured as British Thermal Unit heat content for energy generation or
percent of volume of materials consumed for agricultural products averaged over
the current year of operation) for the production of a commodity for the
primary benefit of the agricultural community or for the generation of
electricity, unless prohibited by other law or ordinance.
         (A)   Any temporary or permanent use of more than 25 percent non-
animal or plant products or waste (percent measured as described above) by an
approved project is subject to Commission approval and their finding that an
adequate animal or plant product or waste supply is not available to maintain
the approved design output capacity of the project due to interruptions of
delivery or elimination of the source beyond the feasible control of the
applicant.
         (B)   Commission approval to exceed 25 percent non-animal or plant
product or waste shall apply only as long as an adequate animal or plant
product or waste supply is not available and subject to prohibition by other
law or ordinance. Sludge materials shall not be permitted as an alternative
source.
      (19)   Recreational uses as defined by Government Code § 51201(e) and
(n), subject to Conditional Use Permit.
   (b)   Additional Uses. Any use determined by the Board to be a compatible
use in all agricultural preserves, after a public hearing with ten days
published notice and other notice as may be required. Thereafter, the use shall
be deemed compatible in any agricultural preserve, provided that it is not
inconsistent with uses listed in Subdivision (a) above.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.09: AIRPORT SAFETY (AR) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.09.010   Purpose.
   
82.09.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.09.030   Airport Safety Review Areas.
   
82.09.040   Applicable Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plans.
   
82.09.050   Review Procedures.
   
82.09.060   Development Standards.
§ 82.09.010 Purpose.
   The Airport Safety (AR) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is created to provide greater safety to aviators and the
general public by establishing requirements for land use compatibility reviews
within designated areas in close proximity to a public use airport or heliport.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.09.020 Location Requirements.
   Airport Safety (AR) Overlay boundaries are designated on the Land Use Plan
by the symbols AR1, AR2, AR3, and AR4, as defined in §
82.09.030 (Airport Safety Review Areas), in the:
   (a)   Area within an adopted Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan for a
public use airport;
   (b)   Unincorporated areas of an adopted Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan
for a public use airport within an incorporated city; and
   (c)   Area within a low altitude/high speed corridor designated for military
aircraft operations.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.09.030 Airport Safety Review Areas.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following Airport Safety Review Areas
are established.
   (a)   Airport Safety Review Area 1 (AR1). AR1 includes the areas at either
end of a runway, outside the airport boundaries, that correspond with the FAA
Runway Protection Zone (per FAR Part 152) for each runway end. AR1 also
includes any area identified by an Interim Airport Land Use Plan as a crash
hazard zone, or as a touchdown pad and peripheral area for a heliport.
   (b)   Airport Safety Review Area 2 (AR2). AR2 includes the areas within the
adopted 65 CNEL (Community Noise Equivalency Level) or Ldn (Day-Night Average
Sound Level) noise contours.
   (c)   Airport Safety Review Area 3 (AR3). AR3 includes one of the following
areas, as applicable.
      (1)   Public Use Airport with Adopted Noise Contours. For a public use
airport with adopted noise contours, AR3 includes the area within one mile
outside the 65 Ldn noise contour, encompassing the boundaries prescribed in FAR
Part 77 that depict imaginary surfaces for “objects affecting navigable
airspace,” as applicable to the specific FAA-approved Airport Layout and
Approach Plan. The imaginary surfaces are as follows.
         (A)   Approach Surface. Extending outward and upward from the end of
the primary runway surface along a slope of 20 to one and extending for a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet. (Slope and distances increase depending on
precise approach existing or planned for the particular runway.)
         (B)   Horizontal Surface. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation. The perimeter is constructed by swinging arcs of
5,000 feet (10,000 feet for runways other than utility or visual) radii from
the center of each of the primary runway surfaces (i.e., beginning points of
Safety Review Area I) and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to the
arcs.
         (C)   Conical Surface. A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one (20:1) for a
horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. (Distances increase for military airports.)
      (2)   Public Use Airport Without Adopted Noise Contours. For a public use
airport without adopted noise contours (e.g. 65 Ldn), AR3 includes the area
within one mile of the outer boundaries of the airport ownership.
      (3)   Heliports. The area outside the 65 Ldn noise contour for a heliport
but within one-half mile of the line.
   (d)   Airport Safety Review Area 4 (AR4). AR4 includes the low-altitude/high
speed corridors designated for military aircraft use.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.09.040 Applicable Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plans.
   This Section lists the Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plans with which
development in compliance with this Chapter shall be consistent.
   (a)   Plans Adopted by County. Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plans have
been established by the County for the following airports:
      (1)   Baker;
      (2)   Barstow - Daggett;
      (3)   Big Bear City;
      (4)   Roy Williams Airport (Hi-Desert) (Joshua Tree);
      (5)   Sun Hill Ranch (near Helendale); and
      (6)   Twentynine Palms.
   (b)   Plans Adopted by Other Jurisdictions. The following Airport
Comprehensive Land Use Plans have been established by other jurisdictions but
have impact on unincorporated areas and have been recognized by the Board by
resolution.
      (1)   Apple Valley Airport.
      (2)   Cable Airport (Upland).
      (3)   Chino Airport.
      (4)   Hesperia Airport.
      (5)   Needles Airport.
      (6)   LA/Ontario International Airport.
      (7)   Redlands Airport.
      (8)   Rialto Airport.
      (9)   San Bernardino International Airport.
      (10)   Southern California Logistics Airport (Victorville).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.09.050 Review Procedures.
   (a)   Public Hearing. In addition to all other requirements of this
Development Code that require a public hearing before a decision on a land use
application, public hearing review is also required when a proposed use is
inconsistent with the Comprehensive Land Use Compatibility criteria of the
applicable Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
   (b)   Required Findings. The approval of a land use application for a
proposed expansion, revision, or establishment of airport or heliport
facilities within an Airport Safety Review Area shall require that the review
authority first find that the proposal is consistent with the General Plan, and
the findings, development standards and review procedures of this Chapter.
   (c)   Land Use Approval. Land use approval for any project found to be
inconsistent with an adopted Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan shall be
reviewed and acted upon by the Board in the form of a minute order or
resolution, in compliance with Public Utilities Code § 21661.5, and the State
Department of Transportation shall be provided a copy of the minute order or
resolution.
   (d)   Conditions of Approval. Any requirements resulting from project review
in compliance with this Section shall be incorporated into the project design
and conditions of approval.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.09.060 Development Standards.
   The following standards and criteria shall apply to each development or land
use proposed within an AR Overlay or an Airport Safety Review Area, in addition
to any standards required by the applicable Airport Comprehensive Land Use
Plan.
   (a)   Allowed Land Uses. Each proposed uses shall be consistent with the
General Plan, any applicable Airport Land Use Plan, and this Section; provided
that no permanent structure or use shall be allowed within Airport Safety
Review Area 1.
   (b)   Height Limits. Proposed structures and the normal mature height of any
vegetation shall not exceed the height limitations established in Federal
Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 77, unless Form 7460-1 (Notice of Proposed
Construction or Alteration) has been filed with and approved by the FAA before
the issuance of a Building Permit. All mitigation measures recommended by the
FAA shall be incorporated into the project conditions of approval. Existing
topographic elevations, as compared to the elevation of the centerline of the
runway, shall be considered in determining the permitted height of an affected
structure. For heliports, structures and the normal mature height of any
vegetation adjacent to the helipad shall not exceed the height limitations
provided by the requirements of Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 77 for
heliports.
   (c)   Interference with Aircraft Operations. The proposed use or structure
shall not reflect glare, emit electronic interference, produce smoke, or store
or dispense hazardous materials in such a manner that would endanger aircraft
operations or public safety in the event of an aircraft accident. For
heliports, uses or structures adjacent to the helipad shall not reflect glare,
emit electronic interference, produce smoke, or store or dispense hazardous
materials in such a manner that would endanger aircraft operations or public
safety in the event of an aircraft accident.
   (d)   Federal and State Requirements. Each airport and heliport shall be
constructed in compliance with FAA requirements and the requirements of
applicable State law.
   (e)   Noise Standards. Noise level reduction shall be designed and
constructed in all structures to maintain maximum interior noise level of 45
dba for residential uses, and 55 dba for commercial and industrial uses.
   (f)   Easements. An Avigation Easement shall be granted to the appropriate
airport and recorded before the issuance of a building permit for those uses
established within an AR1, AR2, or AR3. A copy of the easement shall be
forwarded to the County and the affected airport. Also an Avigation Easement
shall be granted to the appropriate military agency and recorded before the
issuance of a building permit for those uses established within an AR4.
   (g)   Notifications by Property Owner. The property owner shall provide to
all renters, lessees or buyers information that the site is subject to aircraft
overflight from the applicable airport, is subject to the potential noise
problems associated with aircraft operations, and is subject to an Avigation
Easement. The information shall be provided before completion of the rental,
lease or sale, and shall be incorporated into the CC&Rs recorded with the
property and in all lease and rental agreements.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.10: ALTERNATE HOUSING (AH) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.10.010   Purpose.
   
82.10.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.10.030   Development Standards.
§ 82.10.010 Purpose.
   The Alternate Housing (AH) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is intended to provide an alternative to the residential
standards otherwise required by this Development Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.10.020 Location Requirements.
   The AH Overlay may be applied to any site within a rural area of the County
with a primary land use zoning district that allows single dwellings, and that
is a minimum of 40 acres.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.10.030 Development Standards.
   A single dwelling installed within an AH Overlay shall comply with the
construction standards specified by §
84.21.030(a), (b), (c), (d), (i) and (j) (Single-Family Residential Dwellings)
and the following standards:
   (a)   Minimum floor area shall be 725 square feet measured from the exterior
of the structure.
   (b)   Minimum floor width shall be 14 feet, measured from the exterior of
the structure.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008)
CHAPTER 82.11: BIOTIC RESOURCES (BR) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.11.010   Purpose.
   
82.11.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.11.030   Application Requirements.
   
82.11.040   Conditions of Approval.
   
82.11.050   Professional Qualifications.
§ 82.11.010 Purpose.
   The Biotic Resources (BR) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) implements General Plan policies regarding the protection
and conservation of beneficial rare and endangered plants and animal resources
and their habitats, which have been identified within unincorporated areas of
the County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.11.020 Location Requirements.
   The BR Overlay shall be applied to areas that have been identified by a
County, State or Federal agency as habitat for species of unique, rare,
threatened or endangered plants or animals or their habitats as listed in the
General Plan. The overlay applies to policy areas on the Open Space Overlay.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.11.030 Application Requirements.
   When a land use is proposed, or an existing land use is increased by more
than 25 percent of disturbed area within a BR Overlay, the land use application
shall include a biotic resources report prepared as follows, except where the
Director finds that prior environmental studies approved by the County have
determined that the site does not contain viable habitat.
   (a)   Report Content. The biotic resources report shall identify all biotic
resources located on the site and those on adjacent parcels that could be
impacted by the proposed development, and shall also identify mitigation
measures designed to reduce or eliminate impacts to the identified resources,
and shall be submitted along with the application for the proposed development.
   (b)   Report Preparation. The biotic resources report shall be prepared by
an appropriate expert such as a qualified biologist, botanist, herpetologist,
or other professional “life scientist.” See §
82.11.050 for qualification requirements.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.11.040 Conditions of Approval.
   The conditions of approval of any land use application approved within the
BR Overlay shall incorporate the mitigation measures identified in the report
required by §
82.11.030 (Application Requirements), to protect and preserve the habitats of
the identified plants and/or animals.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.11.050 Professional Qualifications.
   Qualified professional biologists, botanists, herpetologists, or other
professional “life scientists” that are employed to conduct field surveys shall
meet the following criteria to qualify to perform work within the County
jurisdiction:
   (a)   Education. Individuals must possess a bachelor’s degree or graduate
degree from an accredited college or university in biology, ecology, wildlife
biology, herpetology, zoology, or related fields.
   (b)   Professional Experience.
      (1)   Have demonstrated prior field experience using accepted resource
agency techniques in survey methods, i.e., conducting field surveys for at
least three years.
      (2)   Have taxonomic experience and knowledge of the species of concern
in the project locale, i.e., knowledge of plant taxonomy and plant community
ecology and classification as well as having familiarity with the plants of the
area, including special status and locally important plants.
      (3)   Have familiarity with State and Federal laws and agency policies
and regulation, which pertain to environmental quality, i.e., having
familiarity with the appropriate State and Federal statutes related to plants
and plant collecting.
      (4)   Have a demonstrated ability to prepare detailed technical reports,
i.e., experience with analyzing impacts of a project on native plants and
communities.
      (5)   Have familiarity with the endemic flora and fauna of Southern
California.
   (c)   Permits. Individuals with relevant State or Federal wildlife agency
permits issued by the California Department of Fish and Game and the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service have demonstrated expertise in the identification and
handling of specific species and their habitats. Current permits shall be
included with the application to be considered a qualifying biologist within a
permitted biological or natural resource discipline.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.12: CULTURAL RESOURCES PRESERVATION (CP) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.12.010   Purpose.
   
82.12.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.12.030   Application Requirements.
   
82.12.040   Development Standards.
   
82.12.050   Native American Monitor.
§ 82.12.010 Purpose.
   The Cultural Resources Preservation (CP) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is intended to provide for the identification and
preservation of important archaeological and historical resources. This is
necessary because:
   (a)   Many of the resources are unique and non-renewable; and
   (b)   The preservation of cultural resources provides a greater knowledge of
County history, thus promoting County identity and conserving historic and
scientific amenities for the benefit of future generations.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.12.020 Location Requirements.
   The CP Overlay may be applied to areas where archaeological and historic
sites that warrant preservation are known or are likely to be present. Specific
identification of known cultural resources is indicated by listing in one or
more of the following inventories:
   (a)   California Archaeological Inventory;
   (b)   California Historic Resources Inventory;
   (c)   California Historical Landmarks;
   (d)   California Points of Historic Interest; and/or
   (e)   National Register of Historic Places.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.12.030 Application Requirements.
   The application for a project proposed within the CP Overlay shall include a
report prepared by a qualified professional that determines through appropriate
investigation the presence or absence of archaeological and/or historical
resources on the project site and within the project area, and recommends
appropriate data recovery or protection measures. The measures may include:
   (a)   Site recordation;
   (b)   Mapping and surface collection of artifacts, with appropriate analysis
and curation;
   (c)   Excavation of sub-surface deposits when present, along with
appropriate analysis and artifact curation;
   (d)   Preservation in an open space easement and/or dedication to an
appropriate institution with provision for any necessary maintenance and
protection; and/or
   (e)   Proper curation of archeological and historical resource data and
artifacts collected within a project area pursuant to federal repository
standards. Such data and artifacts shall be curated at San Bernardino County
Museum. Pursuant to State Historical Resources Commission motion dated February
2, 1992, the repository selected should consider 36 C.F.R. 79, Curation of
Federally-owned and Administered Archaeological Collection, Final Rule, as
published Federal Register, September 12, 1990, or a later amended for archival
collection standards.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.12.040 Development Standards.
   (a)   The proposed project shall incorporate all measures recommended in the
report required by §
82.12.030 (Application Requirements).
   (b)   Archaeological and historical resources determined by qualified
professionals to be extremely important should be preserved as open space or
dedicated to a public institution when possible.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.12.050 Native American Monitor.
   If Native American cultural resources are discovered during grading or
excavation of a development site of the site is within a high sensitivity
Cultural Resources Preservation Overlay District, the local tribe will be
notified. If requested by the tribe, a Native American Monitor shall be
required during such grading or excavation to ensure all artifacts are properly
protected and/or recovered.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.13: FIRE SAFETY (FS) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.13.010   Purpose.
   
82.13.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.13.030   Fire Safety Overlay Area.
   
82.13.040   Application Requirements.
   
82.13.050   General Development Standards.
   
82.13.060   (Reserved).
   
82.13.070   (Reserved).
   
82.13.080   (Reserved).
   
82.13.090   Alternate Hazard Protection Measures.
§ 82.13.010 Purpose.
   The Fire Safety (FS) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is created to provide greater public safety in areas prone
to wildland brush fires, by establishing additional development standards for
these areas.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4334, passed - -2017)
§ 82.13.020 Location Requirements.
   The FS Overlay shall be mapped on the General Plan Hazards Maps with the
boundaries derived from these Fire Authorities: California Department of Fire
and Rescue (Cal Fire), U.S. Forest Service, and the San Bernardino County Fire
Protection District (County Fire).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4334, passed - -2017)
§ 82.13.030 Fire Safety Overlay Area.
   The FS Overlay corresponds to distinct geographic areas and the associated
wildland fire hazard. The requirements applicable to the fire safety area are
found in §
82.13.050 (General Development Standards).
   The FS Overlay includes areas within the mountains, valley foothills, and
desert region designated by the applicable Fire Authority as wildfire risk
areas. It includes all the land generally characterized by areas varying from
relatively flat to steep sloping terrain and with moderate to heavy fuel
loading contributing to high fire hazard conditions. Present and future
development within the FS Overlay is exposed to the impacts of wildland fires
and other natural hazards primarily due to native fuel types, topography, and
prevailing weather conditions such as Santa Ana winds. These factors contribute
to the potential of extreme wildland fire behavior conditions.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4334, passed - -2017)
§ 82.13.040 Application Requirements.
   (a)   Notice of Planning Application or Building Permit. A notice of each
planning application and/or building and safety building permit, that would
lead to the construction of one or more structures or the subdivision of land
within the FS Overlay shall be sent to the responsible Fire Authority for
comment.
   (b)   Review Authorities. Each proposed land use application that would lead
to the construction or expansion of a structure or the subdivision of land
shall be submitted to the responsible Fire Authority and the appropriate
Natural Resources Conservation Service Office of the United States Department
of Agriculture for review and recommendation. Any recommendations received
shall be indicated in any staff report and/or presentation for the proposed
development and shall be incorporated into project conditions of approval where
possible.
   (c)   Fuel Modification Plan. Each project application shall include a fuel
modification plan describing the fuel modification area required in §
82.13.050(l) below. The plan may be submitted as a preliminary and final plan.
A preliminary and/or final plan shall be submitted concurrently with the
development application to the Department of Land Use Services for review in
conjunction with the project design review. Final plans shall be reviewed and
approved by the responsible Fire Authority. The fuel modification plan shall
address the standards in §
82.13.050(l) below, and the following factors:
      (1)   The natural ungraded slope of the land within the project and in
the areas adjacent to the project;
      (2)   Fuel loading;
      (3)   Access to the project and access directly to the fuel-modified
area;
      (4)   The on-site availability of water that can be used for fire-
fighting purposes;
      (5)   The continual maintenance of the fuel-modified areas;
      (6)   The soil erosion and sediment control measures to alleviate
permanent scarring and accelerated erosion; and
      (7)   A list of recommended landscape plant materials that are fire
resistant.
   (d)   Subdivisions. When 25 percent or more of a subdivision project site
involving five or more lots is located on natural slopes greater than 30
percent, the subdivision application shall be submitted concurrently with a
planned development application to evaluate appropriate project design in
consideration of topographic limitations of the site. This provision shall not
apply if all of the areas on the site with natural ungraded slopes over 30
percent are permanently restricted from structural development. Each
subdivision application shall include the following slope analysis information:
      (1)   A topographic map of the proposed project area and all adjoining
properties within 150 feet at a scale of not less than one-inch to 200 feet.
The contour interval shall not be more than two feet except that the contour
interval may be five feet if the general natural ungraded slope is more than 10
percent. Contour lines shall be obtained by aerial or field survey, done under
the supervision of a licensed land surveyor or registered engineer.
      (2)   The natural, ungraded, slope categories to be computed are: zero
percent to less than 15 percent; 15 percent to less than 30 percent; 30 percent
to less than 40 percent; and 40 percent and greater. The minimum area (polygon)
used for slope calculation shall be 5,000 square feet.
      (3)   The area, in acres, shall be tabulated for each category.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4334,
passed - -2017)
§ 82.13.050 General Development Standards.
   Each proposed development shall comply with all applicable requirements of
this Chapter, as follows.
   (a)   All Phases. The requirements of this Chapter shall apply to all phases
of a development project.
   (b)   Fire Authority Standards. All proposed development shall comply with
applicable standards required by the responsible Fire Authority. This shall
include the standards and provisions of the California Building Code (CBC)
Chapter 7A (Materials and Construction Methods for Exterior Wildfire Exposure)
and California Residential Code (CRC) Chapter 327, which are included in this
Code by reference.
   (c)   Applicability of Land Use Zoning District Standards and Overlay
Standards. The development standards established by a land use zoning district
and any applicable overlay shall apply, except as modified by this chapter.
   (d)   Additions, Alterations, Enlargements, or Reconstructions. Any
addition, alteration, enlargement or reconstruction of a structure shall comply
with the provisions of this Chapter. When an addition, alteration, enlargement,
or reconstruction of a structure equals or exceeds 50 percent of the existing
structure, or 25 percent of the roof for roofing requirements only, the
provisions of §
82.13.050(h) (Perimeter access to fuel-modified and fire hazard areas), and §
82.13.050(p) (Building construction requirements), shall apply to the entire
structure and/or the whole roof as applicable. The structures and/or roofs
shall be entirely retrofitted to comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
   (e)   Residential Slope Density. In order to reduce fire hazards, prevent
erosion, and to preserve the existing vegetation and visual quality, the
density of development for any tentative parcel map or tentative tract map in
hillside areas shall be in compliance with the following criteria:
      (1)   One to four dwelling units per gross acre on slopes of zero to less
than 15 percent;
      (2)   Two dwelling units per gross acre on slopes of 15 to less than 30
percent;
      (3)   One dwelling unit per three gross acres on slopes of greater than
30 to less than 40 percent gradient;
      (4)   One dwelling unit per ten gross acres on slopes of 40 percent or
greater gradient;
      (5)   In the Rancho Cucamonga Sphere of Influence, zero density is
allowed for any portion of a proposed tentative parcel map or tentative tract
map on slopes of greater than 30 percent gradient.
   (f)   Site and Emergency Access. Each development project and each
development project phase, except for a development project located exclusively
on a cul-de-sac, shall have a minimum of two points of vehicular ingress and
egress, designed to County road standards, with a minimum width of 26 feet of
all-weather surface as defined in the California Fire Code, from existing and
surrounding streets. The Land Use Services Department may authorize one point
of vehicular access to be an emergency access route with an all-weather surface
if the Land Use Services Department first makes each of the following findings:
      (1)   Two points of nonemergency access are physically infeasible;
      (2)   Provisions have been made to reasonably ensure that the emergency
access will be maintained; and
      (3)   Based on the review and consideration of the responsible Fire
Authority’s recommendation, the emergency access route will provide adequate
vehicular ingress and egress during emergencies.
   (g)   Private Driveways or Access Roadways. Private driveways or access
roadways for residential units shall not exceed 150 feet in length, unless
approved by the responsible Fire Authority in compliance with the California
Fire Code.
   (h)   Perimeter Access to Fuel-modified and Fire Hazard Areas. Fire fighting
vehicles shall have adequate access into areas between fire hazardous areas or
fuel-modified areas and the development perimeter, so that a wildland fire can
be contained at the development perimeter and prevented from spreading to
structures. Each development project shall provide adequate vehicular access
for fire fighting vehicles to the development perimeter of the project along
the portion of the development perimeter that is adjacent to either an existing
or proposed fuel-modified area, or a fire hazard area. Provisions shall be made
and shall be required, where necessary, through conditions of approval for the
development project for the continual maintenance of the areas intended to
provide the access. Perimeter access shall be provided, through either of the
following measures or through alternate measures in compliance with §
82.13.090 (Alternate Hazard Protection Measures).
      (1)   The provision of an existing or proposed road along the development
perimeter, or portion thereof that is exposed to a fire hazard or fuel-modified
area, and which is accessible to fire-fighting equipment. The road shall be
capable of supporting fire-fighting equipment, shall be at least 20 feet in
width, and shall not exceed a grade of 14 percent. The conditions of approval
for the development project shall require provisions to ensure that the roadway
will be maintained, if it is not within the publicly maintained road system.
      (2)   Development projects shall provide access ways, at least 12 feet in
width, with a grade not to exceed 14 percent, and capable of supporting fire
fighting vehicles, between the development perimeter and proposed or existing
streets. Access ways shall be spaced at intervals of no more than an average of
350 feet along each street. The conditions of approval for the development
project shall require specific provisions to ensure that access ways will
remain unobstructed and will be maintained. Where feasible, access ways may not
be paved and shall be designed so as not to detract from the visual quality of
the project.
   (i)   Length of Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 350 feet in
length, except that they may be extended as allowed by this Subdivision.
      (1)   Exception for Parcels of Less than Five Acres. A cul-de-sac may
exceed 350 feet in length but shall not exceed 600 feet in length, if parcels
that take access from the cul-de-sac are less than five acres, and:
         (A)   Alternate measures are utilized in compliance with §
82.13.090 (Alternate Hazard Protection Measures); or
         (B)   Based upon consideration of the recommendation of the
responsible Fire Authority, the Land Use Services Department determines that
the cul-de-sac is situated and designed so that each parcel taking access from
it is not contiguous to or exposed to either undeveloped fuel modified areas
along the development perimeter of the project or to fire hazard areas, and
that the extension of the cul-de-sac will not increase the exposure of
buildings to wildland fires.
      (2)   Exception for Parcels Larger than Five Acres. A cul-de-sac may
exceed 600 feet in length if all parcels that take access from the cul-de-sac
are five acres or greater in area and:
         (A)   The proposed cul-de-sac is not within or adjacent to areas that
are zoned for or subdivided to parcels of five acres or less.
         (B)   Alternate measures are utilized in compliance with §
82.13.090 (Alternate Hazard Protection Measures).
      (3)   Alternate Measures. In compliance with §
82.13.090 (Alternate Hazard Protection Measures) and dependent upon site-
specific conditions, one of the following measures or combination of measures
may be used to mitigate the effect of creating cul-de-sacs up to 600 feet in
length with parcels less than five acres in area:
         (A)   Limitation of the total number of dwelling units with access to
the cul-de-sac to no more than 15, and restriction of further subdivision of
parcels and construction of additional independent residential units which have
access to the cul-de-sac. These restrictions shall be imposed through
conditions of approval of the development project.
         (B)   A continuous perimeter access road at least 20 feet in width is
provided along the portion of the cul-de-sac exposed to fire hazard or fuel-
modified areas such that it is drivable under normal conditions by fire
fighting vehicles, provides adequate maneuvering space for the vehicles, and is
designed so that at least one point of access to the perimeter access road is
taken from roads other than the subject cul-de-sac.
         (C)   The cul-de-sac road will have a paved width of at least 40 feet
with posted no parking for its entire length, and there is at least one area
approximately at the midpoint of the cul-de-sac that serves the same function
of a cul-de-sac bulb in allowing fire fighting vehicles adequate room to turn
around. This measure may only be utilized if the expansion of the road width
will not contribute to slope stability hazards either on-site or off-site.
         (D)   Other alternate measures approved by the department in
compliance with §
82.13.090 (Alternate Hazard Protection Measures).
   (j)   Fences.
      (1)   Where wood or vinyl fencing is used, there shall be a minimum five-
foot separation between the wood or vinyl fencing and the wall of the nearest
structure except on those properties where previous construction occurred in
compliance with a previous Code. Fencing within the five-foot separation area
shall be of noncombustible material or modified one-hour fire-resistance-rated
construction.
      (2)   Fences or walls required adjacent to fuel modification areas or
wildland areas as conditions of approval for a development project shall be
constructed of noncombustible materials as defined in the California Building
Code. All other fences, including those on the interior of a development
project, are not subject to this requirement, except as required in §
82.13.040(j)(1), above.
      (3)   Where side and rear yards are enclosed by fencing, gates shall be
provided on both side yards for emergency access to the rear yard.
   (k)   Access to Water Supplies. There shall be vehicular access, at least 12
feet in width, to within at least ten feet of each static water source,
including ponds, lakes, swimming pools, reservoirs and water storage tanks.
Access shall be either to a plumbed outlet with two-and-one-half-inch National
Hose Thread Fitting, or directly to the source. This requirement shall be
waived if the responsible Fire Authority determines that the water source is
sufficiently below the elevation of existing or proposed roads or driveways to
make drafting of water from the source through a plumbed outlet infeasible, and
that direct vehicular access to the water source would require an impractical
extension of a road or driveway.
   (l)   Fuel Modification Areas.
      (1)   A permanent fuel modification area shall be required around a
development project or portions thereof that are adjacent or exposed to
hazardous fire areas for the purpose of fire protection. In no case shall this
area be less than 100 feet in width as measured from the development perimeter.
Where feasible, the area shall be designated as common open space rather than
private open space. The recommended width of the fuel modification area shall
be determined based on a fuel modification plan filed in compliance with §
82.13.040(c) (Application Requirements—Fuel Modification Plans), above.
      (2)   When a development project is phased, individual phases may be
required to provide temporary fuel modification areas, where the development
perimeter of a phase is contiguous to a subsequent phase of a project, which in
its undeveloped state is a hazardous fire area. The need for a temporary fuel
modification area shall be determined by the responsible Fire Authority in
conjunction with the County Fire Marshal and shall be based upon the same
considerations described in Subdivision (l)(1), for permanent fuel modification
areas and the factors addressed in the required fuel modification plan.
   (m)   Separation/Setback Requirements. Each proposed structure shall comply
with the following separation/setback requirements as applicable, in addition
to the setbacks required by the applicable primary land use zoning district,
and the building separation requirements in Subdivision (o) (Building
Separation Standards) below.
      (1)   Fuel Tanks. Fuel tanks (e.g., liquefied petroleum gas tanks) shall
be located at least ten feet away from any structure and shall be in compliance
with the standards in the California Fire Code, §
83.02.080 (Allowed Projections Structures within Setbacks), and §
83.01.060 (Fire Hazards). The tanks shall be secured to the ground.
      (2)   National Forest Boundary. Each structure on a lot one acre or
greater in size, that abuts a boundary of the San Bernardino National Forest,
shall be set back at least 30 feet from the property line or boundary of the
National Forest per the requirements of Title 14 of the California Code of
Regulations, § 1276.01, and Public Resources Code § 4290. Each structure on a
lot which is less than one acre in size, that abuts a boundary of the San
Bernardino National Forest, shall adhere to the setback requirements
established by the land use zoning district.
      (3)   Sloping Site Setbacks or Fuel Modification. Each structure proposed
upslope, in an area with slopes exceeding 30 percent before grading and greater
than 30 feet in height, shall comply with the following requirements:
         (A)   For existing parcels, the vegetation on the slopes shall be
treated in a manner so that it becomes a fuel-modified area. The fuel-modified
area shall be maintained for either the entire slope, or 100 feet from the
structure, or to the property line, whichever distance is less. For newly
created parcels, the vegetation shall be maintained as outlined above, or
prescribed by a fuel modification plan.
         (B)   Where grading is utilized or proposed, that does not conform to
the natural slope and the graded area is adjacent to natural ungraded slopes
that are greater than 30 percent in gradient and greater than 30 feet in
height, each structure proposed upslope from the toe of the slope, shall be set
back at least 30 feet from the edge of the slope.
   (n)   Decks. Cantilevered or standard type decks shall be composed of
noncombustible or ignition-resistant materials, as defined and in accordance
with the California Building Code Chapter 7A or the California Residential Code
§ 327, as approved by the responsible Fire Authority.
   (o)   Building Separation Standards. The intent of the following exterior
wall separation standards is to reduce the exposure and risk from adjacent
structural fires and to reduce the potential spread of fire from structure to
structure.
      (1)   Residential structures shall have interior side yard setbacks of 20
percent of the lot width, provided that these interior side yards shall not be
less than five feet and need not exceed 15 feet. In no case shall exterior wall
separations be less than ten feet for all buildings, including those on
adjoining parcels. Eaves shall be permitted to project into the required
setback no more than two feet. No other projections shall be allowed less than
five feet to side or rear property lines.
      (2)   In compliance with §
82.13.090 (Alternate Hazard Protection Measures), and dependent upon site-
specific conditions, the following measures or combinations of measures may be
substituted for the exterior wall separation requirements for all structures in
the FS Overlay area:
         (A)   The expansion of fuel-modified areas around the perimeter of the
development project beyond that required by this Section or other requirement
of the County Code.
         (B)   A substantial transfer of density from steeper slopes, including
areas with slopes less than 30 percent if they exist on-site, to less steep
areas within the development project.
         (C)   Clustering of structures away from the development perimeter and
away from fire hazard areas.
         (D)   Other alternate measures if approved by the fire authority in
compliance with §
82.13.090 (Alternate Hazard Protection Measures).
   (p)   Building Construction Requirements.
      (1)   Fascia. Fascia shall be two inches nominal solid wood or stucco or
equivalent protection.
      (2)   Exterior Glazing. Exterior glazing shall comply with the provisions
of the California Building Code and with the following additional requirements:
         (A)   Vinyl window frame assemblies shall be prohibited, except when
they have all of the following characteristics:
            (I)   Frame and sash are comprised of vinyl material with welded
corners;
            (II)   Metal reinforcement in the interlock area;
            (III)   Glazed with insulated glass or tempered;
            (IV)   Frame and sash profiles are certified in American
Architectural Manufacturing Association (AAMA) Lineal Certification Program
(verified with either an AAMA product label or Certified Products Directory);
and
            (V)   Certified and labeled in compliance with American National
Standards Institute (ANSI)/AAMA/National Wood Window and Door Association
(NWWDA) structural requirements.
      (3)   Insulation. Paper-faced insulation shall be allowed in attics or
ventilated spaces only if the paper is not exposed to the attic open space.
Cellulose insulation is required to be fire retardant.
      (4)   Roof Coverings. Roof coverings shall be either noncombustible or
shall be fire retardant material not composed of organic fiber with a minimum
Class A rating, as defined in the California Building Code. The tile shall be
tight-fitting and the open ends of high-profile tile shall be capped with non-
ignitable material to prevent birds’ nests or other combustible material from
accumulating. Gutters and downspouts shall be constructed of noncombustible
material.
   (q)   Additional Requirements. Dependent upon specific site conditions
(e.g., building separation, fire flow, road conditions, slope, vegetation,
etc.) or a combination of conditions, the responsible Fire Authority may
require structures to meet more stringent construction standards (e.g., full
perimeter exterior walls to be constructed to the modified or full one-hour
construction standards, soffitted eaves, etc.) as additional mitigation to the
fire threat.
   (r)   Unoccupied Structures. At the discretion of the responsible Fire
Authority, the fire-safety development standards for projects located within a
FS Overlay that only propose to construct unoccupied structures may be altered
on a case-by-case basis without an approved variance.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4334,
passed - -2017)
§ 82.13.060 (Reserved).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4085,
passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014)
§ 82.13.070 (Reserved).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 82.13.080 (Reserved).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4085,
passed - -2009)
§ 82.13.090 Alternate Hazard Protection Measures.
   (a)   Purpose. This Section allows greater design flexibility than would
otherwise be permitted to more efficiently and effectively achieve the purposes
of the FS Overlay. Design flexibility is provided by allowing the substitution
of alternate measures for otherwise applicable requirements if it is found that
they provide the same or a greater level of protection from wildland fires and
other natural hazards, and that they will fulfill the same purpose as the
established standard or requirement.
   (b)   Applicability.
      (1)   The provisions of this Section shall apply only to the standards
and requirements of:
         (A)   Subdivision
82.13.050(h) (Perimeter Access to Fuel-modified and Fire Hazard Areas); and
         (B)   Subdivision
82.13.050(i)(Length of Cul-de-sacs); and
         (C)   Subdivision
82.13.050(o) (Building Separation Standards).
      (2)   Since these alternate measures apply to the standards and
requirements that pertain to these three specific design elements, they are
intended to be applied to development projects only and not to individual
parcel conditions. Therefore, they do not apply to the determination of
setbacks for residential construction on individual lots.
   (c)   Substitution of Alternate Measures for Standards and Requirements.
      (1)   If alternate measures are proposed, the responsible Fire Authority
shall determine, with specific consideration of the effect of the proposed
alternate measures, whether the proposed development project has adequate
provisions for fuel modification and management, including the ongoing
maintenance of fuel-modified areas.
      (2)   If the responsible Fire Authority makes a positive determination in
compliance with Subdivision (c)(1), above, alternate measures may be
substituted for the established standards and requirements if the department,
with consideration of the recommendation of the responsible Fire Authority,
finds and justifies all of the following:
         (A)   The approved alternate measures meet the intent of, and serve
the same purpose as, the established standard or requirement.
         (B)   The approved alternate measures provide the same or a greater
level of protection or are as effective as the established standard or
requirement.
         (C)   There are clear and substantial reasons for utilizing the
alternate measures because they provide for a more efficient and economic use
of the site, or provide for a superior physical design, and are consistent with
the intent of the FS Overlay.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4334,
passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 82.14: FLOODPLAIN SAFETY (FP) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.14.010   Authority and Purpose.
   
82.14.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.14.030   Applicability.
   
82.14.040   Floodplain Safety Review Areas.
   
82.14.050   Development Standards for Floodplain Safety Review Areas.
   
82.14.060   Variances.
   
82.14.070   Boundary Changes.
§ 82.14.010 Authority and Purpose.
   (a)   The Legislature of the State of California has, in Government Code §§
65302, 65560, and 65800, conferred upon local governments the authority to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry.
   (b)   The purposes and objectives of these regulations are to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific flood hazard areas through the
establishment of comprehensive regulations for management of flood hazard
areas, designed to:
      (1)   Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access, and public
service during times of flooding.
      (2)   Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to
prevent or minimize future flood damage.
      (3)   Manage the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial
functions of the floodplain.
      (4)   Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation,
drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development
which may increase flood damage or erosion potential.
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
divert floodwater or increase flood hazards.
      (6)   Contribute to improved construction techniques in the floodplain.
      (7)   Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities.
      (8)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood hazard areas.
      (9)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding.
      (10)   Ensure that property owners, occupants, and potential owners are
aware of property located in flood hazard areas.
      (11)   Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood
control projects and response to and recovery from flood events.
      (12)   Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for
community participation as set forth in Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations,
Section 59.22.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4469,
passed - -2024)
§ 82.14.020 Location Requirements.
   (a)   Establishment of Flood Hazard Areas. The FP Overlay Areas described in
§
82.14.040 (Floodplain Safety Review Areas) are applied to areas of special
flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in a
scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study for San
Bernardino County, California, and Incorporated Areas," dated May 8, 2024, and
all subsequent amendments and revisions thereto, and the accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to
such maps; which documents are hereby adopted by reference as a part of these
regulations and serve as the basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The
most current copies of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the FIRMs are on
file at the Department of Public Works.
   (b)   FIS establishes the minimum areas to which the FP Overlays may be
applied. Subsequent reports and maps may identify additional flood hazard
areas, with the possibility of adding, removing, or updating areas as directed
by the San Bernardino County Flood Control District or other governmental
agencies, such as the Corps of Engineers.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4163,
passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4333, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4469, passed - -2024)
§ 82.14.030 Applicability.
   No structure or land use shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this
Chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violation
of conditions and safeguards required by conditions of approval) shall be
subject to the penalties established by this County Code. Nothing in this
Chapter shall prevent the County from taking lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
   (a)   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. The provisions of this Chapter
are not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions or any map changes made by FEMA. However, where
this Chapter or other section, easement, covenant, or deed restriction or map
revision as may be made by FEMA conflict or overlap, the more stringent
regulations or standards shall govern.
   (b)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Chapter
all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed
in favor of the governing body and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other
powers granted under State statutes.
   (c)   Implementation. The requirements of this Chapter shall be integrated
into the processing and review of all land use applications and development
permits where specific flood hazard review and flood protection requirements
are made by the County.
   (d)   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and
is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. These provisions shall not create liability on the
part of the County, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California,
or FEMA, for any flood damages that result from reliance on these regulations
or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
   (e)   Severability. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
Chapter is, for any reason, declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a
whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -4163; Am. Ord. 4254,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4469, passed - -2024)
§ 82.14.040 Floodplain Safety Review Areas.
   The FP Overlay shall be subdivided into flood hazard zone areas. Proposed
development shall comply with the following requirements.
   (a)   100-year Floodplain. The 100-year floodplain includes areas subject to
a base flood (also called "100-year flood") as defined by the Federal Flood
Insurance Regulations. The following are the FEMA-designated flood hazard zones
for this area: A, AE, AH, A1-30, and AO. (Note: FEMA-designated regulatory
floodway is included within the AE zone.) The following standards shall apply
to property within these zones:
      (1)   Review Procedures. A project proposed in this area shall be subject
to a Floodplain Development Standards Review. These reviews shall ensure that
the proposed project complies with this County Code regarding flood protection
measures and shall require the submittal of an elevation certificate completed
by a licensed land surveyor, registered civil engineer, or architect who is
authorized by State or local law to certify elevation information.
      (2)   Development Restriction. In Zone AE areas where a base flood
elevation has been determined but no regulatory floodway has been designated by
FEMA, new construction, substantial improvement or other development (including
fill) shall not be permitted, unless it is demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community.
      (3)   FEMA-designated Floodways. Floodways, as defined by FEMA, are
different from the Floodway Land Use Zoning District established in
Chapter 82.01 (Land Use Plan, Land Use Zoning Districts, and Overlays) and
regulated by
Chapter 82.03 (Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts)
of this Title. They are defined as the channels of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation. They
are also referred to as "regulatory floodways" (see §
810.01.080(gg)(43)). They are generally coterminous with the County's Floodway
Land Use Zoning Districts. They are considered FEMA-designated flood hazard
zones in that they are included within the AE zone.
   (b)   100 to 500-year Floodplain. This area includes areas between limits of
the base flood (100-year flood) and a 500-year flood; and certain areas subject
to 100-year flooding with an average depth of less than one foot or where the
contributing drainage areas are less than one square mile; or areas protected
by levees from the base flood. The following are the FEMA-designated flood
hazard zones for this area: A-99 and the shaded Zone X. The following standards
shall apply to property within these zones:
      (1)   Elevation of First Floor. New construction and substantial
improvement of any structure shall be so constructed that the first floor
(including basement) shall be one foot above the natural pre-development
highest adjacent grade.
      (2)   Review Procedures. A project proposed in this area shall be subject
to a Floodplain Development Standards Review conducted by the Building and
Safety Division based upon the determination by the Land Development Division
of the Land Use Services Department. This review shall ensure that the proposed
project complies with this County Code regarding flood protection measures.
   (c)   Undetermined Flood Hazards. This area includes areas of undetermined,
but possible, flooding as FEMA-designated Zone D areas, or as determined by the
County, the Flood Control District, or other governmental agency. The following
standards shall apply to property within this area:
      (1)   Final Building Plan Content. The final building plans that are
submitted for approval shall show the approved location and mitigating
measures.
      (2)   Development Standards. Development standards for the undetermined
flood hazard area shall be determined case-by-case and shall be dependent upon
the specifications of the project. The California Department of Water Resources
Best Available Map may be used to determine standards in the undetermined area.
A Floodplain Development Standards Review may be required.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4333,
passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4393, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4469, passed - -2024)
§ 82.14.050 Development Standards for Floodplain Safety Review Areas.
   (a)   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall be anchored to the foundation
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   (b)   Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and
improvements of structures whether substantial or not, including manufactured
homes, shall be constructed:
      (1)   With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage when
installed in areas below the base floor elevation or the highest adjacent
grade. This would include but not be limited to water-resistant lumber, floor
coverings, adhesives, paints, masonry construction and finishes, waterproof
electrical systems, and mechanical footings, or other acceptable materials
measures. (See FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2.)
      (2)   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      (4)   So that within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths are provided
around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (c)   Grading. If fill is placed to elevate pads above base elevation, it
must be demonstrated that fill will not settle and is protected from erosion,
scour, or differential settlement, as follows.
      (1)   The pad elevation shall be certified to meet or exceed the
elevation required by the applicable Floodplain Safety Review Area, and it must
be demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the
community.
      (2)   Fill shall be compacted to 95 percent per ASTM (American Society of
Testing Materials) Standard D-698.
      (3)   Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two feet horizontal to one
foot vertical ratio unless substantiating data for steeper slopes is provided,
and the slopes are approved by the County.
      (4)   Fill slopes adjacent to a water course may be required to be
armored with stone, rock or approved equal protection.
   (d)   Elevation and Flood-proofing.
      (1)   Residential Structures. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall include having the lowest floor
(including basement):
         (A)   In AE, A1-30, AH Zones, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation.
         (B)   In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a
height one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or
elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number
is specified.
         (C)   In an A Zone, without BFE's specified on the FIRM, elevated two
feet or more above the natural pre-development highest adjacent grade.
         (D)   In a Shaded X Zone (the 100- to 500-year floodplain), elevated
one foot above the natural pre-development highest adjacent grade.
         Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor to be properly elevated above the floodplain elevation
at the time of certification. The certification shall be provided on the
current FEMA Elevation Certificate form to the Building Official.
      (2)   Nonresidential Construction. New and substantial improvement of
nonresidential construction shall be either elevated in compliance with §
82.14.050(d)(1) or be dry flood-proofed. Dry flood-proofing shall consist of
all of the following:
         (A)   The area below the base flood level, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall be constructed so that the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
         (B)   The structural components shall be capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         (C)   The structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer
or architect that the standards of this Subdivision are satisfied. Such
certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   Flood Openings. In addition to the provisions of §
82.14.050(d)(1) and (2) above, all new construction and improvements to
existing structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must meet the following minimum criteria:
         (A)   For non-engineered openings, have a minimum of two openings on
different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Also, buildings with more
than one such enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area
to allow flood water to directly enter and exit; or
         (B)   For engineered openings, be designed and certified by a
registered civil engineer or an architect. This certification must be verified
by the Floodplain Administrator.
         (C)   Enclosed areas below the lowest floor shall be unfinished and
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage.
      (4)   Garages and Low Cost Accessory Structures.
         (A)   Attached Garages.
            (I)   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed
with the garage floor slab below the base flood elevation, must be designed to
allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. Areas of the garage below the
base flood elevation must be constructed with flood-resistant materials.
            (II)   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet
the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. (For guidance on below grade
parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.)
         (B)   Detached Garages and Accessory Structures.
            (I)   Detached garages and accessory storage structures used solely
for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small,
low-cost sheds), may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood
elevation, provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance
with the following requirements:
               (i)   Are one story and not larger than 600 square feet in area
when located in special flood hazard areas;
               (ii)   Are anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement resulting from flood loads;
               (iii)   Have flood damage-resistant materials used below the
base flood elevation;
               (iv)   Have mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems,
including plumbing fixtures, elevated to or above the base flood elevation;
               (v)   Use must be limited to parking or limited storage;
               (vi)   Must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in §
82.14.050(g)(1) below; and
               (vii)   Must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of
flood waters in accordance with §
82.14.050(d)(3) above.
            (II)   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the
above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards
in this Section and to the elevations required by the Floodplain Safety Area in
which it is located.
      (5)   Crawl Space Construction. This Subdivision applies to buildings
with crawl spaces up to two feet below grade. Below-grade crawl space
construction in accordance with the requirements listed below will not be
considered basements.
         (A)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Crawl
space construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than
five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design
professional, such as a registered architect or civil engineer.
         (B)   The crawl space is an enclosed area below the base flood
elevation and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures
by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. (For guidance on
flood openings, see FEMA Technical Bulletins 11 and 1).
         (C)   Portions of the building below the base flood elevation must be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only
the foundation walls of the crawl space used to elevate the building, but also
any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the base flood
elevation.
         (D)   Any building utility systems within the crawl space must be
elevated above base flood elevation or designed so that floodwaters cannot
enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions.
         (E)   Requirements for all below-grade crawl space construction, in
addition to the above requirements, to include the following:
            (I)   The interior grade of a crawl space below the base flood
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade;
            (II)   The height of the below-grade crawl space, measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation wall
must not exceed four feet at any point;
            (III)   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event, not to exceed 72 hours; and
            (IV)   The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed
five feet per second for any crawl space. For velocities in excess of five feet
per second, other foundation types should be used.
   (e)   Utility Standards.
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the system and discharge from systems into flood waters.
      (2)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (3)   All public utilities and facilities such as electrical, telephone,
cable TV, gas, etc., shall utilize flood-proofing measures in their location
and construction to minimize flood damage. They shall be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the facility resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   (f)   Design Requirements. All development proposals, including
subdivisions, shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   All preliminary proposals shall identify the special flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood, including floodways, as appropriate,
and the elevation of the base flood. Where the subdivision has more than 50
lots or is larger than 5 acres and base flood elevations are not included on
the FIRM, the base flood elevations shall be determined by the applicant.
      (2)   All final plans shall provide the elevation of proposed structures
and pads above the floodplain elevation as derived from the FEMA map adopted at
the time of certification. When, as part of a proposed subdivision, fill will
be placed to support buildings, the fill shall be placed in accordance with the
building code and approval of the subdivision shall require that the final pad
elevations be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor and submitted to the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   All proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
      (4)   All proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
      (5)   All proposals shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards and not deflect flood flows onto other properties; in Zones AH
and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around
and away from proposed structures.
   (g)   Manufactured Homes. All new and replacement manufactured homes and
additions to manufactured homes shall comply with all applicable provisions in
this Section in addition to the following:
      (1)   Elevations.
         (A)   Within Zones A1-30, AO, AH, and AE of the 100-year Floodplain
Safety Review Area, all manufactured homes shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to
one foot or more above the base flood elevation or flood depth.
         (B)   Within Zone A, all manufactured homes shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to two feet or more above the highest adjacent grade.
         (C)   Within the 100 to 500-year Floodplain Safety Review Area, all
manufactured homes shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to one foot or more above the
highest adjacent grade.
      (2)   All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to a permanent
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring shall include, but not be limited to, the use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors.
      (3)   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor and verified by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (h)   Floodway Standards. FEMA-designated floodways are extremely hazardous
areas due to the velocity of flood waters that carry debris, potential
projectiles, and erosion potential, therefore, the following provisions apply:
      (1)   Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, stockpiling, and other development are prohibited unless
certification by a registered civil engineer or architect is provided,
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   If §
82.14.050(h)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of this Chapter.
   (i)   Recreational Vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed in the 100-
year floodplain area will:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions; or
      (3)   Meets the permit requirements of §
82.14.030 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes
in §
82.14.050(g) above.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4254,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4304, passed - -2016; Am. Ord. 4333, passed - -2017;
Am. Ord. 4360, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4393, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4469,
passed - -2024)
§ 82.14.060 Variances.
   (a)   Exceptions. Exceptions to the provisions of this Chapter may be made
if a variance is obtained, as provided in this section, based on special or
unique circumstances associated with the property. The unique characteristics
must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the
property owners.
   (b)   Review Authority. The Commission shall hear and decide requests for
variances from the strict application of these regulations, based on technical
justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations and conditions set
forth in this section, and the comments of the Floodplain Administrator and
Building Official, as applicable. The Commission has the right to attach such
conditions to variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives of these regulations and the building code.
      (1)   Restrictions in Floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any
proposed development in a floodway when any increase in base flood levels would
result.
      (2)   Historic Structures. A variance is authorized to be issued for the
repair, improvement, or rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places upon a determination by the Director that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure and the exemption is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure. When the proposed work
precludes the structure's continued designation as a historic building, a
variance shall not be granted and the structure and any repair, improvement,
and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the building code.
      (3)   Functionally Dependent Uses. A variance is authorized to be issued
for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use, provided the requirements of §
82.14.050 are met, as applicable, and the variance is the minimum necessary to
allow the construction or substantial improvement, and that all due
consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety.
   (c)   Procedure. Written application shall be submitted to the Department
upon the forms provided by the Department for this purpose.
      (1)   Required Findings and Conditions. Variances shall only be issued
upon:
         (A)   Submission by the applicant of a showing of good and sufficient
cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography
of the site limit compliance with any provision of these regulations or renders
the elevation standards of the building code inappropriate.
         (B)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that
render the lot undevelopable.
         (C)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
         (D)   The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief and is consistent with the objectives of sound
floodplain management.
   (d)   Records. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a permanent
record of all variance actions, including justification for issuance.
   (e)   Written Notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted
shall be given written notice. Such notice shall include notice that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. A Notice of Condition shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4469,
passed - -2024)
§ 82.14.070 Boundary Changes.
   An applicant may apply to FEMA for an adjustment to the designated base
flood elevation and/or other designations on the FIRM. Prior to submitting such
application to FEMA, all required documents required by FEMA must be submitted
to the Flood Control District for review and acknowledgment. Depending on the
size, scope and specific design of a land use proposal within the County, an
applicant for such proposal may be required to submit an application to FEMA
for an adjustment to the base flood elevation. The Department of Public Works
will determine whether this FEMA application is actually required.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4469,
passed - -2024)
CHAPTER 82.15: GEOLOGIC HAZARD (GH) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.15.010   Purpose.
   
82.15.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.15.030   Professional Reports.
   
82.15.040   Development Standards.
§ 82.15.010 Purpose.
   The Geologic Hazard (GH) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is created to provide greater public safety by
establishing investigation requirements for areas that are subject to potential
geologic problems, including active faulting, landsliding, debris flow/mud
flow, rockfall, liquefaction, seiche, and adverse soil conditions.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.15.020 Location Requirements.
   The GH Overlay shall be designated:
   (a)   In areas that are adjacent to active earthquake fault traces as
depicted on the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone Maps;
   (b)   In areas that are adjacent to potentially active earthquake fault
traces as designated by the County Geologist.
   (c)   In areas where landslides, debris flows/mud flows, rockfall or other
slope instabilities occur;
   (d)   In areas where liquefaction of the soil or seiche is associated with
earthquake activity; and
   (e)   In areas of adverse soil conditions, such as those underlain by
hydrocollapsible, expansive, corrosive soils.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.15.030 Professional Reports.
   Except as provided for areas of adverse soil conditions, a detailed geologic
study prepared by a California Registered Professional Geologist shall be
submitted with all land use applications and development permits proposed
within the GH Overlay, that would lead to the construction of roads or
structures or the subdivision of land.
   (a)   Report Contents.
      (1)   Areas of Faulting. In areas of the GH Overlay where faulting is a
concern, the geologic report shall confirm the presence or absence of active
faults and, if applicable, shall establish appropriate construction setbacks
from active faulting.
      (2)   Areas of Slope Stability. In areas of the GH Overlay where slope
stability is a concern, the geologic report shall evaluate landslides and other
slope instabilities that could affect the project and, if applicable, shall
include recommendations for mitigation.
      (3)   Areas of Liquefaction Susceptibility. In areas of the GH Overlay
where liquefaction is a concern, the geologic report shall evaluate the
potential for liquefaction based upon anticipated ground shaking, historic
groundwater levels and character of the alluvial materials. If the
investigation determines that a potential for liquefaction exists, a
geotechnical investigation may be required.
      (4)   Areas of Potential Seiche. In areas of the GH Overlay where
seiching is a concern, the geologic report shall evaluate the potential for
seiching based upon anticipated ground shaking, the character of the water body
and the elevation of the proposed development with respect to the high water
line. The investigation shall determine if the freeboard requirements will be
met.
      (5)   Areas of Adverse Soil Conditions. In areas of the GH Overlay where
adverse soil conditions are known to exist, a geotechnical investigation report
shall be prepared by a California Registered Professional Engineer. The
investigation shall sample and conduct laboratory analysis of subsurface soils
and, if applicable, shall include recommendations for mitigation.
    (b)   Exemptions from Report Requirements. Exemptions to the requirement
for a geologic study include:
      (1)   A single-family residential wood or steel frame dwelling not
exceeding two stories in height provided the proposed structure is not located
within the boundaries of a mapped landslide or within that portion of the GH
Overlay designated as having adverse soil conditions.
      (2)   Single-family residential wood frame or steel dwellings located
within a subdivision of land for which a geologic report was prepared and
approved;
      (3)   A non-habitable structure that is accessory to a residential use
that is not physically connected to the principal structure; and
      (4)   Alterations or additions to any structure where the value or area
does not exceed 50 percent of the structure.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.15.040 Development Standards.
   Development and land uses proposed within the GH Overlay shall comply with
the following standards.
   (a)   A structure used for human occupancy shall be located 50 feet or
farther from any active earthquake fault traces. Lesser setbacks may be
applicable in certain situations as determined by an appropriate geologic
investigation and approved by the County Geologist or other engineering
geologist designated by the Building Official.
   (b)   A structure used for critical facilities shall be located 150 feet or
farther from any active earthquake fault trace as indicated by General Plan.
Critical facilities shall include dams, reservoirs, fuel storage facilities,
power plants, nuclear reactors, police and fire stations, schools, hospitals,
rest homes, nursing homes and emergency communication facilities.
   (c)   Utility lines and streets shall not be placed within the construction
setback area of a hazardous fault except for crossing which can be made
perpendicular to the fault trace or as recommended by the project geologist and
approved by the County Geologist or individual designated by the Building
Official.
   (d)   The use of development restricted areas as recreation and common open
spaces is encouraged.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.16: HAZARDOUS WASTE (HW) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.16.010   Purpose.
   
82.16.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.16.030   Development Standards.
§ 82.16.010 Purpose.
   The Hazardous Waste (HW) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is created to:
   (a)   Ensure that hazardous waste facilities are sited in areas that protect
public health, safety, welfare, and the environment;
   (b)   Buffer hazardous waste facilities so that incompatible uses cannot be
permitted in the future;
   (c)   Identify permitted uses within the overlay; and
   (d)   Outline applicable permit review procedures.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.16.020 Location Requirements.
   (a)   The Hazardous Waste Overlay shall be applied to areas where a
Hazardous Waste Facility is being approved. This will require the concurrent
filing of a General Plan Amendment and a Conditional Use Permit.
   (b)   The Hazardous Waste Overlay may most appropriately be located in the
following land use zoning districts:
      (1)   Resource Conservation (RC) for Land Disposal and Incineration
Facilities. Incineration facilities shall not, however, be located in areas
where emissions from the facility could directly impact food crops or
livestock.
      (2)   Regional Industrial (IR) for Treatment, Incineration, Recycling,
Storage and Transfer Facilities. Incineration facilities shall not, however, be
located in areas where emissions from the facility could directly impact food
crops or livestock.
   (c)   Siting Criteria for Hazardous Waste Facilities: Refer to policies in
the Safety Element of the General Plan or to Table 5-2 of Chapter 5 of the San
Bernardino County Hazardous Waste Management Plan.
   (d)   A Risk Assessment evaluating a proposal for a Hazardous Waste Facility
shall determine the appropriate location for the overlay for the facility.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.16.030 Development Standards.
   (a)   Review Procedures Include State and County Processes. The types of
applications required for local evaluation of a specified hazardous waste
facility proposal include both discretionary and ministerial permits. The
required permits or processes include:
      (1)   A General Plan Amendment to apply the HW Overlay to the proposed
site and respective buffer.
      (2)   A Conditional Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit and Minor Use Permit).
      (3)   A Special Use Permit issued by the San Bernardino County Fire
Department, which shall be required as a condition of approval of the
Conditional Use Permit.
      (4)   Ministerial Permits from the Building and Safety Division for
building, grading, flood control, etc..
      For a complete discussion of the local application review process, refer
to § 5.3.3 and Table 5-4 of Chapter 5 of the San Bernardino County Hazardous
Waste Management Plan.
   (b)   Compatible land uses. The following list of use classifications may be
compatible with a hazardous waste facility depending on the risk assessment and
are allowed within a HW Overlay.
      (1)   Contract/Construction Services.
      (2)   Manufacturing Operations I & II.
      (3)   Open Lot Services I & II.
      (4)   Repair Services I, II & III.
      (5)   Salvage Services I and II.
      (6)   Transportation Services I & II.
      (7)   Wholesale/Warehouse Services I & II.
   (c)   Prohibited Land Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited
from the HW Overlay:
      (1)   Agricultural uses of any type.
      (2)   Residential uses of any type.
      (3)   Facilities with a high concentration of people/immobile population,
including schools, hospitals, auditoriums, amphitheaters, jails, etc.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.17: MINERAL RESOURCES (MR) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.17.010   Purpose.
   
82.17.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.17.030   Application Requirements.
   
82.17.040   Development Standards.
§ 82.17.010 Purpose.
   The Mineral Resources (MR) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is created with the following intent and objectives.
   (a)   Intent.
      (1)   The extraction of mineral resources is essential to the economic
well being of the County and the needs of the society.
      (2)   Certain privately owned land areas of the County contain
significant amounts of mineral resources. Mineral Resources Overlays are
created to protect these resources for present and future extractions. Since
mineral extraction must take place on the physical site where the minerals
naturally occur, special controls are needed to minimize conflicts with other
land uses. The Mineral Resources Overlay functions as a “holding district”
since the land will be redesignated and reclaimed for other land uses when
mining operations cease. Also, the district will insure that land disturbances
are minimized through regulations and through the prohibition of any other land
uses in these districts that are incompatible with mining.
      (3)   Once the mining activity ceases, the mined lands shall be reclaimed
for new uses in order to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment
and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (b)   Objectives. The MR Overlay shall have the following objectives:
      (1)   Prevent or minimize all adverse environmental effects.
      (2)   Reclaim mined lands to a usable condition that is readily adaptable
for alternative land uses.
      (3)   Encourage the production and conservation of minerals while
preserving areas relating to environmental and recreational amenities if such
amenities are located within the mining locale.
      (4)   Eliminate residual hazards to the public health and safety.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.17.020 Location Requirements.
   The MR Overlay shall be applied on the following areas:
   (a)   Areas with existing major surface mining activities;
   (b)   Areas where mining activity is expected to take place in the future;
and
   (c)   Areas adjacent to current or proposed mining activity to prohibit the
intrusion of incompatible uses.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.17.030 Application Requirements.
   A Mining/Reclamation Plan describing the phasing of reclamation, in relation
to the phases of the mining operation, shall be submitted for land areas which
are to be included within a MR Overlay, subject to the requirements of this
Development Code regarding surface mining and land reclamation and the
California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.17.040 Development Standards.
   (a)   MR Overlays shall be free from any land use that is incompatible with
mining activity.
   (b)   When mining activity ceases, the landowner and/or mining company shall
be responsible for the reclamation of the site.
   (c)   Reclamation shall include but not be limited to the reasonable
mitigation or elimination of residual hazards.
   (d)   Incompatible land uses shall be suitably buffered from mining
activity. Appropriate transition measures shall be taken in order to insure
compatibility between mining activity and surrounding land uses.
   (e)   Non-mining projects located within the MR Overlay may be approved only
if the following finding is made in the affirmative: Even though the project
may otherwise be determined to be incompatible with mineral resource protection
policies, conditions of approval shall be applied to minimize potential
conflicts with these policies.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.18: NOISE HAZARD (NH) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.18.010   Purpose.
   
82.18.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.18.030   Development Standards.
§ 82.18.010 Purpose.
   The Noise Hazard (NH) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is created to provide greater public safety by
establishing land use review procedures and requirements for land uses in areas
with identified high noise levels.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.18.020 Location Requirements.
   The NH Overlay may be applied to those areas where the Average Day-Night
Sound Level (Ldn) is 65 decibels, 65 dBA or greater.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.18.030 Development Standards.
   When a land use application or development permit is proposed within the NH
Overlay, the following standards shall apply with respect to residential uses:
   (a)   Acoustical Report Required. Noise levels shall be identified. An
acoustical report shall be performed to identify noise impact. Any
recommendation for noise attenuation or other mitigation measures shall be
incorporated into the design standards or conditions of approval as applicable.
   (b)   Interior Noise Levels. Interior noise levels in all single-family and
multi-family residences and educational institutions shall not exceed 45 dBA
Ldn emanating from sources outside of the residential building.
   (c)   Exterior Noise Levels. Exterior noise levels in all single-family
residential land use areas and multi-family residential land use areas should
not exceed 65 dBA Ldn. Exterior noise levels shall not exceed 70 dBA Ldn for
any residential use areas. Ability to mitigate exterior noises to the levels of
65 dBA Ldn and 70 dBA Ldn shall be considered by the review authority when
determining the actual Ldn level with which the land uses must comply.
   (d)   Noise Mitigation Measures. In areas where noise exceeds the noise
standard, measures shall be taken to mitigate noise levels. An acoustical
report identifying these mitigation measures shall be required and reviewed by
the Environmental Health Services Division before issuance of any required
development permits or approval of land use applications.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.19: OPEN SPACE (OS) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.19.010   Purpose.
   
82.19.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.19.030   Special Requirements for Natural Resources.
   
82.19.040   Development Criteria within Scenic Areas.
   
82.19.050   Development Standards for Trails.
§ 82.19.010 Purpose.
   The Open Space (OS) Overlay established by
82.01.030 (Overlays) is created to address the issue of open space from many
perspectives. It does not simply protect natural open space areas for wildlife;
the Open Space Overlay strikes a balance between the needs of an urbanizing
County and the many uses, which require open lands. The following are
descriptions of the many types of open space considered in the overlay:
   (a)   Natural Resources. Open space for the protection of natural resources
encompasses a variety of areas, which are required to maintain biological
diversity, to protect significant natural features, and to ensure that future
generations will have access to a quality “natural” experience. The County
recognizes that natural areas in and adjacent to the urbanizing portions of the
County are under substantial pressure. As urbanization of the Valley, Mountain
and Desert Regions of the County continues, the loss of areas, which are
capable of supporting both common and endangered plant and animal species, is
accelerating. For this reason, protection of natural resources, or the proper
management of natural lands for multiple users, is an important focus of the
Open Space Overlay.
   (b)   Scenic Resources. Scenic areas in the County contain vistas that rival
many found elsewhere in the State and the nation. These scenic resources can be
deteriorated by increased urbanization along scenic corridors. The Open Space
Overlay seeks to preserve these resources and to provide additional
opportunities for the public to enjoy these pleasing features.
   (c)   Trails. Because they provide public access to open space lands and
serve as an active recreational amenity, trails form an important part of the
overlay. Trails will be used to provide entry and to direct public access to
those areas which can safely withstand human activity, to provide alternative
transportation opportunities, and to provide a sense of County history.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.19.020 Location Requirements.
   The Open Space Overlay shall be applied to the areas described above.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.19.030 Special Requirements for Natural Resources.
   Areas designated for Wildlife Corridors, Special Policy Areas or Buffer
Zones: When a land use is proposed, or an existing land use is increased by
more than 25 percent of disturbed area within a OS Overlay designated as a
wildlife corridor, special policy area or buffer zone, the land use application
shall include a biotic resources report or other special report as appropriate
for the subject area prepared as follows, except where the Director finds that
prior environmental studies approved by the County have determined that the
site does not contain viable habitat.
   (a)   Report Content. If a biotic resources report is required, it shall
identify all biotic resources located on the site and those on adjacent parcels
that could be impacted by the proposed development and the impacts on the area
as a wildlife corridor. If another special report is required, it shall
identify all resources that are sensitive and need protection. The report shall
also identify mitigation measures designed to reduce or eliminate impacts to
the identified resources, and shall be submitted along with the application for
the proposed development
   (b)   Report Preparation. The biotic resources report shall be prepared by
an appropriate expert (e.g., a qualified biologist, botanist, herpetologist, or
other professional “life scientist.” The professional qualifications of the
person preparing a biotic resources report shall be in compliance with §
82.11.050 (Professional Qualifications). The professional qualifications of the
person preparing a paleontologic resources report shall be in compliance with §
82.19.040 (Paleontologist Qualifications). The professional qualifications of
the person preparing another special report may also require special
qualifications in compliance the Department’s procedures.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.19.040 Development Criteria within Scenic Areas.
   (a)   Applicability. The criteria below shall be used to evaluate a land use
proposed within a scenic area in an Open Space Overlay and shall apply to:
      (1)   Areas with unique views of the County’s desert, mountain and valley
areas or any other aesthetic natural land formations.
      (2)   An area extending 200 feet on both sides of the ultimate road
right-of-way of State and County designated Scenic Highways as identified in
the General Plan. The area covered may vary to reflect the changing topography
and vegetation along the right-of-way.
   (b)   Report. A special viewshed analysis shall be required if it is
determined through the preparation of an Initial Study pursuant to the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) that the proposed project may have
a significant negative impact on the scenic values of the subject parcel. This
analysis shall identify mitigation measures designed to reduce or eliminate
potentially significant impacts to the viewshed.
   (c)   Building and Structure Placement. Structure placement and style shall
be compatible with and shall not detract from the visual setting or obstruct
significant views.
   (d)   Review Area. Land development proposals, including but not limited to
residential facilities, commercial activities and mobile home parks/
manufactured home land-lease communities, shall be designed to blend into the
natural landscape and maximize visual attributes of the natural vegetation and
terrain. The design of development proposals shall also provide for maintenance
of a natural open space parallel to and visible from the right-of-way.
   (e)   Access Drives. Right-of-way access drives shall be minimized.
Developments involving concentrations of commercial activities shall be
designed to function as an integral unit with common parking and right-of-way
access drives.
   (f)   Landscaping. The removal of native vegetation, especially timber,
shall be minimized and replacement vegetation and landscaping shall be
compatible with the local environment and, where practicable, capable of
surviving with a minimum of maintenance and supplemental water. Landscaping and
plantings shall not obstruct significant views, either when installed or when
they reach mature growth.
   (g)   Roads, Pedestrian Walkways, Parking and Storage Areas. A large-scale
development should restrict the number of access points by providing common
access roads. Parking and outside storage areas shall be screened from view, to
the maximum extent feasible, from either the Scenic Highway or the adjacent
scenic or recreational resource by existing topography, by the placement of
structures, or by landscaping and plantings which are compatible with the local
environment and, where practicable, are capable of surviving with a minimum of
maintenance and supplemental water.
   (h)   Above Ground Utilities. Utilities shall be constructed and routed
underground except in those situations where natural features prevent the
underground siting or where safety considerations necessitate above ground
construction and routing. Above ground utilities shall be constructed and
routed to minimize detrimental effects on the visual setting of the designated
area. Where it is practical, above ground utilities shall be screened from view
from either the Scenic Highway or the adjacent scenic or recreational resource
by existing topography, or by placement of structures.
   (i)   Grading. The alteration of the natural topography of the site shall be
minimized and shall avoid detrimental effects to the visual setting of the
designated area and the existing natural drainage system. Alterations of the
natural topography shall be screened from view from either the Scenic Highway
or the adjacent scenic or recreational resource by landscaping and plantings
which harmonize with the natural landscape of the designated area, and which
are capable of surviving with a minimum of maintenance and supplemental water.
   (j)   Timber Harvesting. Timber harvesting within or adjacent to the right-
of-way shall be limited to that which is necessary to maintain and enhance the
quality of the forest.
   (k)   Storage Areas. Outside storage areas associated with commercial
activities shall be completely screened from view of the right-of-way with
landscaping and plantings that are compatible with the local environment and
are capable of surviving with a minimum of maintenance and supplemental water.
   (l)   Signs. Off-site freestanding signs greater than 18 square feet are
prohibited in the OS Overlay. On-site signs within this overlay shall be
designed to reflect and preserve the unique scenic values of the scenic area.
They shall not exceed 100 square feet in area. This on-site sign size
requirement only applies to new on-site signs approved after January 15, 2014.
No on-site signs existing prior to January 15, 2014 will be considered illegal
or abandoned based upon the requirements of this subsection. The provisions of
Chapter 83.13. (Sign Regulations) are applicable to the signs regulated by this
subsection. The provisions of
Chapter 83.13 and the environmental review required for all discretionary
projects will ensure that the scenic quality of properties located within the
overlay will be addressed.
   (m)   Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. Wireless telecommunication
facilities shall be allowed within a scenic area pursuant to
Chapter 84.27 (Wireless Telecommunication Facilities) of this Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4268,
passed - -2015)
§ 82.19.050 Development Standards for Trails.
   The following standards shall be used to evaluate proposed trails:
Table 82-23
Urban Standards (Maximum Accessibility)
Item Bicycle+ Pedestrian  Bicycle- only (1) Hiking- only Equestrian- only (4)
     (1)
Table 82-23
Urban Standards (Maximum Accessibility)
Item           Bicycle+       Bicycle- only  Hiking- only  Equestrian- only
               Pedestrian (1) (1)                          (4)
Minimum width  10 ft.         5 ft.          5 ft.         8 ft.
(one way)
Minimum width  12 ft.         8 - 10 ft.     8 - 10 ft.    10 ft.
(two way)
Surface        Hardened, e.g. Hardened, e.g. Hardened      Hard-packed, No
               asphalt(2)     asphalt                      paving
Shoulder       2 ft. minimum  2 ft. minimum  2 ft. minimum 2 ft. minimum
Vertical       12 ft.         10 ft.         10 ft.        12 ft.
Clearance
Cross Slope    2 percent      2 percent      2 percent     2 percent maximum
               maximum        maximum        maximum
Maximum Grade  5 percent      5 percent      5 percent     Maximum limit is
                                                           erosion control
 
Table 82-24
Low Use and Natural Area Standards
Item Bicycle+ Pedestrian  Bicycle- only (1) Hiking- only Equestrian- only (4)
     (1)
Table 82-24
Low Use and Natural Area Standards
Item           Bicycle+        Bicycle- only  Hiking- only     Equestrian- only
               Pedestrian (1)  (1)                             (4)
Minimum width  6 - 8 ft.       2 ft.          2 ft.            6 ft.
(one way)
Minimum width  8 - 10 ft.      2 ft.          4 ft.            8 ft.
(two way)
               Firm all        Minimize
Surface        weather and     erosion        Minimize erosion Minimize erosion
               unobstructed
Shoulder       2 ft. minimum   2 ft. minimum  2 ft. minimum    2 ft. minimum
Vertical       10 ft.          8 ft.          8 ft.            12 ft.
Clearance
Cross Slope    3 percent       3 percent      3 percent        3 percent
               maximum         maximum        maximum          maximum
               5 percent; rest Maximum limit
Maximum Grade  and turning     is erosion     Maximum limit is Maximum limit is
               areas every 200 control        erosion control  erosion control
               ft. minimum
Notes:
(1)   Standards meet Caltrans Class I Bikeway standards.
(2)   Where equestrian uses occur, an appropriate trail material (e.g.,
decomposed granite) shall be provided on the equestrian portion of the trail
only; the remainder of the trail shall use materials appropriate to its
intended use.
(3)   Multiple use trails with both bicyclists and equestrians shall be no
narrower than six feet. A combined use trail with hiking and bicycling only
should be no narrower than four feet.
(4)   A maximum of 20 percent vertical grade or as needed for erosion control,
whichever is less. This can be exceeded for short distances (no more than 200
feet).
 
Figure 82-1 Trails - Low Use and Natural Areas/Urban #1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11019.jpg]
 
Figure 82-2 Trails - Low Use and Natural Areas
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11021.jpg]
 
Figure 82-3 Trails - Urban
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11023.jpg]
 
Figure 82-4 Trails - Low Use and Natural Areas/Urban #2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11025.jpg]
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.20: PALEONTOLOGIC RESOURCES (PR) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.20.010   Purpose.
   
82.20.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.20.030   Criteria for Site Evaluation for Paleontologic Resources.
   
82.20.040   Paleontologist Qualifications.
§ 82.20.010 Purpose.
   The Paleontologic Resources (PR) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is created in recognition of the following:
   (a)   The identification and preservation of significant paleontologic
(fossil) resources is necessary as many such resources are unique and non-
renewable.
   (b)   Preservation of such paleontologic resources provides a greater
knowledge of County natural history, thus promoting County identity and
conserving scientific amenities for the benefit of future generations.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.20.020 Location Requirements.
   The Paleontologic Resources (PR) Overlay may be applied to those areas where
paleontologic resources are known to occur or are likely to be present.
Specific identification of known fossil occurrences or potential paleontologic
sensitivity is indicated by listing in the locality files of one or more of the
following institutions:
   (a)   San Bernardino County Museum;
   (b)   University of California; and
   (c)   Los Angeles County Museum.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.20.030 Criteria for Site Evaluation for Paleontologic Resources.
   When a land use is proposed within a PR Overlay, the following criteria
shall be used to evaluate the project’s compliance with the intent of the
overlay.
   (a)   Field Survey Before Grading. In areas of potential but unknown
sensitivity, field surveys before grading shall be required to establish the
need for paleontologic monitoring.
   (b)   Monitoring During Grading. A project that requires grading plans and
is located in an area of known fossil occurrence within the overlay, or that
has been demonstrated to have fossils present in a field survey, shall have all
grading monitored by trained paleontologic crews working under the direction of
a qualified professional, so that fossils exposed during grading can be
recovered and preserved. Paleontologic monitors shall be equipped to salvage
fossils as they are unearthed to avoid construction delays, and to remove
samples of sediments that are likely to contain the remains of small fossil
invertebrates and vertebrates. Monitors shall be empowered to temporarily halt
or divert equipment to allow removal of abundant or large specimens. Monitoring
is not necessary if the potentially-fossiliferous units described for the
property in question are not present, or if present are determined upon
exposure and examination by qualified paleontologic personnel to have low
potential to contain fossil resources.
   (c)   Recovered Specimens. Qualified paleontologic personnel shall prepare
recovered specimens to a point of identification and permanent preservation,
including washing of sediments to recover small invertebrates and vertebrates.
Preparation and stabilization of all recovered fossils is essential in order to
fully mitigate adverse impacts to the resources.
   (d)   Identification and Curation of Specimens. Qualified paleontologic
personnel shall identify and curate specimens into the collections of the
Division of Geological Sciences, San Bernardino County Museum, an established,
accredited museum repository with permanent retrievable paleontologic storage.
These procedures are also essential steps in effective paleontologic mitigation
and CEQA compliance. The paleontologist must have a written repository
agreement in hand prior to the initiation of mitigation activities. Mitigation
of adverse impacts to significant paleontologic resources is not considered
complete until curation into an established museum repository has been fully
completed and documented.
   (e)   Report of Findings. Qualified paleontologic personnel shall prepare a
report of findings with an appended itemized of specimens A preliminary report
shall be submitted and approved before granting of building permits, and a
final report shall be submitted and approved before granting of occupancy
permits. The report and inventory, when submitted to the appropriate Lead
Agency along with confirmation of the curation of recovered specimens into the
collections of the San Bernardino County Museum, will signify completion of the
program to mitigate impacts to paleontologic resources.
   (f)   Mitigation Financial Limits. In no event shall the County require the
applicant to pay more for mitigation as required by Subdivisions (b), (c), and
(d), above within the site of the project than the following amounts:
      (1)   One-half of one percent of the projected cost of the project, if
the project is a commercial or industrial project;
      (2)   Three-fourths of one percent of the projected cost of the project
for a housing project consisting of one unit; and
      (3)   If a housing project consists of more than one unit, three-fourths
of one percent of the projected cost of the first unit plus the sum of the
following:
         (A)   $200.00 per unit for any of the next 99 units;
         (B)   $150.00 per unit for any of the next 400 units; and
         (C)   $100.00 per unit for units in excess of 500.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.20.040 Paleontologist Qualifications.
   Qualified professional paleontologists that are employed to conduct field
surveys or monitor grading shall meet the following criteria to qualify to
perform work within the County jurisdiction:
   (a)   Education. An advanced degree (Masters or higher) in geology,
paleontology, biology or related disciplines (exclusive of archaeology).
   (b)   Professional Experience. At least five years professional experience
with paleontologic (not including cultural) resources, including the
collection, identification and curation of the resources.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.21: SIGN CONTROL (SC) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.21.010   Purpose.
   
82.21.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.21.030   Development Standards.
§ 82.21.010 Purpose.
   The Sign Control (SC) Overlay established by §§
82.01.020 (Land Use Plan and Land Use Zoning Districts) and
82.01.030 (Overlays) is created to regulate freestanding signs ensure
compatibility with the character of the neighborhood.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.21.020 Location Requirements.
   The SC Overlay shall be applied where it is determined that the location of
large freestanding signs may be detrimental to the character of the
neighborhood.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.21.030 Development Standards.
   No freestanding sign shall exceed 25 feet in height, and the sign face shall
not exceed the sign area indicated in the bracketed suffix to the overlay map
symbol (e.g. CG-SC[150], shall mean a maximum sign area of 150 square feet.)
Where the bracketed suffix includes the letter “p” (e.g. CG-SC [p]), an off-
site freestanding sign greater than 18 square feet shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 82.22: SPHERE STANDARDS (SS) OVERLAY
Section
   
82.22.010   Purpose.
   
82.22.020   Location Requirements.
   
82.22.030   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Adelanto
   
82.22.040   Development Standards within the Sphere of the Town of Apple Valley
   
82.22.050   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Barstow
   
82.22.060   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Big Bear
Lake
   
82.22.070   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Chino
   
82.22.080   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Colton
   
82.22.090   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Fontana
   
82.22.100   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Hesperia
   
82.22.110   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Highland
   
82.22.120   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Loma Linda
   
82.22.130   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Montclair
   
82.22.140   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Needles
   
82.22.150   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Rancho
Cucamonga
   
82.22.160   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Redlands
   
82.22.170   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Rialto
   
82.22.180   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of San
Bernardino
   
82.22.190   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Twentynine
Palms
   
82.22.200   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Upland
   
82.22.210   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Victorville
   
82.22.220   Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Yucaipa
§ 82.22.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Purpose. The Sphere Standards (SS) Overlay established by §
82.01.030 (Overlays) is created to allow the implementation of County
development standards or standards that more closely conform to city
development standards within specified spheres of influence areas identified in
this Chapter.
   (b)   Intent. The intent is to ensure that the County's approval of a
proposed development in a sphere of influence is consistent with the shared
objectives of the County and the applicable city where the County has
determined it is appropriate to adopt similar standards.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4189, passed - -2012)
§ 82.22.020 Location Requirements.
   The Sphere Standards Overlay shall only be applied to the city/town spheres
of influence indicated in Table 82-23 (Sphere Standards Overlay) and shall be
created upon adoption of an amendment to this Development Code in compliance
with
Chapter 86.12 (Amendments). These standards apply only to the unincorporated
portions of a city’s/town’s sphere of influence.
Table 82-23
Sphere Standards Overlays
Name of City/Town                                          Section Reference
with Sphere of        Zoning Prefix Adoption Date of City/ (Where sphere
Influence over County               Town Sphere Standards  standards located in
lands                                                      Development Code)
Table 82-23
Sphere Standards Overlays
Name of City/Town                                          Section Reference
with Sphere of        Zoning Prefix Adoption Date of City/ (Where sphere
Influence over County               Town Sphere Standards  standards located in
lands                                                      Development Code)
Adelanto              AD            Not adopted            82.22.030
Apple Valley          AV            November 27, 2012      88.22.040
Barstow               BW            Not adopted            88.22.050
Big Bear Lake         BB            Not adopted            88.22.060
Chino                 CC            Not adopted            88.22.070
Colton                CL            Not adopted            88.22.080
Fontana               FT            May 8, 2007            88.22.090
Hesperia              HP            Not adopted            88.22.100
Highland              HD            Not adopted            88.22.110
Loma Linda            LL            Not adopted            88.22.120
Montclair             MC            Not adopted            88.22.130
Needles               ND            Not adopted            88.22.140
Rancho Cucamonga      RC            Not adopted            88.22.150
Redlands              RD            Not adopted            88.22.160
Rialto                RT            Not adopted            88.22.170
San Bernardino        SB            Not adopted            88.22.180
Twentynine Palms      TP            Not adopted            88.22.190
Upland                UP            Not adopted            88.22.200
Victorville           VV            Not adopted            88.22.210
Yucaipa               YU            Not adopted            88.22.220
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4020, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4189,
passed - -2012)
§ 82.22.030 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Adelanto.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.040 Development Standards within the Sphere of the Town of Apple
Valley.
   (a)   General Provisions. The provisions contained in this section are only
those provisions that are different from countywide provisions and unique to
the Apple Valley Sphere of Influence.
   (b)   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts—Allowed
Uses and Permit Requirements. As outlined in
Table 82-4 of
Chapter 82.03, except for the unique uses noted below:
Table 82-24
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements
for Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts
within the Apple Valley Sphere of Influence
LAND USE
See Division 10        PERMIT REQUIRED BY  DISTRICT Specific Use Regulations
(Definitions) for land
use definitions
                       AV/RC AV/AG AV/FW
Table 82-24
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements
for Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts
within the Apple Valley Sphere of Influence
LAND USE
See Division 10           PERMIT REQUIRED BY  DISTRICT Specific Use Regulations
(Definitions) for land
use definitions
                          AV/RC AV/AG AV/FW
Agricultural, Resource & Open Space Uses
Community garden          A     A     A
Nursery (Wholesale)       M/C   M/C   M/C
Recreation, Education & Public Assembly
Desert botanical garden   MUP   MUP   —
Historical landmarks and  A     A     A
structures
Zoos                      CUP   CUP   —
Services—General
Licensed Residential Care
Facility with 7 or more   CUP   CUP   —              84.23
persons
Unlicensed Residential
Care Facility with 7 or   CUP   CUP   —              84.32
more persons
 
Key
    Allowed use (no planning permit         Planned Development Permit required
A   required)                           PD  (
                                            Chapter 85.10)
    Permitted Use; Site Plan Permit         Special Use Permit required (
P   required (                          SUP Chapter 85.14)
    Chapter 85.08)
    Minor Use Permit required; unless a
    Conditional Use Permit required in      Permit requirement set by Specific
M/C compliance with Section             S   Use Regulations (Division 4)
    85.06.050 (Projects That Do Not
    Qualify for a Minor Use Permit)
                                            Temporary Special Events Permit
                                        TSP required (
                                            Chapter 85.16)
CUP Conditional Use Permit required (   TUP Temporary Use Permit required (
    Chapter 85.06)                          Chapter 85.15)
MUP Minor Use Permit required (         – Use not allowed
    Chapter 85.06)
 
   (c)   Residential Land Use Zoning Districts—Allowed Uses and Permit
Requirements. As outlined in
Table 82-7 of
Chapter 82.04, except for the unique uses noted below:
Table 82-25
Table 82-25
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Land Use Zoning
Districts within the Apple Valley Sphere of Influence
                                                                               PERMIT
                                                                               REQUIRED
LAND USE                                                                       BY       Specific
See Division 10 (Definitions) for land use definitions                         DISTRICT Use
                                                                               AV/ AV/  Regulations
                                                                               RL  RS

Agricultural, Resource & Open Space Uses
Agricultural accessory structure (non-habitable)—1,000 sf. max.              A   A
Agricultural accessory structure (non-habitable)—up to 10,000 sf max. on 5 acA   —
or less
Agricultural accessory structure (non-habitable)—greater than 10,000 sf on 5 M/C —
ac. or less
Community garden                                                               A   A
Nursery (Wholesale)                                                            M/C —
Recreation, Education & Public Assembly
Historical landmarks and structures                                            A   A
Residential Uses
Fitness/health facility                                                        CUP —
 
 
Key
    Allowed use (no planning permit         Planned Development Permit required
A   required)                           PD  (
                                            Chapter 85.10)
    Permitted Use; Site Plan Permit         Special Use Permit required (
P   required (                          SUP Chapter 85.14)
    Chapter 85.08)
    Minor Use Permit required; unless a     Permit requirement set by Specific
    Conditional Use Permit required in  S   Use Regulations (Division 4)
M/C compliance with Section                 
    85.06.050 (Projects That Do Not        Temporary Special Events Permit
    Qualify for a Minor Use Permit)     TSP required (
                                            Chapter 85.16)
CUP Conditional Use Permit required (   TUP Temporary Use Permit required (
    Chapter 85.06)                          Chapter 85.15)
MUP Minor Use Permit required (         -   Use not allowed
    Chapter 85.06)
 
   (d)   Commercial Land Use Zoning Districts—Allowed Uses and Permit
Requirements. As outlined in Table 82-11 of
Chapter 82.05, except for the unique uses noted below:
Table 82-26
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial Land Use Zoning
Districts within the Apple Valley Sphere of Influence
LAND USE
See Division 10        PERMIT REQUIRED BY  DISTRICT Specific Use Regulations
(Definitions) for land
use definitions
                       AV/CR AV/CN AV/CG
Table 82-26
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial Land Use Zoning
Districts within the Apple Valley Sphere of Influence
LAND USE                                                       Specific Use
See Division 10 (Definitions) for PERMIT REQUIRED BY  DISTRICT Regulations
land use definitions
                                  AV/CR AV/CN AV/CG
Industry, Manufacturing & Processing, Wholesaling
Storage—Personal storage (mini- M/C   —   CUP
storage)
Storage—Recreational vehicles   CUP   —   CUP
Recreation, Education & Public Assembly
Historical landmarks and          A     A     A
structures
School—Specialized education/   M/C   M/C   M/C
training
Retail
Construction and heavy equipment  M/C   —   CUP
sales and rental
Nurseries (Retail)                M/C   —   CUP
Services—General
Crematorium                       CUP   —   CUP
Mortuary services                 CUP   —   CUP
Repair Services—non-automotive  MUP   MUP   MUP
Licensed Residential Care         —   —   —
Facility with 6 or fewer persons
Licensed Residential Care         —   —   —
Facility with 7 or more persons
Unlicensed Residential Care       —   —   —
Facility with 7 or more persons
 
Key
    Allowed use (no planning permit         Planned Development Permit required
A   required)                           PD  (
                                            Chapter 85.10)
    Permitted Use; Site Plan Permit         Special Use Permit required (
P   required (                          SUP Chapter 85.14)
    Chapter 85.08)
    Minor Use Permit required; unless a
    Conditional Use Permit required in      Permit requirement set by Specific
M/C compliance with §                  S   Use Regulations (Division 4)
    85.06.050 (Projects That Do Not
    Qualify for a Minor Use Permit)
                                            Temporary Special Events Permit
                                        TSP required (
                                            Chapter 85.16)
CUP Conditional Use Permit required (   TUP Temporary Use Permit required (
    Chapter 85.06)                          Chapter 85.15)
MUP Minor Use Permit required (         – Use not allowed
    Chapter 85.06)
 
   (e)   Industrial and Special Use Land Use Zoning Districts—Allowed Uses and
Permit Requirements. As outlined in
Table 82-17 of
Chapter 82.06, except for the unique uses noted below:
Table 82-27
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements
for Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning Districts
within the Apple Valley Sphere of Influence
LAND USE
See Division 10        PERMIT REQUIRED BY  DISTRICT Specific Use Regulations
(Definitions) for land
use definitions
                       AV/IC AV/IR AV/SD-PD
Table 82-27
Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements
for Industrial and Special Purpose Land Use Zoning Districts
within the Apple Valley Sphere of Influence
LAND USE                                      PERMIT REQUIRED BY   Specific Use
See Division 10 (Definitions) for land use    DISTRICT             Regulations
definitions
                                              AV/IC AV/IR AV/SD-PD
Recreation, Education & Public Assembly
Historical landmarks and structures           A     A     A
Retail
Building and landscape materials sales—IndooM/C   M/C   —
Building and landscape materials              M/C   M/C   —
sales—Outdoor
Services—Business, Financial, Professional
Office—Government                           M/C   M/C   M/C
Services—General
Lodging—Hotel or motel—20 or fewer guest  CUP   CUP   M/C
rooms
Lodging—Hotel or motel—More than 20 guest CUP   CUP   M/C
rooms
Licensed Residential Care Facility with 6 or  —   —   —
fewer persons
Licensed Residential Care Facility with 7 or  —   —   —
more persons
Unlicensed Residential Care Facility with 2   —   —   —
or more person
 
Key
    Allowed use (no planning permit         Planned Development Permit required
A   required)                           PD  (
                                            Chapter 85.10)
    Permitted Use; Site Plan Permit         Special Use Permit required (
P   required (                          SUP Chapter 85.14)
    Chapter 85.08)
    Minor Use Permit required; unless a
    Conditional Use Permit required in      Permit requirement set by Specific
M/C compliance with §                  S   Use Regulations (Division 4)
    85.06.050 (Projects That Do Not
    Qualify for a Minor Use Permit)
                                            Temporary Special Events Permit
                                        TSP required (
                                            Chapter 85.16)
CUP Conditional Use Permit required (   TUP Temporary Use Permit required (
    Chapter 85.06)                          Chapter 85.15)
MUP Minor Use Permit required (         – Use not allowed
    Chapter 85.06)
 
   (f)   Single-Family Residential Dwellings. The exception to the ten-year
standard outlined in §
84.21.030(i) (Certification tag or label required) shall not be allowed.
Therefore, in the Apple Valley Sphere of Influence, a permit from the Building
and Safety Division for the installation of a manufactured home not within an
approved and properly licensed mobile home park shall not be issued, if more
than ten years have elapsed between the date of manufacture and the date of the
application for the issuance of the permit to install such manufactured home.
(Ord. 4189, passed - -2012)
§ 82.22.050 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Barstow.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.060 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Big Bear
Lake.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.070 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Chino.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.080 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Colton.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.090 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Fontana.
   Fontana Sphere of Influence: The density within the FT/RM (Fontana/Multiple
Residential) Land Use Zoning District shall be up to 24 units per acre
depending on the design of the project and the amenities provided. The density
of 24 units per acre shall be allowed if the Total Amenity Points as outlined
in § 84.16.070 (Common Amenities and Facilities) is 12 points or greater and
all other required design standards of Chapter 84.16 (Multi-Family Residential
Development Standards) are met.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4020, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4189,
passed - -2012)
§ 82.22.100 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Hesperia.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.110 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Highland.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.120 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Loma Linda.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.130 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Montclair.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.140 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Needles.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.150 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Rancho
Cucamonga.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.160 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Redlands.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.170 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Rialto.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.180 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of San
Bernardino.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.190 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Twentynine
Palms.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.200 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Upland.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.210 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Victorville.
   (Reserved)
§ 82.22.220 Development Standards within the Sphere of the City of Yucaipa.
   (Reserved)
CHAPTER 82.23: COMMUNITY PLANS, SPECIFIC PLANS AND AREA PLANS
Section
   
82.23.010   Purpose.
   
82.23.020   Adopted Community Plans.
   
82.23.030   Adopted Specific Plans.
   
82.23.040   Adopted Area Plans.
§ 82.23.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Purpose. Specific Plans, Community Plans and Area Plans may be
established to allow the implementation of special development standards for
specified areas.
   (b)   Intent. The intent is to ensure that the County’s approval of a
proposed development in these specified areas is consistent with the standards
as adopted for specific areas.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.23.020 Adopted Community Plans.
   (a)   Available for Review. All adopted Community Plans are available for
review at the Department and are posted on the Department web page
(www.sbcounty.gov/landuseservices).
   (b)   Adopted Plans. The following symbols appear as a prefix on the land
use zoning district maps to identify the various community plan areas that have
been adopted by the Board:
      (1)   Valley Community Plans:
         (A)   Bloomington - BL
         (B)   Muscoy - MS
      (2)   Mountain Community Plans:
         (A)   Bear Valley - BV
         (B)   Crest Forest - CF
         (C)   Hilltop - HT
         (D)   Lake Arrowhead - LA
         (E)   Lytle Creek - LC
         (F)   Oak Glen - OG
      (3)   Desert Community Plans:
         (A)   Homestead Valley - HV
         (B)   Joshua Tree - JT
         (C)   Lucerne Valley - LV
         (D)   Morongo Valley - MV
         (E)   Oak Hills - OH
         (F)   Phelan/Pinon Hills - PH
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 82.23.030 Adopted Specific Plans.
   (a)   Available for Review. Specific plans are adopted by the Board and
shall be shown on the appropriate land use zoning district map with a Specific
Plan (SP) Land Use Zoning District designation. All adopted Specific Plans are
available for review at the Department and are posted on the Department web
page (www.sbcounty.gov/landuseservices).
   (b)   Adopted Plans. The following symbols appear as a prefix on the land
use zoning district maps to identify the various specific plan areas that have
been adopted by the Board:
      (1)   Agua Mansa Industrial Corridor Specific Plan - AM
      (2)   Bloomington Business Park Specific Plan - BP
      (3)   Glen Helen Specific Plan - GH
      (4)   Kaiser Commerce Center Specific Plan - KC
      (5)   Hacienda at Fairview Valley Specific Plan - HF
      (6)   Speedway Commerce Center II Specific Plan - SC
      (7)   Valley Corridor Specific Plan - VC.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4319,
passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4448, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 4450, passed - -2022)
§ 82.23.040 Adopted Area Plans.
   (a)   Available for Review. All adopted Areas Plans are available for review
at the Department and are posted on the Department web page (www.sbcounty.gov/
landuseservices).
   (b)   Adopted Plans. The following symbols appear as a prefix on the land
use zoning district maps to identify the area plan that has been adopted by the
Board: East Valley Area Plan (EV).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 82.24: BEAR VALLEY COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.25: BLOOMINGTON COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.26: CREST FOREST COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.27: HILLTOP COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.28: HOMESTEAD VALLEY COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.29: JOSHUA TREE COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.30: LAKE ARROWHEAD COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.31: LUCERNE VALLEY COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.32: LYTLE CREEK COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.33: MORONGO VALLEY COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.34: MUSCOY COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.35: OAK GLEN COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.36: OAK HILLS COMMUNITY PLAN
Section
   
82.36.010   General Provisions.
   
82.36.020   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts.
   
82.36.030   Residential Land Use Zoning Districts.
   
82.36.040   Commercial Land Use Zoning Districts.
   
82.36.050   Industrial and Special Use Land Use Zoning Districts.
§ 82.36.010   General Provisions.
   Development standards, procedural regulations and other provisions of Title
8 shall apply to all projects within the Oak Hills Community Plan area except
as noted in this Chapter.
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
§ 82.36.020   Agricultural and Resource Management Land Use Zoning Districts.
   (a)   Minimum Area Designation. As outlined in
Table 82-3 of
Chapter 82.03.
   (b)   Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements. As outlined in
Table 82-4 of
Chapter 82.03.
   (c)   Subdivision Standards. As outlined in
Table 82-4C of
Chapter 82.03, except as noted below:
      (1)   Oak Hills/Resource Conservation (OH/RC) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Minimum Width: 150 feet.
         (B)   Minimum Depth: 150 feet.
      (2)   Oak Hills/Floodway (OH/FW) Land Use Zoning District. The provisions
of §
82.03.070 plus the following additional provisions shall apply to all
development within the OH/FW Land Use Zoning District:
         (A)   Site Design. The natural drainage courses should not be occupied
or obstructed and should be left in their natural state as much as possible.
Hard lined concrete facilities are discouraged; however rock slope protection
may be used for erosion control.
         (B)   Road Crossings. Road crossings shall be designed to have minimal
impact on the natural drainage courses.
         (C)   Boundaries. Where it has been demonstrated in a detailed
drainage report that land within the Floodway Land Use District should not be
restricted by the limitations of the Floodway designation, the boundary between
the Floodway and the adjacent land use district shall be interpreted to be
consistent with such report.
   (d)   Development Standards. As outlined in
Table 82-5C of
Chapter 82.03.
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
§ 82.36.030   Residential Land Use Zoning Districts.
   (a)   Minimum Area Designation. As outlined in
Table 82-6 of
Chapter 82.04.
   (b)   Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements. As outlined in
Table 82-7 of
Chapter 82.04.
   (c)   Subdivision Standards. As outlined in
Table 82-8C of
Chapter 82.04, except as noted below for Oak Hills/Single Residential (OH/RS)
Land Use Zoning District:
      (1)   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be 7,200 square feet.
Within areas that contain significant environmental or topographic constraints,
clustering of residential uses may be encouraged to preserve natural resources
and mitigate environmental impacts. Maximum permitted density will be
determined through the development review process, based upon environmental and
infrastructure conditions.
      (2)   Minimum Width: 100 feet for subdivisions with parcels greater than
or equal to one acre and 60 feet for subdivisions with parcels less than one
acre.
      (3)   Minimum Depth: 100 feet for subdivisions with parcels of any size.
   (d)   Development Standards. As outlined in
Table 82-9C of
Chapter 82.04, except as noted below:
      (1)   Oak Hills/Rural Living (OH/RL) Land Use Zoning District.
Side—Interior Setbacks: 15 feet.
      (2)   Oak Hills/Single Residential (OH/RS) Land Use Zoning District.
Maximum coverage: 40 percent.
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
§ 82.36.040   Commercial Land Use Zoning Districts.
   (a)   Minimum Area Designation. As outlined in
Table 82-10 of
Chapter 82.05, except the minimum area for the Oak Hills/Neighborhood
Commercial (OH/CN) Land Use Zoning District designation shall be 2.5 acres.
   (b)   Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements. As outlined in Table 82-11 of
Chapter 82.05.
   (c)   Subdivision Standards. As outlined in
Table 82-12C of
Chapter 82.05, except as noted below:
      (1)   Oak Hills/Neighborhood Commercial (OH/CN) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Minimum Lot Size: 2.5 acres. Minimum lot size can be less than
two and one-half (2.5) acres if the subdivision application is filed
concurrently with a Planned Development, Conditional Use Permit, or Department
Review application.
         (B)   Minimum Width: 300 feet.
         (C)   Minimum Depth: 300 feet.
         (D)   Site Design. Site design should incorporate effective internal
circulation for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic, as well as buffering if
adjacent to residential uses.
      (2)   Oak Hills/General Commercial (OH/CG) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Minimum Width: 300 feet.
         (B)   Minimum Depth: 300 feet.
         (C)   Site Design. Site design within general commercial use areas
should include effective internal circulation, designed to minimize traffic
impacts on adjacent arterial streets.
         (D)   Regional Commercial Uses. Regional commercial uses should have
access from major highways or arterials, and be of a size and configuration to
facilitate development of businesses attracting consumers from a regional
market area. Minimum site area for a development project within a regional
commercial area should be ten acres.
   (d)   Development Standards. As outlined in
Tables 82-15A and
82-15B of
Chapter 82.05, except as noted below:
      (1)   Oak Hills/Neighborhood Commercial (OH/CN) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Maximum Lot Coverage: 40 percent.
         (B)   Side—Street Side Setback: 15 feet.
         (C)   Floor Area Ratio (FAR): Maximum FAR (floor area/lot area): 0.47.
      (2)   Oak Hills/General Commercial (OH/CG) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Maximum Lot Coverage: 60 percent.
         (B)   Floor Area Ratio (FAR): Maximum FAR (floor area/lot area): 1.20.
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
§ 82.36.050   Industrial and Special Use Land Use Zoning Districts.
   (a)   Minimum Area Designation. As outlined in
Table 82-16 of
Chapter 82.06, except the minimum area for the Oak Hills/Special Development
(OH/SD) Land Use Zoning District designation shall be ten acres.
   (b)   Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements. As outlined in
Table 82-17 of
Chapter 82.06. The allowed uses for the Special Development (SD) Land Use
Zoning District shall be as outlined under Special Development-Residential (SD-
RES).
   (c)   Subdivision Standards. As outlined in
Table 82-18C of
Chapter 82.06, except as noted below:
      (1)   Oak Hills/Community Industrial (OH/IC) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Minimum Width: 150 feet.
         (B)   Minimum Depth: 200 feet.
         (C)   Site Design. Where possible, industrial areas should be
separated from residential areas by natural or artificial barriers, such as
drainage courses, utility easements, railroad tracks, or major arterials.
Adequate land use and design buffers to mitigate impacts of truck traffic,
noise, emissions, and other potential land use conflicts, must be addressed
through the design review process.
      (2)   Oak Hills/Institutional (OH/IN) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Minimum Lot Dimensions Width to Depth Ratio: 1:4.
         (B)   Site Design. The boundaries of the Institutional Land Use
District are intended to match the rights-of-way or easements for public
utilities and interstate transportation corridors within the community plan
area.
      (3)   Oak Hills/Special Development (OH/SD) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Minimum Lot Area: 10 acres.
         (B)   Minimum Width: 400 feet.
         (C)   Minimum Depth: 400 feet.
   (d)   Development Standards. As outlined in
Tables 82-21A and
82-21B of
Chapter 82.06, except as noted below:
      (1)   Oak Hills/Community Industrial (OH/IC) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Side—Street Side Setback: 15 feet.
         (B)   Floor Area Ratio (FAR): Maximum FAR (floor area/lot area): 0.97.
         (C)   Maximum Lot Coverage: 70 percent.
      (2)   Oak Hills/Institutional (OH/IN) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Front Setback: 15 feet.
         (B)   Side—Street Side Setback: 15 feet.
         (C)   Floor Area Ratio (FAR): Maximum FAR (floor area/lot area): 1.20.
         (D)   Maximum Lot Coverage: 70 percent.
      (3)   Oak Hills/Special Development (OH/SD) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Front Setback: 15 feet.
         (B)   Side—Street Side Setback: 15 feet.
         (C)   Side—Interior Yard Setback. Only one side yard is required to
provide for emergency access. If the adjacent property is not designated
commercial or industrial, a side yard shall be required along that side of the
property.
         (D)   Rear Yard Setback. A rear yard is required only when the
adjacent property is not designated commercial or industrial.
         (E)   Floor Area Ratio (FAR): Maximum FAR (floor area/lot area): 1.20.
         (F)   Maximum Structure Height: 50 feet.
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 82.37: PHELAN/PINON HILLS COMMUNITY PLAN
(Reserved)
(Ord. 4204, passed - -2013)
DIVISION 3: COUNTYWIDE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
CHAPTER 83.01: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section
   
83.01.010   Purpose.
   
83.01.020   Applicability.
   
83.01.030   Modification of Standards.
   
83.01.040   Air Quality.
   
83.01.050   Electrical Disturbances.
   
83.01.060   Fire Hazards.
   
83.01.070   Heat.
   
83.01.080   Noise.
   
83.01.090   Vibration.
   
83.01.100   Waste Disposal.
   
83.01.110   External Commercial or Industrial Activity on Private Property.
§ 83.01.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish uniform performance standards
for development within the County that promotes compatibility with surrounding
areas and land uses.
   Performance standards are designed to mitigate the environmental impacts of
existing and proposed land uses within a community. Environmental impacts
include air quality, glare, heat, noise, runoff control, and waste disposal.
These general performance standards are intended to protect the health and
safety of businesses, nearby residents, and workers and to prevent damaging
effects to surrounding properties.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.01.020 Applicability.
   (a)   New and Existing Uses in All Land Use Zoning Districts. The provisions
of this Chapter apply to all new and existing uses in all land use zoning
districts. The standards of this Chapter elaborate upon and otherwise augment
the development standards specified for individual land use zoning districts in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and in
Division 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities).
   (b)   Compliance of Alterations or Modifications. Uses of the land that
existed on the effective date of this Division shall not be altered or modified
so as to conflict with, or further conflict with, these standards.
   (c)   Evidence of Compliance with Standards. If requested by the Director or
the Review Authority, applicants shall provide evidence to the Director that
the proposed development is in compliance with the standards in this Division
and other applicable standards in this Development Code before the issuance of
a Building Permit or business license.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.01.030 Modification of Standards.
   (a)   Modification by Specific Reference. The provisions of this Division
shall prevail should they conflict with the provisions of a land use zoning
district or specific plan, unless the land use zoning district or plan standard
specifically overrides or modifies the provisions of this Division by specific
reference.
   (b)   Modification by Establishment of Overlay or Approval of Planned
Development or Variance. An overlay, approved Planned Development, or approved
Variance may modify the provisions of this Division.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.01.040 Air Quality.
   (a)   Equipment Permit and Inspection Requirements. Required permits shall
be obtained from either the Mojave Air Pollution Management District or the
South Coast Air Quality Management District depending on the location of the
subject property and equipment for equipment that may cause air pollution.
Before the equipment may be constructed, plans and specifications shall be
submitted to the appropriate District for approval
   (b)   Permits from Air Quality Management Districts. Permits shall be
obtained from either the Mojave Air Pollution Management District or the South
Coast Air Quality Management District depending on the location of the subject
property and equipment. If requested by the Director, uses, activities, or
processes that require Air Quality Management District approval to operate
shall file a copy of the permit with the Department within 30 days of its
approval.
   (c)   Diesel Exhaust Emissions Control Measures. The following emissions
control measures shall apply to all discretionary land use projects approved by
the County on or after January 15, 2009:
      (1)   On-Road Diesel Vehicles. On-road diesel vehicles are regulated by
the State of California Air Resources Board.
      (2)   Off-Road Diesel Vehicle/Equipment Operations. All business
establishments and contractors that use off-road diesel vehicle/equipment as
part of their normal business operations shall adhere to the following measures
during their operations in order to reduce diesel particulate matter emissions
from diesel-fueled engines:
         (A)   Off-road vehicles/equipment shall not be left idling on site for
periods in excess of five minutes. The idling limit does not apply to:
            (I)   Idling when queuing;
            (II)   Idling to verify that the vehicle is in safe operating
condition;
            (III)   Idling for testing, servicing, repairing or diagnostic
purposes;
            (IV)   Idling necessary to accomplish work for which the vehicle
was designed (such as operating a crane);
            (V)   Idling required to bring the machine system to operating
temperature; and
            (VI)   Idling necessary to ensure safe operation of the vehicle.
         (B)   Use reformulated ultra low-sulfur diesel fuel in equipment and
use equipment certified by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or
that pre-dates EPA regulations.
         (C)   Maintain engines in good working order to reduce emissions.
         (D)   Signs shall be posted requiring vehicle drivers to turn off
engines when parked.
         (E)   Any requirements or standards subsequently adopted by the South
Coast Air Quality Management District, the Mojave Desert Air Quality Management
District or the California Air Resources Board.
         (F)   Provide temporary traffic control during all phases of
construction.
         (G)   On-site electrical power connections shall be provided for
electric construction tools to eliminate the need for diesel-powered electric
generators, where feasible.
         (H)   Maintain construction equipment engines in good working order to
reduce emissions. The developer shall have each contractor certify that all
construction equipment is properly serviced and maintained in good operating
condition.
         (I)   Contractors shall use ultra low sulfur diesel fuel for
stationary construction equipment as required by Air Quality Management
District (AQMD) Rules 431.1 and 431.2 to reduce the release of undesirable
emissions.
         (J)   Substitute electric and gasoline-powered equipment for diesel-
powered equipment, where feasible.
       (3)   Project Design. Distribution centers, warehouses, truck stops and
other facilities with loading docks where diesel trucks may reside overnight or
for periods in excess of three hours shall be designed to enable any vehicle
using these facilities to utilize on-site electrical connections to power the
heating and air conditioning of the cabs of such trucks, and any refrigeration
unit(s) of any trailer being pulled by the trucks, instead of operating the
diesel engines and diesel refrigeration units of such trucks and trailers for
these purposes. This requirement shall also apply to Recreational Vehicle Parks
(as defined in §
810.01.200(k) of this title) and other development projects where diesel
engines may reasonably be expected to operate on other than an occasional
basis.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4065, passed - -2008)
§ 83.01.050 Electrical Disturbances.
   No activity, land use, or process shall cause electrical disturbance that
adversely affects persons or the operation of equipment across lot lines and
that does not conform to the regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission. Existing or proposed uses that generate electrical disturbances
that are be considered hazardous or a public nuisance shall be contained,
modified, or shielded to prevent disturbances.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.01.060 Fire Hazards.
   This Section establishes standards for storage of solid materials
susceptible to fire hazards and flammable liquids and gases where allowed in
compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
   (a)   Combustible Solids. Land uses that include the storage of solid
materials susceptible to fire hazards shall be subject to the following storage
standards in the indicated land use zoning districts.
      (1)   Regional Industrial (IR) Land Use Zoning District.
         (A)   Inside Storage. A structure utilized for the storage,
manufacture, or use of flammable solid materials shall be located no less than
40 feet from any lot line and any other on-site structures or shall adhere to
standards specified in Subdivision (2) below.
         (B)   Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of flammable solid materials
shall be no less than 50 feet from any lot line and any other on-site
structures.
      (2)   All Other Manufacturing or Industrial Uses Legally Established
Within Any Other Land Use Zoning District. The storage, manufacture, or use of
highly flammable solid materials shall take place in enclosed spaces having
fire resistance of no less than two hours and protected with an automatic fire
extinguishing system.
   (b)   Flammable Liquids and Gases. Land uses that involve the storage of
flammable liquids and gases shall be subject to the following standards when
established within the land use zoning districts indicated.
      (1)   Setbacks. County Code
Title 2, Division 3 (Fire Protection and Explosives and Hazardous Materials)
shall establish setback requirements for flammable liquids and gases.
      (2)   Storage capacity. The total storage capacity of flammable liquids
and gases on a parcel shall not exceed the quantities indicated in
Table 83-1 (Storage Standards for Flammable Liquids and Gases).
Table 83-1
Storage Standards for Flammable Liquids and Gases
Stored Substance Land Use Zoning District Maximum Capacity
Table 83-1
Storage Standards for Flammable Liquids and Gases
Stored Substance           Land Use Zoning District   Maximum Capacity
SCF = Standard cubic feet at 60ºF and 29.92" Hg (i.e., mercury)
Liquids                    Regional Industrial        120,000 gallons
                           District (IR)
                           All other manufacturing or
                           industrial uses legally
                           established within any     60,000 gallons
                           other land use zoning
                           district
                           All manufacturing or       Per County Code
Liquefied Petroleum Gas    industrial uses            Title 2, Division 3 (Fire
(LPG)                      established in any land    Protection and Explosives
                           zoning use district        and Hazardous Materials)
                           All commercial uses        15,000 gal./tank
                           legally established in any 20,000 gallons maximum
                           land use zoning district   aggregate total
                           All agricultural uses
                           legally established in any 15,000 gal./tank and
                           land use zoning district   aggregate total
                           and aggregate total
Gases other than liquefied Regional Industrial        300,000 SCF above ground
petroleum gas              District (IR)              600,000 SCF below ground
                           All other manufacturing or 150,000 SCF above ground
                           industrial uses legally
                           established within any     300,000 SCF below ground
                           other land use zoning
                           district
 
   (c)   Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG).
      (1)   General Requirements.
         (A)   Agricultural, Commercial, Industrial, or Manufacturing Uses and
Land Use Zoning Districts. Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) storage and
distribution facilities for agricultural, commercial, industrial, or
manufacturing uses shall be allowed subject to a Use Permit in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses). The location,
installation, operation, and maintenance of LPG storage and distribution
facilities shall be subject to:
            (I)   The standards in this Subdivision.
            (II)   The conditions, requirements, and standards imposed by the
Review Authority in compliance with this Chapter.
         (B)   Residential Uses and Land Use Zoning Districts. County Code
Title 2, Division 3 (Fire Protection and Explosives and Hazardous Materials)
shall establish standards for residential uses and residential land use zoning
districts for LPG storage.
         (C)   Conflict Between Land Use District and Use Permit Requirements.
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this §
83.01.060(c) (Liquefied Petroleum Gas [LPG]) and the provisions of a land use
zoning district, including the requirement for Use Permit, the provisions of
this Section shall prevail and control.
      (2)   Fire Protection Requirements for All Parcels.
         (A)   Setbacks for LPG storage and distribution facilities from
structures and property lines shall be those specified by County Code
Title 2, Division 3 (Fire Protection and Explosives and Hazardous Materials).
         (B)   LPG storage tanks shall be centrally located on the parcel to
the satisfaction of the Fire Department.
      (3)   Additional Fire Protection Requirements for Specific Types of
Parcels. For parcels that have no more than one occupied structure less than
5,000 square feet in size and where the water system provides substandard flows
per International Standards Organization (ISO) standards for structure
protection, additional fire protection requirements shall be as follows:
         (A)   Where Parcel Size Is Ten Acres or More. Fire flow shall be
calculated for exposures only in compliance with County Code
Title 2, Division 3 (Fire Protection and Explosives and Hazardous Materials).
         (B)   Where Parcel Size Is at Least Five Acres but less than Ten
Acres.
            (I)   A one hour approved protective coating shall be applied to
the LPG storage tank.
            (II)   Fire flow shall be calculated for exposures only, in
compliance with County Code
Title 2, Division 3 (Fire Protection and Explosives and Hazardous Materials).
         (C)   Where Parcel Size Is at Least Two and One-half Acres, but less
than Five Acres.
            (I)   A two hour approved protective coating shall be applied to
the tank.
            (II)   Fire flow shall be calculated for exposures only, in
compliance with County Code
Title 2, Division 3 (Fire Protection and Explosives and Hazardous Materials).
      (4)   Additional Fire Protection Requirements for Any Parcel with
Adequate Fire Flow Available per ISO Standards.
         (A)   Fire hydrant(s) shall serve the parcel in compliance with County
Code
Title 2, Division 3 (Fire Protection and Explosives and Hazardous Materials).
         (B)   Fire flow shall provide for exposure protection (ISO
Calculation) and LPG storage tank protection/suppression.
            (I)   Sprinklers shall use calculations, as adopted by County Code
Title 2, Division 3 (Fire Protection and Explosives and Hazardous Materials).
            (II)   Hose lines shall use the formula: GPM = five times the
square root of the tank capacity.
         (C)   Additional protection.
            (I)   Where the Fire Chief determines that water can be applied to
the tank or exposures by the Fire Department in required amounts in eight
minutes or less, no additional protection shall be required.
            (II)   Where the Fire Chief determines that water cannot be applied
to the tank or exposures by the Fire Department in required amounts in eight
minutes or less, one of the following protection measures shall be required:
               (i)   One hour approved protective coating shall be applied to
the LPG storage tank; or
               (ii)   A fixed spray water system shall be installed as approved
by the Fire Department.
      (5)   Additional fire protection requirements for any parcel not included
in either Subdivisions (C)(III) or (C)(IV), above:
         (A)   Either a one-hour or more protective coating shall be applied to
the LPG storage tank, as required by the Fire Department, or a fixed spray
water system shall be installed instead of coating the tank.
         (B)   Fire flow shall be calculated for exposure only, in compliance
with the San Bernardino Code
Title 2, Division 3 (Fire Protection and Explosives and Hazardous Materials).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.01.070 Heat.
   Land uses in industrial districts shall not emit heat that would cause a
temperature increase on any adjacent property in excess of ten degrees
Fahrenheit, whether the change is in the air, on the ground, or in a structure.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.01.080 Noise.
   This Section establishes standards concerning acceptable noise levels for
both noise-sensitive land uses and for noise-generating land uses.
   (a)   Noise Measurement. Noise shall be measured:
         (1)   At the property line of the nearest site that is occupied by,
and/or zoned or designated to allow the development of noise-sensitive land
uses;
         (2)   With a sound level meter that meets the standards of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI § SI4 1979, Type 1 or Type 2);
         (3)   Using the “A” weighted sound pressure level scale in decibels
(ref. pressure = 20 micronewtons per meter squared). The unit of measure shall
be designated as dB(A).
   (b)   Noise Impacted Areas. Areas within the County shall be designated as
“noise-impacted” if exposed to existing or projected future exterior noise
levels from mobile or stationary sources exceeding the standards listed in
Subdivision (d) (Noise Standards for Stationary Noise Sources) and Subdivision
(e) (Noise Standards for Adjacent Mobile Noise Sources), below. New development
of residential or other noise-sensitive land uses shall not be allowed in
noise-impacted areas unless effective mitigation measures are incorporated into
the project design to reduce noise levels to these standards. Noise-sensitive
land uses shall include residential uses, schools, hospitals, nursing homes,
religious institutions, libraries, and similar uses.
   (c)   Noise Standards for Stationary Noise Sources.
      (1)   Noise Standards.  
Table 83-2 (Noise Standards for Stationary Noise Sources) describes the noise
standard for emanations from a stationary noise source, as it affects adjacent
properties:
Table 83-2
Noise Standards for Stationary Noise Sources
Affected Land Uses  7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. Leq 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. Leq
(Receiving Noise)
Table 83-2
Noise Standards for Stationary Noise Sources
Affected Land Uses    7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. Leq 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. Leq
(Receiving Noise)
Residential           55 dB(A)                   45 dB(A)
Professional Services 55 dB(A)                   55 dB(A)
Other Commercial      60 dB(A)                   60 dB(A)
Industrial            70 dB(A)                   70 dB(A)
Leq = (Equivalent Energy Level). The sound level corresponding to a steady-
state sound level containing the same total energy as a time-varying signal
over a given sample period, typically one, eight or 24 hours.
dB(A) = (A-weighted Sound Pressure Level). The sound pressure level, in
decibels, as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting filter
network. The A-weighting filter de-emphasizes the very low and very high
frequency components of the sound, placing greater emphasis on those
frequencies within the sensitivity range of the human ear.
Ldn = (Day-Night Noise Level). The average equivalent A-weighted sound
level during a 24-hour day obtained by adding 10 decibels to the hourly
noise levels measured during the night (from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.). In
this way Ldn takes into account the lower tolerance of people for noise
during nighttime periods.
 
      (2)   Noise Limit Categories. No person shall operate or cause to be
operated a source of sound at a location or allow the creation of noise on
property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by the person, which
causes the noise level, when measured on another property, either incorporated
or unincorporated, to exceed any one of the following:
         (A)   The noise standard for the receiving land use as specified in
Subdivision (b) (Noise-Impacted Areas), above, for a cumulative period of more
than 30 minutes in any hour.
         (B)   The noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of
more than 15 minutes in any hour.
         (C)   The noise standard plus ten dB(A) for a cumulative period of
more than five minutes in any hour.
         (D)   The noise standard plus 15 dB(A) for a cumulative period of more
than one minute in any hour.
         (E)   The noise standard plus 20 dB(A) for any period of time.
   (d)   Noise Standards for Adjacent Mobile Noise Sources. Noise from mobile
sources may affect adjacent properties adversely. When it does, the noise shall
be mitigated for any new development to a level that shall not exceed the
standards described in the following
Table 83-3 (Noise Standards for Adjacent Mobile Noise Sources).
Table 83-3
Noise Standards for Adjacent Mobile Noise Sources
Land Use        Ldn (or CNEL) dB(A)
Categories Uses Interior (1) Exterior (2)
Table 83-3
Noise Standards for Adjacent Mobile Noise Sources
Land Use                                              Ldn (or CNEL) dB(A)
Categories           Uses                             Interior (1) Exterior (2)
Residential          Single and multi-family, duplex, 45           60(3)
                     mobile homes
Commercial           Hotel, motel, transient housing  45           60(3)
                     Commercial retail, bank,         50           N/A
                     restaurant
                     Office building, research and
                     development, professional        45           65
                     offices
                     Amphitheater, concert hall,      45           N/A
                     auditorium, movie theater
                     Hospital, nursing home, school
Institutional/Public classroom, religious             45           65
                     institution, library
Open Space           Park                             N/A          65
Notes:
(1) The indoor environment shall exclude bathrooms, kitchens, toilets, closets
and corridors.
(2) The outdoor environment shall be limited to:
   ·   Hospital/office building patios
   ·   Hotel and motel recreation areas
   ·   Mobile home parks
   ·   Multi-family private patios or balconies
   ·   Park picnic areas
   ·   Private yard of single-family dwellings
   ·   School playgrounds
(3)   An exterior noise level of up to 65 dB(A) (or CNEL) shall be allowed
provided exterior noise levels have been substantially mitigated through a
reasonable application of the best available noise reduction technology, and
interior noise exposure does not exceed 45 dB(A) (or CNEL) with windows and
doors closed. Requiring that windows and doors remain closed to achieve an
acceptable interior noise level shall necessitate the use of air conditioning
or mechanical ventilation.
CNEL = (Community Noise Equivalent Level). The average equivalent A-weighted
sound level during a 24-hour day, obtained after addition of approximately five
decibels to sound levels in the evening from 7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. and ten
decibels to sound levels in the night from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
 
   (e)   Increases in Allowable Noise Levels. If the measured ambient level
exceeds any of the first four noise limit categories in Subdivision (d)(2),
above, the allowable noise exposure standard shall be increased to reflect the
ambient noise level. If the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit
category in Subdivision (d)(2), above, the maximum allowable noise level under
this category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level.
   (f)   Reductions in Allowable Noise Levels. If the alleged offense consists
entirely of impact noise or simple tone noise, each of the noise levels in
Table 83-2 (Noise Standards for Stationary Noise Sources) shall be reduced by
five dB(A).
   (g)   Exempt Noise. The following sources of noise shall be exempt from the
regulations of this Section:
      (1)   Motor vehicles not under the control of the commercial or
industrial use.
      (2)   Emergency equipment, vehicles, and devices.
      (3)   Temporary construction, maintenance, repair, or demolition
activities between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except Sundays and Federal
holidays.
   (h)   Noise Standards for Other Structures. All other structures shall be
sound attenuated against the combined input of all present and projected
exterior noise to not exceed the criteria.
 
Table 83-4
Noise Standards for Other Structures
Typical Uses                             12-Hour Equivalent Sound Level
                                         (Interior) in dBA Ldn
Educational, institutions, libraries,    45
meeting facilities, etc.
General office, reception, etc.          50
Retail stores, restaurants, etc.         55
Other areas for manufacturing, assembly, 65
testing, warehousing, etc.
 
   In addition, the average of the maximum levels on the loudest of intrusive
sounds occurring during a 24-hour period shall not exceed 65 dBA interior.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014)
§ 83.01.090 Vibration.
   (a)   Vibration Standard. No ground vibration shall be allowed that can be
felt without the aid of instruments at or beyond the lot line, nor shall any
vibration be allowed which produces a particle velocity greater than or equal
to two-tenths inches per second measured at or beyond the lot line.
   (b)   Vibration Measurement. Vibration velocity shall be measured with a
seismograph or other instrument capable of measuring and recording displacement
and frequency, particle velocity, or acceleration. Readings shall be made at
points of maximum vibration along any lot line next to a parcel within a
residential, commercial and industrial land use zoning district.
   (c)   Exempt Vibrations. The following sources of vibration shall be exempt
from the regulations of this Section.
      (1)   Motor vehicles not under the control of the subject use.
      (2)   Temporary construction, maintenance, repair, or demolition
activities between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except Sundays and Federal
holidays.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.01.100 Waste Disposal.
   (a)   Liquid Waste Disposal and Runoff Control. No liquids of any kind shall
be discharged into a public or private sewage or drainage system, watercourse,
body of water, or into the ground, except in compliance with applicable
regulations of the County Code, Title 23 (Waters) of the California Code of
Regulations, the California Water Code, and related Federal regulations.
   (b)   Hazardous Waste. Refer to
Chapter 84.11 (Hazardous Waste Facilities) for regulations relative to
hazardous waste facilities.
   (c)   Solid Waste Disposal. Refer to
Chapter 84.24 (Solid Waste/Recyclable Materials Storage) for regulations
relative to solid waste disposal.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.01.110 External Commercial or Industrial Activity on Private Property.
   There shall be no unpermitted external or industrial activity on properties
subject to the County’s jurisdiction between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. that shall at any time impair the quiet enjoyment of neighboring property
owners or residents or in any manner disturb the public peace.
(Ord. 4245, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 83.02: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE STANDARDS
Section
   
83.02.010   Purpose.
   
83.02.020   Applicability.
   
83.02.030   Clear Sight Triangles.
   
83.02.040   Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions.
   
83.02.050   Parcel Area Measurements and Exceptions.
   
83.02.060   Screening and Buffering.
   
83.02.070   Setback Regulations and Exceptions.
   
83.02.080   Allowed Projections/Structures Within Setbacks.
§ 83.02.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that all development produces an
environment of stable and desirable character that is harmonious with existing
and future development, and protects the use and enjoyment of neighboring
properties, consistent with the General Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.02.020 Applicability.
   The standards of this Chapter apply to all land use zoning districts. These
standards shall be considered in combination with the standards for each land
use zoning district in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and
Division 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses). Where there may be a conflict,
the standards specific to the land use zoning district or specific land use
shall override these general standards.
   All structures, additions to structures, and uses shall conform to the
standards of this Chapter as determined applicable by the Director, except as
identified in
Chapter 84.17 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.02.030 Clear Sight Triangles.
   (a)   View Obstructions. Adequate visibility for vehicular and pedestrian
traffic shall be provided at clear sight triangles at all 90 degree angle
intersections of public rights-of-way and private driveways.
      (1)   Prohibited. The following shall be prohibited within a clear sight
triangle:
         (A)   Monument signs.
         (B)   Hedges or shrubbery.
      (2)   Maximum Height Requirements. The following shall not be erected,
placed, planted, or allowed to grow over 30 inches in height above the nearest
street curb elevation within a clear sight triangle:
         (A)   Fences and walls.
         (B)   Signs.
         (C)   Structures.
         (D)   Mounds of earth.
         (E)   Other visual obstructions.
      (3)   Exceptions. The requirements for clear sight triangles shall not
apply to:
         (A)   Traffic safety devices.
         (B)   Trees trimmed to eight feet above the adjoining curb.
         (C)   Utility poles.
         (D)   Other government or utility installed/maintained devices allowed
by this Development Code.
         (E)   Freestanding sign when the lower edge of the sign face is at
least eight feet above grade and when there are no more than two posts or
columns, each with a maximum width or diameter of 12 inches, supporting the
sign.
   (b)   Dimensions and Location. Clear sight triangles are right triangles
that shall be measured as follows:
      (1)   The 90-degree angle is formed by the intersection of either:
         (A)   The intersection of the edges of two roadways as measured at the
edge of their ultimate planned right-of-way; or
         (B)   The intersection of the edge of a private driveway or alley and
the edge of the ultimate planned right-of-way of an intersecting roadway.
      (2)   The two 45-degree angles of a clear sight triangle shall each be
located as follows (See
Figure 83-1):
         (A)   Roadway intersections - 30 feet from the roadway intersection.
         (B)   Private driveway or alleyway - ten feet from the intersection.
Figure 83-1 Clear Sight Triangles
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11027.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11029.jpg]
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.02.040 Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions.
   All structures shall meet the standards in this Section relating to height,
except for fences and walls, which shall comply with
Chapter 83.06 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls).
   (a)   Maximum Height Allowed. The height of buildings/structures shall not
exceed the standards established by the applicable land use zoning district,
except as otherwise provided in this Section.
   (b)   Height Measurement. Height shall be measured as the vertical distance
above a referenced datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat
roof or to the deck line of mansard roof or to the average height of the
highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof or the highest part of a structure.
The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever
yields a greater height of building:
      (1)   The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface
within a five-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building
when the sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet above lowest
grade.
      (2)   An elevation ten feet higher than the lowest grade when the
sidewalk or ground surface described in Subdivision (1) above is more than ten
feet about lowest grade.
   (c)   Allowed Building/Structure Height Increases. The maximum building/
structure height development standards established by
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) may be increased
as specified by this Section, provided the increase shall not conflict with
airport safety regulations or conditions of an approved Conditional Use Permit.
      (1)   Institutional Structures. Institutional structures in land use
zoning districts that impose a height limitation of 35 feet or less may exceed
the 35 foot height limit by up to 25 feet when the required front, side, and
rear setbacks are increased an additional one foot in excess of minimum
requirements for each four feet in height above 35 feet.
      (2)   Miscellaneous Structures. The maximum structure height specified in
a land use zoning district may be exceeded by no more than 50 percent for the
following structures, except that a lower maximum height may be specified in
the conditions of an approved Conditional Use Permit:
         (A)   Barns, silos, grain elevators, and other farm structures in
Rural Resource Conservation (RC), Agricultural (AG), or Rural Living (RL) land
use zoning districts.
         (B)   Birdhouses.
         (C)   Architectural features of religious institutions.
         (D)   Cooling towers, smokestacks or other structures that are
required by allowed industrial processes in industrial land use zoning
districts.
         (E)   Cupolas, domes, skylights, and gables.
         (F)   Elevator housings.
         (G)   Fire and hose towers.
         (H)   Fire or parapet walls.
         (I)   Flag poles.
         (J)   Mechanical equipment and its screening to include roof-mounted
wireless telecommunications support facilities.
         (K)   Monuments.
         (L)   Noncommercial antennae up to 65 feet in residential land use
zoning districts.
         (M)   Observation and carillon towers.
         (N)   Ornamental towers and spheres.
         (O)   Radio and television station towers.
         (P)   Residential chimneys, flues, smokestacks, and enclosures.
         (Q)   Solar energy collectors in the RS (Single Residential) and RM
(Multiple Residential) land use zoning districts. In other land use zoning
districts, these structures shall be allowed up to 65 feet. These structures
shall be set back from all property lines and habitable structures at least 100
percent of the height of the structure. For noncommercial windmills, refer to
Chapter 84.26 (Wind Energy Systems). Small solar collectors (less than three
feet by three feet) are exempt from this requirement to be setback from
property lines.
         (R)   Stairway housing.
         (S)   Water tanks and water towers.
         (T)   Distribution and transmission cables and towers.
         (U)   Other roof structures and mechanical equipment similar to those
listed above.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4245,
passed - -2014)
§ 83.02.050 Parcel Area Measurements and Exceptions.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide regulations for
parcel area standards required by this Development Code. The intent is to
clarify the circumstances in which exceptions to the standards may be allowed
and to provide uniform methods of calculating parcel areas and measuring parcel
dimensions.
   (b)   Applicability. Except as provided in this Chapter, all parcels of land
shall conform to the parcel area standards in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) for the land use
zoning districts in which the parcels are located.
   (c)   Allowed Substandard Parcels. A legally created parcel having an area,
width, or depth less than that required by an applicable standard provided in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) may be used or
built upon, provided the development otherwise conforms to the requirements of
this Development Code.
   (d)   Exceptions to Parcel Area Requirements.
      (1)   Parcel Area Reduction as a Result of Government Action for Public
Purpose. Where a parcel area or setback width or depth has been reduced by a
government agency to not more than 25 percent below the minimum requirements
identified in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses), by condemnation,
acquisition or dedication for a road, drain, or other public purpose, including
any dedication as a result of a redistricting, Variance or Conditional Use
Permit, the parcel area existing before reduction shall be what counts for
meeting the requirements of this Development Code.
      (2)   Preservation of Historic Structures. Parcels to be used for the
preservation of historic structures or land uses may have less than the minimum
parcel area required for the land use zoning district where located, provided
that:
         (A)   The parcel’s structure and/or use have been or may be deemed
historic by an incorporated, nonprofit historic preservation organization.
         (B)   The site shall not be used for human habitation nor generate
sewage effluent unless it is:
            (I)   Served by common sewage facilities; or
            (II)   Contains at least 40,000 square feet and the facilities meet
the approval of the Environmental Health Services Division.
         (C)   The parcel owner shall grant an easement in perpetuity to the
County or other governmental body empowered to accept the easement, restricting
further development of the site to historic preservation purposes.
      (3)   Subdivision in Compliance with Conditional Use Permit. The
subdivision of multi-family dwellings and mobile home parks in compliance with
the conditions of an approved Conditional Use Permit shall not be held to the
minimum parcel area requirements of the applicable land use zoning district.
      (4)   Subdivision Where Topographical Constraints or Created by Aliquot
Part. Metes and bounds subdivisions may have actual parcel areas that are ten
percent less than those required by the applicable land use zoning district,
where the parcels either:
         (A)   Have topographical constraints; or
         (B)   Are created by aliquot part division (i.e., using a “proper
divisor,” which is any divisor of a given number other than the number itself).
   (e)   Parcel Area Calculations. The minimum parcel area requirements
identified in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) shall be
calculated as follows:
      (1)   Urban Areas. The area of parcels within the following urban land
use zoning districts shall be that area included within the perimeter of the
legal boundaries of the subject property, exclusive of any area within abutting
planned rights-of-way (net area): Single Residential (RS) where lands are
designated for lots smaller than one acre as measured herein, Multiple
Residential (RM), Special Development (SD) and all commercial, industrial and
institutional land use zoning districts.
      (2)   Rural Areas. The area of parcels within the following rural land
use zoning shall be that area included within the perimeter of the legal
boundaries of the subject property inclusive of that area within the planned
rights-of-way up to the centerline, not to exceed 60 feet from the legal
boundary of the lot (gross area): Resource Conservation (RC), Agriculture (AG),
Rural Living (RL), Floodway (FW) and Open Space (OS). Within the RS-1 (Single
Residential-one acre minimum lot size) Land Use Zoning District, parcels shall
be measured based on gross area as defined herein, provided that when any one
acre lot is created within an area not served by a municipal water and sewer
system, each lot shall be configured so as to meet applicable requirements for
an individual well and septic system.
      (3)   Parcels That Abut Alleys. In computing the area of a parcel that
abuts upon one or more alleys, one-half the width of the alley(s) may be
assumed to be a portion of the parcel.
      (4)   Rounding. In computing lot area requirements for the resultant
parcels in a subdivision, the total lot area shall be rounded to the nearest
tenth of an acre using the normal rounding convention (e.g., 2.45 acres shall
be rounded to 2.5, 9.94 acres shall be rounded to 9.9 acres).
   (f)   Measurement of Parcel Dimensions. All required parcel dimensions shall
be measured in compliance with the definitions contained in
Division 10 (Definitions).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.02.060 Screening and Buffering.
   This Section provides standards for the screening and buffering of adjoining
land uses, equipment, and outdoor storage areas, and surface parking areas.
Multi-family and nonresidential land uses shall comply with the requirements of
this Section.
   (a)   Screening Between Different Land Uses.
      (1)   An opaque screen consisting of plant material, a minimum of ten
feet in width, and a solid masonry wall, a minimum of six feet in height, shall
be installed along parcel boundaries whenever a commercial, institutional or
industrial development adjoins a residential land use zoning district.
      (2)   The maximum height of walls shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 83.06 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls).
      (3)   The walls shall be architecturally treated or landscaped on both
sides to avoid the appearance of unfinished precision block, subject to the
approval of the Director.
      (4)   Minimum sizes of plant materials shall conform to the requirements
in §
83.10.070(d) (Landscape Standards Minimum Sizes of Plant Materials).
Figure 83-2 Screening and Buffering
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11031.jpg]
 
   (b)   Mechanical Equipment, Loading Docks, and Refuse Areas.
      (1)   Roof or ground mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air
conditioning, heating, ventilation ducts and exhaust, etc.), loading docks,
refuse storage areas, and utility services shall be screened from public view
from adjoining public streets and rights-of-way and surrounding area(s) zoned
for residential or open space uses.
      (2)   The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with
other on-site development in terms of colors, materials, and architectural
style.
      (3)   Landscaping shall be installed adjacent to the walls at the
discretion of the Director.
   (c)   Outdoor Storage Areas.
      (1)   The use of outdoor areas for storage purposes shall be subject to
the following standards:
         (A)   Outside storage areas shall be screened with a solid sight-
obscuring wall not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height, of a
type and design approved by the Director. The wall shall include sight-
obscuring gates. The wall and gate(s) shall be continuously maintained in good
repair.
         (B)   Stored materials shall be kept below the level of the fence or
other screening mechanism.
         (C)   Site operations in conjunction with outdoor storage, including
the loading and unloading of materials and equipment, shall be conducted
entirely within a walled area.
         (D)   Exterior storage shall comply with Title 3 (Health and
Sanitation and Animal Regulations) of the County Code.
      (2)   Incidental outdoor storage shall be allowed, subject to the above
standards. Outdoor storage categorized as a primary land use shall be subject
to the applicable permitting requirements identified in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and the above
standards.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009)
§ 83.02.070 Setback Regulations and Exceptions.
   This Section establishes standards to ensure the provision of open areas
around structures for visibility and traffic safety; access to and around
structures; access to natural light and ventilation; separation of incompatible
land uses; and space for privacy, landscaping, and recreation.
Figure 83-3 Location and Measurement of Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11033.jpg]
 
   (a)   General Setback Requirements.
      (1)   Structures. Each structure shall comply with the setback
requirements established for each land use zoning district in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and established
for specific uses in
Division 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses) and elsewhere in this Development
Code.
      (2)   Setback Areas or Open Space Areas.
         (A)   Setback areas or open space around an existing or proposed
structure shall not be considered as providing setback areas or open space for
any other structure.
         (B)   Setback areas or open space on an adjoining parcel shall not be
considered as providing setback areas or open space for a parcel on which a
structure is proposed to be erected.
      (3)   Rights-of-Way and Easements.
         (A)   Future Right-of-Way. If any future right-of-way line has been
established by an ordinance, specific plan, or similar document, the
measurement of the setback shall be made from the future right-of-way or future
property line.
         (B)   Street Setbacks. Street setbacks shall provide a minimum half
width of 30 feet for a right-of-way in the Valley or Desert Regions and 20 feet
for a right-of-way in the Mountain Region unless otherwise specified by an
ordinance, specific plan, or similar document.
         (C)   Private Road Easements. The minimum front, side, and rear
setbacks from private road easements shall be 15 feet in the Mountain Region
and 25 feet in the Valley and Desert Regions from the recognized easement line.
This rear setback requirement shall apply only when the easement is used to
access two or more parcels.
      (4)   Front Setbacks.
         (A)   Front setback lines shall be established so that, wherever
possible, the yard width at the setback line is at least the minimum width
specified by the applicable land use zoning district, unless otherwise allowed
by this Development Code.
         (B)   On through lots, front setbacks shall be provided on all street
frontages.
      (5)   Street Side Setbacks for Corner Parcels. Side yards on the street
sides of corner parcels shall require the same setback as front yards unless
otherwise specified within the provisions of a land use zoning district,
ordinance, specific plan or similar regulation.
   (b)   Exemptions from Setback Requirements.
      (1)   The minimum setback requirements of this Development Code shall
apply to all uses except for the following:
         (A)   Fences or walls constructed within the height limitations of
Chapter 83.06 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls).
         (B)   Retaining walls less than three feet in height above finished
grade not to exceed four such walls within the setback.
      (2)   Street setback lines, as delineated on all Final Maps, Parcel Maps
and Records of Survey maps recorded in the County between March 1, 1948 and
January 1, 1987, or on Composite Development Plans on file with the Division of
Building and Safety shall be the street and yard setback distances required on
the property within the Final Maps, Parcel Maps, Records of Survey or Composite
Development Plans, unless additional road dedication is required as a condition
of development. When additional road dedication is required, or in the case of
Final Maps, Parcel Maps and Records of Survey maps recorded prior to March 1,
1948, the greater setback distance of either the property development standards
in the applicable land use zoning district based on the ultimate right-of-way
width or the setback distance as shown on the approved map shall prevail.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Development Code, any request to
modify or deviate from a building setback line designated on a recorded map or
final map shall be made in compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 85.17 (Variances).
   (c)   Measurement of Setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured as follows:
      (1)   Front Setbacks. The front yard setback shall be measured at right
angles from the nearest point on the front property line of the parcel to the
nearest point of the structure envelope, except for corner parcels. Refer to §
810.01.140(oo)(1) for the definition of front lot line.
      (2)   Side Setbacks.
         (A)   The side yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the
nearest point on the side property line of the parcel to the nearest line of
the structure envelope, establishing a setback line parallel with the side
property line that extends between the front and rear yards.
         (B)   For the purposes of calculating side setbacks, the following
dwellings with common party walls shall be considered as one structure
occupying one parcel:
            (I)   Semi-detached two and four family dwellings.
            (II)   Row dwellings.
            (III)   Group dwellings.
            (IV)   Court apartments.
      (3)   Street Side Yard Setbacks. The side yard setback on the street side
of a corner parcel shall be measured from the nearest point of the side
property line adjoining the street.
      (4)   Rear Yard Setbacks.
         (A)   The rear yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the
nearest point on the rear property line of the parcel to the nearest line of
the structure envelope, establishing a setback line parallel with the rear
property line that extends between the side yards, except:
            (I)   If an access easement or street right-of-way line extends
into or through a rear yard, the measurement shall be taken from the nearest
point of the access easement or right-of-way line; and
            (II)   When the side property lines converge to a point at the rear
of the parcel, or to a rear property line narrower than ten feet, for setback
purposes the rear property line shall be considered to be a line parallel to
the front property line measuring ten feet between the two side property lines.
The rear yard depth shall be measured from the ten-foot line to the nearest
part of the primary structure on the parcel.
         (B)   In computing the depth of a rear setback where the yard opens
into an alley, one half the width of the alley may be assumed to be a portion
of the required rear setback.
Figure 83-4 Rear Setbacks on Irregularly Shaped Parcels
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11035.jpg]
 
   (d)   Allowed Projections into Setbacks. See §
83.02.080 (Allowed Projections into Setbacks).
   (e)   Construction Across Property Lines Prohibited. A structure shall not
be constructed across the property line(s) of two or more contiguous parcels.
If the placement of a proposed structure would otherwise cross the property
line of two or more contiguous parcels held by the same owner, before the
issuance of a Building Permit, the property owner shall apply for and receive
an approved voluntary lot merger, lot line adjustment, or parcel map to move or
eliminate the property line in question. The lot line adjustment process may be
used if the parcels will still meet the development standards of the land use
zoning district in which the parcels are located.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008)
§ 83.02.080 Allowed Projections/Structures Within Setbacks.
   This Section provides standards for allowed projections into required
setbacks. Nothing in this Section is intended to prevent the construction of an
allowed primary or accessory structure within the building envelope that is in
the parcel area not included in any required setback area.
   (a)   Open and Unobstructed. Each setback area shall be open and
unobstructed from finished grade, or other specified level at which the setback
area is required, to the sky except as provided in Table 83-5 (Allowed
Projections/Structures Within Setbacks).
   (b)   Projections Attached to Primary Structure. The architectural
projections identified in the table shall be attached to the primary structure
allowed on the parcel.
   (c)   Required Clear Areas. The projections listed in Table 83-5 (Allowed
Projections/Structures Within Setbacks) may not, in any event, encroach on or
into the following:
      (1)   The Clear Sight Triangle required at traffic intersections.
      (2)   Within three feet of any parcel line, dividing parcels not in
common ownership, except as noted in the Table.
      (3)   Within five feet of any side or rear property line in a Fire Safety
Overlay District or as allowed in §
82.13.060(c).
   (d)   Table 83-5 (Allowed Projections into Setbacks). Table 83-5 (Allowed
Projections/Structures Within Setbacks) lists the equipment and architectural
features typically related to a structure that may extend into front, side, and
rear yard setbacks.
Table 83-5
Allowed Projections/Structures Within Setbacks
Projections Front and Street Side Setbacks Interior Side Setbacks Rear Setbacks
Table 83-5
Allowed Projections/Structures Within Setbacks
                                                                                 Front and    Interior
Projections                                                                      Street Side  Side     Rear Setbacks
                                                                                 Setbacks     Setbacks
Awnings, canopies, louvers and similar shading devices                           4 ft.        2 ft.    4 ft.
Eaves, cornices, sills, planting boxes; skylights, fireplaces, flues and
chimneys, small satellite dishes (less than 4 ft. in diameter) that are mounted  4 ft.        2 ft.    4 ft.
on the roof, and similar architectural features
                                                                                 4 ft. When
Evaporative coolers, air conditioner compressors, and pool equipment             screened     2 ft.    4 ft.
                                                                                 from view
Water tanks, propane tanks sited per California Fire Code and maintained in                   Not
compliance with standards specified by §                                        Not allowed  allowed  4 ft.
83.01.060 (Fire Hazards)
Propane tanks in Mountain Region only when sited per California Fire Code and    Allowed when Not
maintained in compliance with standards specified by §                          screened     allowed  4 ft.
83.01.060 (Fire Hazards)                                                         from view
Large freestanding photovoltaic or solar panels (9 sq. ft. or greater)           Not allowed  Not      10 ft.
                                                                                              allowed  Minimum 5 ft. separation from rear parcel line
Attached patio roofs and similar residential structures having open, unwalled                 Not      15 ft.
sides along not less than 50 percent of their perimeters, including top deck     4 ft.        allowed  Minimum 5 ft. separation from rear parcel line
(decks with height greater than 4 ft. above grade)
Cantilevered portion of primary structure more than 8 ft. above grade limited to 4 ft.        4 ft.    4 ft.
50 percent of length of one wall on any one story
Open-sided stairways, landings and required fire escapes                         5 ft.        4 ft.    10 ft.
Uncovered porches, platforms, or decks (up to 4 ft. in height)                   4 ft.        4 ft.    10 ft.
Open storage of boats, recreational vehicles, trailers and similar vehicles      Not Allowed  Allowed  Allowed
Temporary trash storage in appropriate containers                                Not Allowed  Allowed  Allowed
Slides, clotheslines and similar equipment                                       Not allowed  Not      Allowed
                                                                                              allowed
Radio or television masts or antennas, large satellite dishes (4 ft. or greater  Not allowed  Not      Allowed
in diameter)                                                                                  allowed
Garages, carports, sheds and other similar uninhabitable, detached, enclosed
accessory structures in the Valley and Desert Region that:                          Not    Not      Allowed
•   Occupy no more than 25 percent of yard                                  allowed      allowed
•   Limited to 1 story in height
                                                                                 Allowed for
                                                                                 garages and
                                                                                 carports
                                                                                 only, but
                                                                                 must
                                                                                 maintain a 3
Garages, carports, sheds and other similar, uninhabitable enclosed accessory     ft. setback
structures in Mountain Region only that:                                         from road
•   Limited to 1 story in height                                            right-of-    Not         Allowed for detached accessory structures
•   Meet administrative criteria of Building Official                       way. 10 ft.  allowed  only
•   Occupy no more than 25 percent of rear yard                             minimum from
•   Adhere to 20 percent sideyard setback for front and rear property lines existing
                                                                                 edge of
                                                                                 roadway
                                                                                 pavement.
                                                                                 Other
                                                                                 structures
                                                                                 not allowed.
                                                                                 As specified
                                                                                 by the
Unroofed parking, parking decks, and loading areas                               Chapter      Allowed  Allowed
                                                                                 83.11
                                                                                 (Parking
                                                                                 Regulations)
Covered, underground or partially excavated structures (e.g., basements, fallout Allowed in all setback areas, provided that the facilities do not
shelters, garages, public utility or telephone/cable TV vaults, wine cellars,    extend more than 30 inches above the adjoining average finished grade
etc.)                                                                            level.
Fences, screening, safety guardrails, walls along property lines                 Allowed in compliance with §
                                                                                 83.06.030 (General Height Limitations).
                                                                                              10 ft.
                                                                                 6 ft. max.   max.
                                                                                 height       height
   •   Industrial land use zoning districts                              4 ft. max.   10 ft.   10 ft. max. height
•   Commercial land use zoning districts                                    height       max.     10 ft. max. height
•   All other land use zoning districts                                     4 ft. max.   height   6 ft. max. height
                                                                                 height       6 ft.
                                                                                              max.
                                                                                              height
                                                                                 Fence heights in excess of these standards may be allowed by an
                                                                                 approved Use Permit, Variance, Tract or Parcel Map or when required
                                                                                 by the County for reasons of the health and safety of the general
                                                                                 public. In the RC and RL land use zoning districts, open fences may
                                                                                 go up to a maximum of 5 feet in the front yard and street side yards.
•   Flagpoles
•   Sculpture and similar decorations
•   Trees(1), shrubs(1), and landscaping with a screening effect                                 
•   Utility poles and lines located along property lines no closer than one                      
from side property line (this includes small solar panels that are less than 9                        
sq. ft.)                                                                                              
•   Walkways(2)                                                                                  
•   Unroofed paving and driveways outside the ultimate road right-of-way.   Allowed      Allowed  Allowed
Unroofed paving and driveways within the ultimate road right-of-way shall be a
minimum of 3 feet from the side property line(1)
Signs                                                                            Allowed in all setback areas subject to
                                                                                 Chapter 83.13 (Signs)
Swimming pools and spas no closer than 5 ft. to any property line                Not allowed  Not      Allowed
                                                                                              allowed
                                                                                              4 ft.
Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units(3)                  Not allowed  from     4 ft. from property line
                                                                                              property
                                                                                              line
(1)       Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that at maturity they shall not interfere with a driver's or pedestrian's view of public rights-of-way
(e.g., the view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic, etc.) or otherwise impair public safety, or interfere with the safe operation of a
motor vehicle on public streets.
(2)    Walkways necessary for access to the building, parking areas and driveways may be supported on masonry construction in the Mountain Region.
(3)   No setback shall be required for an existing living area or accessory structure or a structure constructed in the same location and to the same
dimensions as an existing structure that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit or to a portion of an accessory dwelling unit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014;
Am. Ord. 4383, passed - -2020)
CHAPTER 83.03: AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES - DENSITY BONUS
Section
   
83.03.010   Purpose.
   
83.03.020   Applicability.
   
83.03.030   Eligibility for Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions
   
83.03.040   Allowed Density Bonuses
   
83.03.050   Allowed Incentives or Concessions
   
83.03.060   Parking Requirements in Density Bonus Projects
   
83.03.070   Bonus and Incentives for Housing with Child Care Facilities
   
83.03.080   Continued Availability
   
83.03.090   Location and Type of Designated Units
   
83.03.100   Processing of Bonus Requests
   
83.03.110Density Bonus Agreement
   
83.03.120   Control of Resale
   
83.03.130   Judicial Relief, Waiver of Standards
§ 83.03.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter is intended to implement Government Code §§ 65915 et seq. and
the Housing Element of the Policy Plan, and to increase the production of
affordable and senior citizen housing.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.020 Applicability.
   The provisions of this Chapter apply to a proposed housing development, as
defined by Government Code § 65915(i), as may be amended from time to time,
that is eligible for a requested density bonus, incentives or concessions, or
waiver or reduction of development standards and parking ratios described
herein, and is applicable in all zones that allow residential as a primary use.
(Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.030 Eligibility for Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions.
   In order to be eligible for a density bonus and other incentives or
concessions as provided by this Chapter, a proposed housing development shall
comply with the following requirements and shall satisfy all other applicable
provisions of this Development Code, except as provided by §
83.03.050 (Allowed Incentives or Concessions).
   (a)   Resident Requirements. A housing development proposed to qualify for a
density bonus shall be designed and constructed so that it includes at least
any one of the following:
      (1)   At least ten percent of the total number of proposed units are for
lower income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 50079.5;
      (2)   At least five percent of the total number of proposed units are for
very low- income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 50105;
      (3)   The project is a senior citizen housing development as defined in
Civil Code §§ 51.3 and 51.12, or is a mobile home park that limits residency
based on age requirements for housing older persons in compliance with Civil
Code §§ 798.76 or 799.5;
      (4)   At least ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common
interest development, as defined in Civil Code § 4100, for persons and families
of moderate income, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 50093, provided that
all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase;
      (5)   At least ten percent of the total units of a housing development
for transitional foster youth, as defined in Education Code § 66025.9, disabled
veterans, as defined in Government Code § 18541, or homeless persons, as
defined in the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. Sec.
11301 et seq.). The units described in this paragraph shall be subject to a
recorded affordability restriction of 55 years and shall be provided at the
same affordability level as very low- income units;
      (6)   At least 20 percent of the total units for lower income students in
a student housing development that meets the requirements of Government Code §
65915(b)(1)(F); or
      (7)   One hundred percent of all units in the development, including
total units and density bonus units, but exclusive of a manager's unit or
units, are for lower income households, as defined by Health and Safety Code §
50079.5, except that up to 20 percent of the units in the development,
including total units and density bonus units, may be for moderate-income
households, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 50053.
   (b)   Applicant Selection of Basis for Bonus. For purposes of calculating
the amount of the density bonus in compliance with § 83.03.040 (Allowed Density
Bonuses), the applicant who requests a density bonus shall elect whether the
bonus shall be awarded on the basis of subsections (a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5),
(6) or (7).
   (c)   Bonus Units Shall Not Qualify a Project. A density bonus granted in
compliance with §
83.03.040 (Allowed Density Bonuses) shall not be included when determining the
number of housing units that is equal to the percentages required by subsection
(a).
   (d)   Minimum Project Size to Qualify for Density Bonus. The density bonus
provided by this Chapter shall be available only to a housing development of
five or more residential units, including mixed-use developments.
   (e)   Condominium Conversion Projects. A condominium conversion project for
which a density bonus is requested shall comply with the eligibility and other
requirements in Government Code § 65915.5.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.040 Allowed Density Bonuses.
   The Board shall determine the amount of a density bonus allowed in a housing
development in compliance with this Section. For the purposes of this Chapter,
"density bonus" means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable
gross residential density under the applicable Policy Plan designation and
zoning district as of the date of application by the applicant to the County.
   (a)   Density Bonus. A housing development that complies with the
eligibility requirements in §
83.03.030(a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6) or (7) shall be entitled to density
bonuses as follows, unless a lesser percentage or no increase in density bonus
is proposed by the applicant.
      (1)   Bonus for Units for Lower Income Households. A housing development
that is eligible for a bonus in compliance with the criteria in §
83.03.030(a)(1) (ten percent of units for lower income households) shall be
entitled to a density bonus calculated as follows:
Percentage of Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
Percentage of Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
10                                      20
11                                      21.5
12                                      23
13                                      24.5
14                                      26
15                                      27.5
16                                      29
17                                      30.5
18                                      32
19                                      33.5
20                                      35
21                                      38.75
22                                      42.5
23                                      46.25
24                                      50
 
      (2)   Bonus for Units for Very Low-income Households. A housing
development that is eligible for a bonus in compliance with the criteria in §
83.03.030(a)(2) (five percent of units for very low-income households) shall be
entitled to a density bonus calculated as follows:
Percentage of Very Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
Percentage of Very Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
5                                            20
6                                            22.5
7                                            25
8                                            27.5
9                                            30
10                                           32.5
11                                           35
12                                           38.75
13                                           42.5
14                                           46.25
15                                           50
 
      (3)   Bonus for Senior Citizen Development. A housing development that is
eligible for a bonus in compliance with the criteria in §
83.03.030(a)(3) (senior citizen housing development or mobile home park) shall
be entitled to a density bonus of 20 percent of the number of senior housing
units.
      (4)   Bonus for Transitional Foster Youth, Disabled Veterans, or Homeless
Persons. A housing development that is eligible for a bonus in compliance with
the criteria in § 83.03.030(a)(5) (transitional foster youth, disabled
veterans, or homeless persons) shall be entitled to a density bonus of 20
percent of the number of the type of units giving rise to a density bonus.
      (5)   Bonus for Student Housing Development. A housing development that
is eligible for a bonus in compliance with the criteria in §
83.03.030(a)(6) (lower-income students in a student housing development) shall
be entitled to a density bonus of 35 percent of the student housing units.
      (6)   Bonus for 100 Percent Affordable Housing Development. A housing
development that is eligible for a bonus in compliance with the criteria in §
83.03.030(a)(7) (100 percent of all units in development affordable with up to
20 percent moderate) shall be entitled to a density bonus of 80 percent of the
number of units for lower-income households, except if the housing development
is located within one-half mile of a major transit stop, then no maximum
density controls shall be applied.
      (7)   Bonus for Moderate-income Units in Common Interest Development. A
housing development that is eligible for a bonus in compliance with the
criteria in §
83.03.030(a)(4) (ten percent of units in a common interest development for
persons and families of moderate income) shall be entitled to a density bonus
calculated as follows:
Percentage of Moderate-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
Percentage of Moderate-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
10                                           5
11                                           6
12                                           7
13                                           8
14                                           9
15                                           10
16                                           11
17                                           12
18                                           13
19                                           14
20                                           15
21                                           16
22                                           17
23                                           18
24                                           19
25                                           20
26                                           21
27                                           22
28                                           23
29                                           24
30                                           25
31                                           26
32                                           27
33                                           28
34                                           29
35                                           30
36                                           31
37                                           32
38                                           33
39                                           34
40                                           35
41                                           38.75
42                                           42.5
43                                           46.25
44                                           50
 
      (8)   Density Bonus for Land Donation. When an applicant for a Tentative
Map, Parcel Map, or other residential development approval donates land to the
County in compliance with this subsection, the applicant shall be entitled to a
density bonus for the entire development, provided that nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to affect the authority of the County to require
a developer to donate land as a condition of development, as follows:
         (A)   Basic Bonus. The applicant shall be entitled to a 15 percent
increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the
applicable Policy Plan land use designation and zoning district for the entire
development, as follows.
Percentage of Very Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
Percentage of Very Low-Income Units Proposed Percentage of Density Bonus
10                                           15
11                                           16
12                                           17
13                                           18
14                                           19
15                                           20
16                                           21
17                                           22
18                                           23
19                                           24
20                                           25
21                                           26
22                                           27
23                                           28
24                                           29
25                                           30
26                                           31
27                                           32
28                                           33
29                                           34
30                                           35
 
         (B)   Increased Bonus. The increase identified in the table above
shall be in addition to any increase in density required by subsections (a)(1)
through (a)(7), up to a maximum combined mandated density increase of 35
percent if an applicant seeks both the increase required in compliance with
this subsection (a)(8), as well as the bonuses provided by subsections (a)(1)
through (a)(7).
         (C)   Eligibility for Increased Bonus. An applicant shall be eligible
for the increased density bonus provided by this subsection if all of the
following conditions are met:
            (I)   The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than
the date of approval of the Final Map, Parcel Map, or residential development
application.
            (II)   The developable acreage and zoning classification of the
land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units
affordable to very low-income households in an amount not less than ten percent
of the number of residential units of the proposed development.
            (III)   The transferred land is at least one acre in size, or of
sufficient size to permit development of at least 40 units; has the appropriate
Policy Plan land use designation; is appropriately zoned for development as
affordable housing; and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and
infrastructure. The land shall have appropriate zoning and development
standards to make the development of the affordable units feasible.
            (IV)   No later than the date of approval of the Final Map, Parcel
Map, or of the residential development, the transferred land shall have all of
the permits and approvals, other than Building Permits, necessary for the
development of the very low-income housing units on the transferred land,
except that the County may subject the proposed development to subsequent
design review to the extent authorized by Government Code § 65583.2(i) if the
design is not reviewed by the County before the time of transfer.
            (V)   The transferred land and the affordable units shall be
subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units
consistent with §
83.03.080 (Continued Availability), which shall be recorded on the property at
the time of dedication.
            (VI)   The land is transferred to the County or to a housing
developer approved by the County. The County may require the applicant to
identify and transfer the land to the approved housing developer.
            (VII)   The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the
proposed development or, if the County agrees, within one-quarter mile of the
boundary of the proposed development.
            (VIII)   A proposed source of funding for the very low-income units
shall be identified not later than the date of approval of the final
subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application.
   (b)   Density Bonus Calculations. The calculation of a density bonus in
compliance with this Section that results in fractional units shall be rounded
up to the next whole number, as required by State law. For the purpose of
calculating a density bonus, the residential units do not have to be based upon
individual subdivision maps or parcels.
   (c)   Additional County Density Bonus. In addition to subsection (a), when a
project restricts at least 20 percent of proposed housing units for lower
income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 50079.5, the County
grants an additional density bonus for properties zoned Multiple Residential.
The additional County density bonus for such projects shall be ten units per
acre in the Valley region, or Desert region when served by piped water, sewer,
and paved roads; and five units per acre in the Mountain and remaining Desert
regions. The resulting maximum density for such projects shall be 30 units per
acre in the Valley region, or Desert region when served by piped water, sewer,
and paved roads; and 25 units per acre in the Mountain and remaining Desert
regions. These are the maximum densities that shall be used to calculate
density bonus prescribed by State law and as provided in §
83.03.030(a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(7).
   (d)   Requirements for Amendments or Discretionary Approval. The granting of
a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a Policy
Plan amendment, zoning amendment, or other discretionary approval.
   (e)   Location of Bonus Units. The developer may locate density bonus units
in the housing project in other than the areas where the units for the lower
income households are located.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.050 Allowed Incentives or Concessions.
   (a)   Applicant Request and County Approval. An applicant for a density
bonus in compliance with this Chapter may submit to the County a proposal for
the specific incentives or concessions listed in subsection (c) (Type of
Incentives or Concessions), below, that the applicant requests in compliance
with this Section, and may request a meeting with the Director. The applicant
may file a request either before filing an application for County approval of a
proposed project or concurrently with an application for project approval. The
Board shall grant an incentive or concession request that complies with this
Section unless the Board makes any of the following findings in writing, based
upon substantial evidence:
      (1)   The incentive or concession does not result in identifiable and
actual cost reductions, consistent with §
83.03.050(c), required to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in
Health and Safety Code § 50052.5, or for rents for the targeted units to be set
as specified in §
83.03.070(b) (Unit Cost Requirements);
      (2)   The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact,
as defined in Government Code § 65589.5(d)(2), upon public health and safety or
the physical environment, or on any real property listed in the California
Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering
the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households; or
      (3)   The incentive or concession would be contrary to state or federal
law.
   (b)   Number of Incentives or Concessions. The applicant shall receive the
following number of incentives or concessions.
      (1)   One Incentive or Concession. One incentive or concession for a
project that includes at least ten percent of the total units for lower income
households, at least five percent for very low-income households, or at least
ten percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest
development.
      (2)   Two Incentives or Concessions. Two incentives or concessions for a
project that includes at least 17 percent of the total units for lower income
households, at least ten percent for very low-income households, or at least 20
percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest
development.
      (3)   Three Incentives or Concessions. Three incentives or concessions
for a project that includes at least 24 percent of the total units for lower
income households, at least 15 percent for very low-income households, or at
least 30 percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common
interest development.
      (4)   Four Incentives or Concessions. Four incentives or concessions for
a project that includes 100 percent of all units in the development, including
total units and density bonus units, for lower income households, as defined by
Health and Safety Code § 50079.5, except that up to 20 percent of the units in
the development may be for moderate-income households, as defined by Health and
Safety Code § 50053. If the project is located within one-half mile of a major
transit stop, the applicant shall also receive a height increase of up to three
additional stories, or 33 feet.
   (c)   Type of Incentives or Concessions. For the purposes of this Chapter,
incentive or concession means any of the following:
      (1)   A reduction in the site development standards of this Development
Code (e.g., site coverage limitations, setbacks, reduced parcel sizes, and/or
parking requirements (see also §
83.03.060 [Parking Requirements in Density Bonus Projects]), or a modification
of architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards
approved by the California Building Standards Commission in compliance with
Health and Safety Code §§ 18901 et seq., that would otherwise be required, that
results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions;
      (2)   Approval of mixed-use land uses not otherwise allowed by this
Development Code in conjunction with the housing development, if nonresidential
land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development, and the
nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing project and the
existing or planned development in the area where the project will be located;
      (3)   Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the
applicant or the County that will result in identifiable, financially
sufficient, and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs;
and/or
      (4)   In its sole and absolute discretion, a direct financial
contribution granted by the Board, including writing-down land costs,
subsidizing the cost of construction, or participating in the cost of
infrastructure.
   (d)   Effect of Incentive or Concession. The granting of an incentive or
concession shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a Policy Plan
amendment, zoning amendment, or other discretionary approval.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.060 Parking Requirements in Density Bonus Projects.
   (a)   Applicability. This Section applies to a development that meets the
requirements of §
83.03.030 (Eligibility for Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions), above, but only
at the request of the applicant. An applicant may request additional parking
incentives or concessions beyond those provided in this Section in compliance
with §
83.03.050 (Allowed Incentives or Concessions). A request pursuant to this
Section shall neither reduce nor increase the number or incentives or
concessions to which the applicant is entitled.
   (b)   Number of Parking Spaces Required.
      (1)   Maximum Parking Requirements. Except as provided by §
83.03.060(b)(2) (Special Parking Requirements), at the request of the
applicant, the County shall not require a vehicular parking ratio for a project
that complies with the requirements of §
83.03.030 (Eligibility for Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions), inclusive of
parking for the disabled and guest parking, that exceeds the following ratios:
         (A)   Zero to one bedroom: One on-site parking space per unit.
         (B)   Two to three bedrooms: One and one-half on-site parking spaces
per unit.
         (C)   Four and more bedrooms: Two and one-half on-site parking spaces
per unit.
      (2)   Special Parking Requirements. Notwithstanding §
83.03.060(b)(1) (Maximum Parking Requirements), lower parking ratios shall
apply to the following specified projects:
         (A)   For sale or for rent housing development, that includes at least
20 percent low-income units or at least 11 percent very low-income units that
is located within one-half mile of a major transit stop, and there is
unobstructed access to the major transit stop from the development: one- half
space per unit.
         (B)   For-rent housing development, 100 percent affordable to lower
income families, located within one-half mile of a major transit stop and there
is unobstructed access to the major transit stop from the development: zero
spaces per unit.
         (C)   For-rent housing development for individuals who are 62 years of
age or older that complies with Civil Code §§ 51.2 and 51.3, 100 percent
affordable to lower income families, and the development has either paratransit
service or unobstructed access, within one-half mile, to fixed bus route
service that operates at least eight times per day: zero spaces per unit.
         (D)   For-rent special needs housing development (as defined in Health
and Safety Code § 51312), 100 percent affordable to lower income families,
shall have either paratransit service or unobstructed access, within one-half
mile, to fixed bus route service that operates at least eight times per day:
zero spaces per unit.
         (E)   For-rent supportive housing development (as defined in Health
and Safety Code § 50675.14), 100 percent affordable to lower income families:
zero spaces per unit.
   (c)   Calculation of Parking. If the total number of parking spaces required
for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up
to the next whole number.
   (d)   Location of Parking. For purposes of this Section, a development may
provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not
through on-street parking.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.070 Bonus and Incentives for Housing with Child Care Facilities.
   A housing development that complies with the resident and project size
requirements of §
83.03.030 (Eligibility for Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions) and also includes
as part of that development a child care facility other than a family day care
home, that will be located on the site of, as part of, or adjacent to the
development, shall be subject to the following additional bonus, incentives,
and requirements:
   (a)   Additional Bonus and Incentives. The County shall grant a housing
development that includes a child care facility in compliance with this Section
either of the following:
      (1)   An additional density bonus that is an amount of floor area in
square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the floor
area of the child care facility; or
      (2)   An additional concession or incentive that contributes
significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care
facility.
   (b)   Requirements to Qualify for Additional Bonus and Incentives.
      (1)   The County shall require, as a condition of approving the housing
development, that the following occur:
         (A)   The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period
of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the
density bonus units are required to remain affordable in compliance with §
83.03.080 (Continued Availability); and
         (B)   Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children
of very low-income households, lower income households, or families of moderate
income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage
of dwelling units that are required for very low-income households, lower
income households, or families of moderate income in compliance with §
83.03.030 (Eligibility for Bonus, Incentives, or Concessions).
      (2)   The County shall not be required to provide a density bonus or
concession for a child care facility in compliance with this Section if it
finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child
care facilities.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.080 Continued Availability.
   The units that qualified in the housing development for a density bonus and
other incentives and concessions shall continue to be available as affordable
units in compliance with the following requirements, as required by Government
Code § 65915(c). See also §
83.03.120 (Control of Resale).
   (a)   Duration of Affordability. The applicant shall agree to, and the
County shall ensure, the continued affordability of all low- and very low-
income qualifying units shall be maintained for 55 years, or a longer time if
required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage
insurance program or rental subsidy program.
   (b)   Unit Cost Requirements. The rents charged for the housing units in the
development that qualify the project for a density bonus and other incentives
and concessions, shall not exceed the following amounts during the period of
continued availability required by this Section:
      (1)   Lower Income Units. Except as provided below in §
83.03.080(b)(2), rents for the lower income density bonus units shall be set at
an affordable rent as defined in Health and Safety Code § 50053.
      (2)   For housing developments meeting the criteria of §
83.03.030(a)(7), rents for all units in the development, including both base
density and density bonus units, shall be as follows:
         (A)   The rent for at least 20 percent of the units in the development
shall be set at an affordable rent, as defined in Health and Safety Code §
50053.
         (B)   The rent for the remaining units in the development shall be set
at an amount consistent with the maximum rent levels for a housing development
that receives an allocation of state or federal low-income housing tax credits
from the California Tax Credit Allocation Committee.
   (c)   Occupancy and Resale of Moderate-income Common Interest Development
Units. An applicant shall agree to, and the County shall ensure that, the
initial occupant of moderate income units that are directly related to the
receipt of the density bonus in a common interest development as defined in
Civil Code § 1351, are persons and families of moderate income, as defined in
Health and Safety Code § 50093, and that the units are offered at an affordable
housing cost, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 50052.5. The County shall
enforce an equity sharing agreement unless it is in conflict with the
requirements of another public funding source or law. The following
requirements apply to the equity sharing agreement.
      (1)   Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any
improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of
appreciation.
      (2)   The County shall recapture any initial subsidy and its
proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be used within five years
for any of the purposes described in Health and Safety Code § 33334.2(e) that
promote home ownership. For the purposes of this Section:
         (A)   The County's initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market
value of the home at the time of initial sale, minus the initial sale price to
the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance
or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the
initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as
the initial market value; and
         (B)   The County's proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal
to the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the
time of initial sale.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.090 Location and Type of Designated Units.
   (a)   Location/Dispersal of Units. As required by the Board in compliance
with §
83.03.100 (Processing of Bonus Requests), designated units shall be reasonably
dispersed throughout the project where feasible, shall contain on average the
same number of bedrooms as the non-designated units in the project, and shall
be compatible with the design or use of remaining units in terms of appearance,
materials, and finished quality.
   (b)   Phasing. If a project is to be phased, the density bonus units shall
be phased in the same proportion as the non-density bonus units, or phased in
another sequence acceptable to the County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.100 Processing of Bonus Requests.
   A request for a density bonus and other incentives and concessions shall be
evaluated and decided through Conditional Use Permit approval in compliance
with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permits/Minor Use Permits); provided, the
decision of the Commission on a Conditional Use Permit application shall be a
recommendation to the Board, and the density bonus and other incentives and
concessions shall be approved or denied only by the Board.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.110 Density Bonus Agreement.
   (a)   Agreement Required. An applicant requesting a density bonus shall
agree to enter into a density bonus agreement (referred to as the "agreement")
with the County in the County's standard form of agreement.
   (b)   Agreement Provisions.
      (1)   Project Information. The agreement shall include at least the
following information about the project:
         (A)   The total number of units approved for the housing development,
including the number of designated dwelling units;
         (B)   A description of the household income group to be accommodated
by the housing development, and the standards and methodology for determining
the corresponding affordable rent or affordable sales price and housing cost
consistent with HUD Guidelines;
         (C)   The marketing plan for the affordable units;
         (D)   The location, unit sizes (square feet), and number of bedrooms
of the designated dwelling units;
         (E)   Tenure of the use restrictions for designated dwelling units of
the time periods required by §
83.03.080 (Continued Availability);
         (F)   A schedule for completion and occupancy of the designated
dwelling units;
         (G)   A description of the additional incentives and concessions being
provided by the County;
         (H)   A description of the remedies for breach of the agreement by the
owners, developers, and/or successors-in-interest of the project; and
         (I)   Other provisions to ensure successful implementation and
compliance with this Chapter.
      (2)   Minimum Requirements. The agreement shall provide, at minimum,
that:
         (A)   The developer shall give the County the continuing right-of-
first-refusal to lease or purchase any or all of the designated dwelling units
at the appraised value;
         (B)   The deeds to the designated dwelling units shall contain a
covenant stating that the developer or successors-in-interest shall not assign,
lease, rent, sell, sublet, or otherwise transfer any interests for designated
units without the written approval of the County;
         (C)   When providing the written approval, the County shall confirm
that the price (rent or sale) of the designated dwelling unit is consistent
with the limits established for low and very low-income households, as
published by HUD;
         (D)   The County shall have the authority to enter into other
agreements with the developer, or purchasers of the designated dwelling units,
to ensure that the required dwelling units are continuously occupied by
eligible households;
         (E)   Applicable deed restrictions, in a form satisfactory to the
County Counsel, shall contain provisions for the enforcement of owner or
developer compliance. Any default or failure to comply may result in
foreclosure, specific performance, or withdrawal of the Certificate of
Occupancy;
         (F)   In any action taken to enforce compliance with the deed
restrictions, the County Counsel shall, if compliance is ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction, take all action that may be allowed by law to recover
all of the County's costs of action including legal services; and
         (G)   Compliance with the agreement will be monitored and enforced in
compliance with the measures included in the agreement.
      (3)   For-Sale Housing Conditions. In the case of a for-sale housing
development, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing
the initial sale and use of designated dwelling units during the applicable
restriction period:
         (A)   Designated dwelling units shall be owner-occupied by eligible
households, or by qualified residents in the case of senior housing; and
         (B)   The initial purchaser of each designated dwelling unit shall
execute an instrument or agreement approved by the County which:
            (I)   Restricts the sale of the unit in compliance with §
83.03.120 (Control of Resale), or other applicable County policy or ordinance,
during the applicable use restriction period;
            (II)   Contains provisions as the County may require to ensure
continued compliance with this Chapter and State law; and
            (III)   Shall be recorded against the parcel containing the
designated dwelling unit.
      (4)   Rental Housing Conditions. In the case of a rental housing
development, the agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing
the use of designated dwelling units during the applicable restriction period:
         (A)   The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing
affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining the designated dwelling
units for qualified tenants;
         (B)   Provisions requiring owners to annually verify tenant incomes
and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this Chapter;
         (C)   Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to the
County, which includes the name, address, and income of each person occupying
the designated dwelling units, and which identifies the bedroom size and
monthly rent or cost of each unit; and
         (D)   The applicable use restriction period shall comply with the time
limits for continued availability in §
83.03.080 (Continued Availability).
   (c)   Execution of Agreement.
      (1)   Following Board approval of the agreement and execution of the
agreement by all parties, the County shall record the completed agreement on
the parcels designated for the construction of designated dwelling units at the
County Recorder's Office.
      (2)   The approval and recordation shall take place at the same time as
the Final Map or, where a map is not being processed, before issuance of
Building Permits for the designated dwelling units.
      (3)   The agreement shall be binding on all future owners, developers,
and/or successors-in-interest.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.120 Control of Resale.
   In order to maintain the availability of for-sale affordable housing units
constructed in compliance with this Chapter, the following resale conditions
shall apply.
   (a)   Limits on Resale Price. The price received by the seller of an
affordable unit shall be limited to the purchase price plus an increase based
on the Consumer Price Index, an amount consistent with the increase in the
median income since the date of purchase, or the fair market value, whichever
is less. Before offering an affordable housing unit for sale, the seller shall
provide written notice to the County of their intent to sell. The notice shall
be provided by certified mail to the Director.
   (b)   Units to Be Offered to the County. Home ownership affordable units
constructed, offered for sale, or sold under the requirements of this Section
shall be offered to the County or its assignee for a period of at least 90 days
from the date of the notice of intent to sell is delivered to the County by the
first purchaser or subsequent purchasers. Home ownership affordable units shall
be sold and resold from the date of the original sale only to households as
determined to be eligible for affordable units by the County in compliance with
this Section. The seller shall not levy or charge any additional fees nor shall
any "finder's fee" or other monetary consideration be allowed other than
customary real estate commissions and closing costs.
   (c)   Declaration of Restrictions. The owners of any affordable unit shall
attach and legally reference in the grant deed conveying title of the
affordable ownership unit a declaration of restrictions provided by the County,
stating the restrictions imposed in compliance with this Section. The grant
deed shall afford the grantor and the County the right to enforce the
declaration of restrictions. The declaration of restrictions shall include all
applicable resale controls, occupancy restrictions, and prohibitions required
by this Section.
   (d)   County to Monitor Resale of Units. The County shall monitor the resale
of ownership affordable units. The County or its designee shall have a 90-day
option to commence purchase of ownership affordable units after the owner gives
notification of intent to sell. Any abuse in the resale provisions shall be
referred to the County for appropriate action.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
§ 83.03.130 Judicial Relief, Waiver of Standards.
   (a)   Judicial Relief. As provided by Government Code § 65915(d)(3), the
applicant may initiate judicial proceedings if the County refuses to grant a
requested density bonus, incentive, or concession.
   (b)   Waiver of Standards Preventing the Use of Bonuses, Incentives, or
Concessions.
      (1)   As required by Government Code § 65915(e), the County will not
apply a development standard that will have the effect of precluding the
construction of a development meeting the criteria of §
83.03.020(a) (Resident Requirements), above, at the densities or with the
concessions or incentives allowed by this Chapter.
      (2)   An applicant may submit to the County a proposal for the waiver or
reduction of development and zoning standards that would otherwise inhibit the
utilization of a density bonus on a specific site, including minimum parcel
size, side setbacks, and placement of public works improvements.
      (3)   The applicant shall show that the waiver or modification is
necessary to make the housing units economically feasible.
      (4)   A proposal of the waiver or reduction of development standards
pursuant to this subsection shall neither reduce nor increase the number of
incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to §
83.03.050 (Allowed Incentives or Concessions).
   (c)   County Exemption. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a)
and (b), above, nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the
County to:
      (1)   Grant a density bonus, incentive, or concession, or waive or reduce
development standards, if the bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or
reduction would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined in Government Code
§ 65589.5(d)(2), upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for
which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
specific adverse impact; or
      (2)   Grant a density bonus, incentive, or concession, or waive or reduce
development standards, if the bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or
reduction would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in
the California Register of Historical Resources.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4415, passed - -2021)
CHAPTER 83.04: CONDITIONAL GRADING COMPLIANCE
Section
   
83.04.010   Purpose.
   
83.04.020   Applicability.
   
83.04.030   Quality Control Engineer’s Role and Responsibilities.
   
83.04.040   Developer’s Deposit.
   
83.04.050   Building Official Authority.
   
83.04.060   Authority to Contract.
   
83.04.070   Enforcement.
   
83.04.080   Compliance with Dust Control Regulations.
§ 83.04.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Compliance with Conditions of Approval.  The purpose of this Chapter
is to ensure compliance with conditions of approval on projects involving
earthwork grading.
   (b)   On-Site Continuous Inspections of Grading. The provisions in this
Chapter regulate on-site continuous inspections that are required by the
Building Official of grading projects or developments for which adopted
conditions of approval:
      (1)   Require any specific or general features to be incorporated into
the earthwork; or
      (2)   Restrict or limit the earthwork in any way that is more restrictive
than the grading provisions prescribed in the California Building Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.04.020 Applicability.
   (a)   Applicable Projects. The provisions of this Chapter apply to projects
that:
      (1)   Have been conditionally approved; and
      (2)   Involve grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards; and
      (3)   When either of the following conditions exist:
         (A)   Natural pregraded slopes of 15 percent or greater; or
         (B)   Requirements for natural open space retention.
   (b)   Supplement Other Applicable Grading Requirements. The provisions in
this Chapter are in addition to the provisions of the California Building Code
and any geotechnical investigation report recommendations.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.04.030 Quality Control Engineer’s Role and Responsibilities.
   (a)   Independent. The quality control engineer shall not be employed by,
have any relationship to, or interest in the developer, or any contracting,
engineering, or geotechnical companies performing work on or providing services
to the project being inspected.
   (b)   Duties and Responsibilities. The quality control engineer shall:
      (1)   Inspect the work in progress to ensure compliance with the
conditions of approval including:
         (A)   Slope ratio.
         (B)   Slope height.
         (C)   Slope location.
         (D)   Areas of land disturbance.
      (2)   Set provisions regarding:
         (A)   Archeology.
         (B)   Paleontology.
         (C)   Landscaping.
         (D)   Erosion control.
         (E)   Protection of native plants and animals.
         (F)   Any other conditions of approval that will control or impact
grading.
      (3)   Report to and file reports with the Building Official as required
by the Building Official.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.04.040 Developer’s Deposit.
   (a)   Deposit Required for Services of Quality Control Engineer. Before the
issuance of the grading permit, the developer shall post a deposit with the
Building Official in the amount and in the form specified by the Building
Official. The deposit funds held in trust shall be dispersed to the quality
control engineer by the Building Official under the terms of the agreement
between the County and the quality control engineer to pay for the services of
the quality control engineer.
   (b)   Additional Deposits Required. The Building Official shall notify the
developer if and when it becomes apparent that the deposit will be exhausted
and the developer shall make the additional deposit as is required by the
Building Official.
   (c)   Suspension or Revocation of Grading Permit. If the developer fails to
submit the additional deposit by the date specified by the Building Official,
the Building Official shall suspend or revoke the grading permit, in compliance
with the provisions of the California Building Code and order that work on the
project be ceased.
   (d)   Refunds. Upon completion of the work, unused funds shall be returned
to the developer within 60 days following the final grading and quality control
inspection approvals.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.04.050 Building Official Authority.
   The Building Official shall have authority to adopt reasonable rules and
regulations to clarify, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
The Building Official may approve variations when the variations are not
detrimental to the life, health, safety or welfare of the public and are
necessary because of particular or peculiar circumstances, and will achieve the
same level of protection as the original condition. Variations of the
environmental conditions shall be applied for and processed in the same manner
as other grading variations.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.04.060 Authority to Contract.
   For the purpose of the Chapter, the Building Official may retain, on behalf
of the County, independent engineers to serve as the quality control engineer
on projects regulated by this Chapter using a standard form contract approved
by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.04.070 Enforcement.
   (a)   Authority to Enforce. The Building Official shall have the authority
to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and may use any legal means to
accomplish enforcement, including:
      (1)   Suspending and/or revoking any permits that have been issued by the
Building Official for the project, whether or not the permits are for the
earthwork grading; and
      (2)   Withholding issuance of any permits on the project for which
applications have been filed.
   (b)   Authority to Expend Deposited Funds. The Building Official shall have
the authority to expend any remaining funds in the developer’s deposit to
obtain compliance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.04.080 Compliance with Dust Control Regulations.
   Grading shall be conducted in the Desert Region in compliance with the
provisions of §
88.02.040.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 83.05: DEDICATIONS AND INSTALLATIONS OF STREET AND TRAIL IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
83.05.010   Purpose.
   
83.05.020   Applicability.
   
83.05.030   Dedication of Street and/or Highway Right-of-Way.
   
83.05.040   Dedication and Installation of Trail Right-of-Way.
   
83.05.050   Installation of Street Improvements.
   
83.05.060   Delayed Improvements.
   
83.05.070   Waiver or Modification of Dedication and/or Street Improvement
Requirements.
   
83.05.080   Building Official Determination.
§ 83.05.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter regulates and controls dedications and the installation of
street improvements and trails. The regulations are intended to preserve the
public health, safety, and general welfare; to promote orderly growth and
development; and to ensure the provision of adequate traffic circulation,
utilities, and services.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.05.020 Applicability.
   The requirements of this Chapter shall apply to all subdivision and single-
parcel developments. The road dedication and street improvement standards
provided in this Chapter do not apply to: (1) the alteration or enlargement of
an existing building or structure on a lot or parcel of land if the total
square footage of such alteration or enlargement, and all other alterations or
enlargements completed three years prior to the date of the application for a
permit for such alteration or enlargement, does not exceed one-half of the
original square footage of all buildings and structures on such lot or parcel
of land, or (2) the erection of one or more accessory structures (not including
accessory dwellings) as defined in §
810.01.030(g) of the County Code. For purposes of this section, “original
square footage” means the square footage of all buildings and structures that
existed on such lot or parcel of land three years prior to the date of the
application for such permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4181, passed - -2012)
§ 83.05.030 Dedication of Street and/or Highway Right-of-Way.
   (a)   Dedications Required by Approved Plans or Ordinances. Before final
inspection of structures, the dedication of additional street and/or highway
right-of-way may, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works, be
required to comply with the General Plan, an adopted specific plan, a Local
Area Transportation Facilities Plan, or the provisions of any specific
ordinance which has established a future right-of-way line.
   (b)   Dedications Required in Absence of Approved Plans or Ordinances. Where
approved plans or ordinances do not exist, the required dedications shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Desert Region. In the Desert Region, a 44-foot half width on
section lines and quarter section lines and a 30-foot half width on sixteenth
section lines shall be required.
      (2)   Mountain Region. In the Mountain Region, a 20-foot half width from
centerline shall be required; however, whenever the Director of Public Works
waives this dedication requirement, a ten- foot half width shall be the
absolute minimum required.
      (3)   Valley Region. In the Valley Region, additional right-of-way shall
be required in compliance with road widths established by the General Plan
after review by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.05.040 Dedication and Installation of Trail Right-of-Way.
   (a)   Dedications Required by Approved Plans or Ordinances. Before final
inspection of structures, the dedication of a trail right-of-way may, at the
discretion of the Director, be required to comply with the General Plan, an
adopted specific plan, or the provisions of any specific ordinance that has
established a future right-of-way line.
   (b)   Dedications Required in Absence of Approved Plans or Ordinances. Where
approved plans or ordinances do not exist, the required dedications may be
required for specific plans and planned development projects and shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Proposed development adjacent to trail systems may be required to
dedicate land for trail access points, as determined by the Director.
      (2)   The dedication or offers of dedication of trail easements where
appropriate may be required for establishing a planned trails system alignment
or where an established trail is jeopardized by impending development.
   (c)   Development Standards.
      (1)   To ensure application of uniform design standards and to promote
the safety of trail users and their enjoyment of the trails system, the
Director shall apply the County Trail Use and Design Guidelines. These
standards are intended to serve as a general guide, and may at times be
superseded by standards of managing agencies other than San Bernardino County
(e.g., U.S. Forest Service standards). Standards may vary depending on the
proposed use and operation of the trail; more detailed standards for specific
trails may be developed at the time specific siting and planning for a trail
link is completed.
      (2)   The scenic corridor on either side of a proposed trail route,
measured from the outside edge of the right-of-way, trail, or path shall be
identified. Development along the scenic corridor shall be compatible with
existing scenic qualities.
      (3)   Signage shall indicate approved off-highway vehicle (OHV) trails or
access areas and shall notify where OHV use is prohibited.
   (d)   Delayed Improvements. Delayed improvements may be allowed in
compliance with §
83.05.060 (Delayed Improvements).
   (e)   Waiver of Public Works Requirements. A waiver of the Public Works
Department requirements may be allowed in compliance with §
83.05.070 (Waiver or Modification of Dedication and/or Street Improvement
Requirements).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.05.050 Installation of Street Improvements.
   (a)   When Installation of Street Improvements Required. Before final
inspection of a structure or improvement resulting in an increase or change of
vehicular traffic that necessitates the construction of street improvements for
the purposes of protecting public safety and health, the installation of street
improvements may, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works, be
required in compliance with the current adopted County standards.
   (b)   Street Improvements Described. Street improvements shall include any
or all of the following:
      (1)   Curb and gutter.
      (2)   Sidewalks.
      (3)   Concrete driveway approaches.
      (4)   Drainage structures.
      (5)   Back filling and preparation of the road surface to rough grade for
the placement of paving.
      (6)   Paving.
      (7)   Other necessary improvements as determined by the Director of
Public Works.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.05.060 Delayed Improvements.
   (a)   Dedication and Installation Required First. The right-of-way
dedication and installation of street improvements shall be required before the
occupancy of the premises or commencement of uses.
   (b)   Delayed Improvements Allowed with Written Agreement. Where it is
impractical to install the required improvements at the time of the proposed
development, a delayed improvement agreement in writing shall be entered into
with the County Department of Public Works to make the improvements along with
the posting of a form of surety described in Subdivision (c), herein. If the
United States, the State of California, the County of San Bernardino, any other
county, any municipal corporation, school district, other public district or
public body includes in the delayed improvement agreement a written guarantee
of payment of all costs for which the public district or public body may become
liable to the County, then the posting of a form of surety described in
subsection (c), herein, is not required from such public district or public
body. The foregoing exemption to the surety requirement does not apply to
subdivisions under the California Subdivision Map Act, Government Code §§ 66410
et seq.
   (c)   Surety Required. A cash deposit, a surety bond, a developer lien
agreement, or other form of surety acceptable to the County Department of
Public Works in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvements as
determined by the County Engineer, shall be posted with the County Department
of Public Works to guarantee the installation of the improvements. The actual
installation of street improvements may be delayed until the County makes a
written demand for the installment. If surety bonds are submitted, they shall
be furnished by a surety company authorized to write the bonds in the State of
California. If a developer lien agreement is used, it shall be used only for
residential subdivisions (as defined in §
87.07.040(d)(1)), and commercial or industrial development and shall be
prepared and processed in compliance with County policy.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4180, passed - -2012)
§ 83.05.070 Waiver or Modification of Dedication and/or Street Improvement
Requirements.
   (a)   Request for Waiver or Modification of Dedication and/or Street
Improvement Requirements. The Director and the Director of the Department of
Public Works shall have the authority to approve a request for a waiver or
modification, in whole or in part, of the dedication and/or street improvement
requirements as defined in §
83.05.050(b). Requests for a waiver or modification may be made by the
applicant on the form made available by the Land Use Services Department or may
be initiated by the Director or the Director of the Department of Public Works.
Waivers or modifications initiated by the Director or the Director of the
Department of Public Works may be made at any time during the development
approval process. The waiver or modification must be approved by both the
Director and the Director of the Department of Public Works.
      (1)   Findings Required. Prior to granting any waiver or modification to
the required dedication and/or street improvement requirements, the Director
and the Director of the Department of Public Works shall make all of the
following findings:
         (A)   The waiver or modification would not adversely affect the
environment, public health or safety.
         (B)   The waiver or modification would not create a financial impact
to the County of San Bernardino or the San Bernardino County Flood Control
District within ten years from the date of the waiver or modification.
         (C)   The request for a waiver or modification is not based solely on
the financial hardship to the applicant.
         (D)   The waiver or modification would not conflict with other County
departments’ or notified agencies’ dedication and/or improvement requirements,
or any foreseeable future needs for access or infrastructure.
         (E)   There is good cause shown for the waiver or modification and
such waiver or modification would serve a public purpose.
      (2)   No Findings Required Under Certain Circumstances. Notwithstanding §
83.05.070(a)(1), a waiver or modification may be granted and no findings are
required when the dedication and/or street improvement requirements of this
Code, as applied to a particular project, would violate Federal or State law or
the United States Constitution or the State of California Constitution.
   (b)   Appeal of Action Taken by the Director and the Director of the
Department of Public Works.
      (1)   A decision by the Director and the Director of the Department of
Public Works pertaining to a request to waive or modify required dedications
and/or street improvements may be appealed to the review authority of the
subdivision or the development project’s land use decision within ten calendar
days of receipt of the decision made by the Director and the Director of the
Department of Public Works.
      (2)   In the event the development project is not subject to any
discretionary land use decision, an appeal of the decision made by the Director
and the Director of the Department of Public Works pertaining to a request to
waive or modify required dedications and/or street improvements may be made to
the County’s Chief Executive Officer or designee within ten calendar days of
receipt of the decision made by the Director and the Director of the Department
of Public Works.
      (3)   Any appeal of the decision of the Director and the Director of the
Department of Public Works under this Subdivision (b) may be appealed by the
applicant or other affected party in compliance with the following provisions:
         (A)   Appropriate Forms. Applications for an appeal shall be made on
forms supplied by the Land Use Services Department.
         (B)   Appeal Submittals. Applications for appeals shall be addressed
and submitted to:
            (I)   For appeals described in §
83.05.070(b)(1), to the review authority of the subdivision or the development
project’s land use decision.
            (II)   For appeals described in §
83.05.070(b)(2), to the County’s Chief Executive Officer.
         (C)   Grounds for Appeal. Applications for an appeal shall include a
written statement of the grounds upon which the appeal is based.
         (D)   Contents of Appeal Application. The appeal application shall
identify:
            (I)   The subject development project;
            (II)   The specific decision being appealed;
            (III)   The date of the appeal;
            (IV)   The justification for the appeal; and
            (V)   Any remedy or solution for which the appellant petitions.
         (E)   Appeal Shall Stay All Proceedings. A properly filed application
for appeal shall stay the proceedings in the matter appealed until a decision
is rendered on the appeal.
         (F)   Notice of Appeal Required.
            (I)   For appeals described in §
83.05.070(b)(1), the review authority shall consider the appeal at the time it
considers the subdivision or development project’s land use decision. Within 30
calendar days of the acceptance of an application for an appeal, the review
authority shall set the matter for hearing and shall give notice of the date,
time, and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and to any
other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. In addition, notice
shall also be given in the same manner and to the same entities as notice was
given for the land use decision.
            (II)   For appeals described in §
83.05.070(b)(2), within 30 calendar days of the acceptance of an application
for an appeal, the County Administrative Office, on behalf of the Chief
Executive Officer, shall set the matter for hearing and shall give notice of
the date, time, and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and
to any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified.
         (G)   Action on Appeal.
            (I)   For appeals described in §
83.05.070(b)(1), upon hearing the appeal, the review authority shall consider
the record and any additional evidence that may be offered, and may affirm,
reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, the decision appealed.
            (II)   For appeals described in §
83.05.070(b)(2), upon hearing the appeal, the County’s Chief Executive Officer
shall consider the record and any additional evidence that may be offered, and
may affirm, reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, the decision appealed.
         (H)   Applicable Criteria, Findings, and Requirements. The review
authority and the County's Chief Executive Officer are subject to all of the
criteria, findings, and requirements imposed by this Code upon the original
decision maker.
         (I)   Withdrawal of Appeal. An appeal may be withdrawn before the time
that the review authority or the County’s Chief Executive Officer issues a
decision. The appellant or the appellant’s representative shall notify the Land
Use Services Department, and in the event of appeals under §
83.05.070(b)(2) to the Chief Executive Officer, in writing that they wish to
withdraw the appeal.
         (J)   Appeal of the Land Use Decision. If there is a land use decision
for the development project, any appeal of the decision of the review
authority, other than a decision by the Board of Supervisors which is final,
regarding the waiver or modification may be further appealed by the applicant
or other affected party along with the land use decision in compliance with
Chapter
86.08 (Appeals).
         (K)   Judicial Review. No person shall seek judicial review of a
County decision on the waiver or modification decision until all appeals have
been first exhausted in compliance with the County Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4242,
passed - -2014)
§ 83.05.080 Building Official Determination.
   Before final inspection of a structure, the Building Official shall
determine that all of the following have been accomplished:
   (a)   Dedications have been provided.
   (b)   Street improvements have either been installed or that a cash deposit,
surety bond or other form of acceptable surety in an amount equal to the
estimated cost of the street improvements has been posted with the County
Department of Public Works to ensure the installation of the street
improvements.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 83.06: FENCES, HEDGES, AND WALLS
Section
   
83.06.010   Purpose.
   
83.06.020   Applicability.
   
83.06.030   General Height Limitations.
   
83.06.040   Measurement of Fence or Wall Height.
   
83.06.050   Walls Required Between Different Land Use Zoning Districts.
   
83.06.060   Special Wall and Fencing Requirements.
   
83.06.070   Prohibited Fence Materials.
§ 83.06.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish requirements for fences, hedges,
and walls to ensure that these elements do not unnecessarily block views and
sunlight; provide adequate buffering between different land uses; provide
screening of outdoor uses and equipment; and provide for the mitigation of
noise. These requirements are designed to provide aesthetic enhancement of the
County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.06.020 Applicability.
   The provisions of this Chapter apply to all fences, hedges, and walls unless
otherwise stated. These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by
regulations of a State or Federal agency, or by the County for reasons of
public safety, or to retaining walls which are regulated by §
83.02.070 (Setback Regulations and Exceptions).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.06.030 General Height Limitations.
   Fences, hedges, and walls may be erected/maintained within required setback
areas to the heights identified in
Table 83-6, below. See also
Figure 83-5.
Table 83-6
Maximum Height of Fences, Hedges, and Walls Within Setbacks
Land Use Zoning Districts Maximum Height in Setbacks(1)
Table 83-6
Maximum Height of Fences, Hedges, and Walls Within Setbacks
Land Use Zoning Districts               Maximum Height in Setbacks(1)
                                        Front Street Side Interior Side Rear
Commercial land use zoning districts(2) 4 ft. 4 ft.       10 ft.        10 ft.
Industrial land use zoning districts(2) 6 ft. 6 ft.       10 ft.        10 ft.
All other land use zoning districts     4 ft. 4 ft.       6 ft.         6 ft.
Notes:
(1)   Fence heights in excess of these standards may be allowed by an approved
Use Permit, Variance, Tract or Parcel Map or when required by the County for
reasons of the health and safety of the general public. In the RC and RL land
use zoning districts, open fences may go up to a maximum of 5 feet in the
front setbacks and street side setbacks.
(2)   Projects adjacent to residential districts shall use the standard of
“All other land use zoning district.”
 
Figure 83-5 Allowed Fence Height in Residential Land Use Zoning Districts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11037.jpg]
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.06.040 Measurement of Fence or Wall Height.
   (a)   The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from the finished
grade at the location in which the fence or wall is to be located.
   (b)   Where there is a difference in the ground level between two adjacent
parcels, the height of a fence or wall constructed along the property line
shall be determined by using the finish grade of the lowest contiguous parcel.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 83.06.050 Walls Required Between Different Land Use Zoning Districts.
   Walls shall be provided and maintained between different land use zoning
districts in the following manner:
   (a)   Nonresidential or Multi-Family. Where a nonresidential land use
district abuts property in any residential land use zoning district or a
Multiple Residential Land Use Zoning District abuts property in a Single
Residential Land Use Zoning District, a solid masonry wall shall be constructed
on the land use zoning district boundary line consistent with the height
limitations contained in
Table 83-6. If a public right-of-way separates a nonresidential district from
any residential district or multi-family residential district from a Single
Residential Land Use Zoning District, this wall requirement may not apply.
Also, this requirement shall not apply to the Rural Commercial (CR) Land Use
Zoning District in the Desert Region.
   (b)   Industrial. Where an industrial land use zoning district abuts
property in a non-industrial land use zoning district, a solid masonry wall, a
minimum of six feet in height, shall be constructed on the land use zoning
district boundary line.
   (c)   Design and Construction. Walls shall be of solid masonry construction
and shall be of a decorative design when in view of public rights-of-way
subject to the approval of the Director.
   (d)   Modification of Requirements. The Director may waive or modify
requirements for walls between different land use zoning districts where a
solid masonry wall already exists on the abutting property if the following
findings can be made in a positive manner:
      (1)   The existing wall meets, or would be modified to conform to, the
intent of this Chapter.
      (2)   Suitable landscaping would be installed adjacent to the existing
wall to supplement and enhance the desired physical separation.
      (3)   The existing wall would be protected to prevent vehicle damage, if
necessary.
      (4)   Concurrence of the abutting property owner(s) would be obtained, to
modify the existing wall to meet the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.06.060 Special Wall and Fencing Requirements.
   (a)   Swimming Pools, Spas, and Similar Features. Swimming pools, spas, and
other similar features shall be fenced in compliance with the California
Building Code.
   (b)   Outdoor Equipment, Storage, and Work Areas. Screening of outdoor uses
and equipment and activities shall be provided in compliance with §
83.02.060 (Screening and Buffering).
   (c)   Temporary Fencing. Temporary fencing may be necessary to protect
archaeological or historic resources and/or trees during site preparation and
construction. Temporary fencing for these purposes shall be subject to the
approval of the Director.
   (d)   Walls along Rights-of-way.
      (1)   Walls shall be constructed of decorative concrete or masonry
materials up to six feet in height.
      (2)   Aesthetic appeal as well as structural integrity shall be
considered when designing the wall.
      (3)   The design shall include an appropriate mix of materials and
landscaping subject to the approval of the Director.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.06.070 Prohibited Fence Materials.
   (a)   Chain Link Fencing. Permanent chain link fencing or similar materials
(chicken wire, hog fencing, etc.) is prohibited in residential land use zoning
districts in the Valley Region, except in those cases where it is not visible
from the public right-of-way or where the fence does not extend in front of the
primary structure and is camouflaged to the greatest extent possible with
plantings or similar shrouding, and except in those cases where the use is
adjacent to public rights-of-way in commercial and industrial zoning districts.
Chain link fencing shall be allowed for temporary uses. In the Mountain Region,
chain link fencing will be allowed when used in conjunction with other fencing
materials (i.e., split-rail fencing) and when camouflaged to the greatest
extent possible. In the Desert Region, the prohibition against chain link
fencing will not apply.
   (b)   Barbed Wire/Razor Wire Fencing. Barbed wire and razor wire fencing
shall be prohibited in residential land use zoning districts or adjacent to
public rights-of-way in commercial and industrial zoning districts. Barbed
wire, razor wire, or other sharp pointed material may only be used in the
construction of a fence if it is at least six feet above ground level.
   (c)   Tarp Fencing. Tarp fencing shall be prohibited in all land use zoning
districts.
   (d)   Electrified Fencing. The use of electrified fencing or wires in
conjunction with any fence, wall, roof, hedge, or by itself along the property
lines of a parcel within any land use zoning district is prohibited unless
required by the law or a regulation of the city, the County, the State, Federal
Government, agency, or as a condition of approval. The fencing may be allowed
within the interior of a parcel if buffered from other properties by a separate
barrier.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
CHAPTER 83.07: LIGHT TRESPASS
Section
   
83.07.010   Title.
   
83.07.020   Purpose.
   
83.07.030   Definitions.
   
83.07.040   Applicability.
   
83.07.050   Valley Requirements.
   
83.07.060   Mountain and Desert Requirements.
   
83.07.070   Conflicts with Other Laws.
   
83.07.080   Application of Ordinance to Legal Non-conforming Lighting.
   
83.07.090   Enforcement and Penalties.
§ 83.07.010 Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the "San Bernardino County Light Trespass
Ordinance."
(Ord. 4419, passed - -2021)
§ 83.07.020 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the goals and policies of the
Countywide Plan and to protect and promote the public health, safety, welfare,
and quality of life of the citizens and visitors of the County by establishing
regulations and a process for review of outdoor lighting in order to accomplish
the following:
   (a)   Minimize direct glare and prevent excessive lighting, thereby
minimizing light trespass and pollution caused by inappropriate or misaligned
light fixtures, and promoting common courtesy among neighbors.
   (b)   Assist in the overall efforts by the County to preserve the night sky
and thereby help preserve the County's rural quality of life and the scenic
value of this desirable visual resource.
   (c)   Promote wildlife habitation and migration by minimizing light trespass
and pollution into and adjacent to habitat areas.
   (d)   Provide sufficient lighting where it is needed to promote safety and
security on public and private property.
   (e)   Allow flexibility in the style of outdoor lighting.
   (f)   Provide standards for efficient and moderate use of lighting which
balance energy use and economic impact.
   (g)   Provide lighting standards that can evolve according to advancements
in technology.
   (h)   Promote lighting practices and systems which conserve energy, decrease
dependence on fossil fuels and limit greenhouse gas emissions consistent with
the California Global Warming Solutions Act and other applicable state and
federal laws.
(Ord. 4419, passed - -2021)
§ 83.07.030 Definitions.
   The definitions in this section are intended to apply to this chapter only.
Any term or phrase which is not specifically defined herein shall have the
definition as provided by Division 10 of the Development Code or elsewhere
within the County Code. The following words and phrases are defined as follows:
   DIRECTIONAL LIGHTING. Methods of directing light downward, rather than
upward or outward, with the intention of directing light where it is needed.
   FOOT-CANDLE (ABBREVIATED 'FC'). A unit of illuminance defined as one lumen
per square foot. One foot-candle is approximately equal to 10.76 lux.
   FULLY SHIELDED. A light fixture constructed and installed in such a manner
that all light emitted, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element,
or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the fixture, is
projected below the horizontal plane through the fixture's lowest light-
emitting part.
   GLARE. Light or illuminance entering the eye directly from a light fixture
or indirectly from reflective surfaces that causes visual discomfort, reduced
visibility to a reasonable person, or is in violation of this chapter.
   ILLUMINANCE. The intensity of light falling upon or hitting a given surface,
and is measured in units of foot-candles or lux.
   KELVIN. The measure of the color temperature of a light source. Warmer
temperatures are a lower number, and cooler temperatures are a higher number.
   LAMP. In generic terms, a source of optical radiation (i.e., "light"), often
called a "bulb" or "tube." Examples include incandescent, fluorescent, high-
intensity discharge (HID) lamps, and low-pressure sodium (LPS) lamps, as well
as light-emitting diode (LED) modules and arrays.
   LIGHT POLLUTION. The unintended, adverse and/or obstructive effects from the
use of outdoor light.
   LIGHT SOURCE. A light emitting portion of the luminaire and any diffusing
elements and surfaces intended to reflect or refract light emitted from the
lamp individually or collectively. Examples include a lamp, bulb, lens, highly
reflective surface, or frosted glass.
   LIGHT TRESPASS. Artificial light or illuminance that falls beyond the
property that it is located on.
   LUMEN. The unit of measure used to quantify the amount of visible light
produced by a lamp or emitted from a light fixture (as distinct from "watt," a
measure of power consumption).
   LUX (ABBREVIATED 'LX'). The unit of illuminance defined as one lumen per
square meter. One lux is approximately equal to 0.093 foot-candle.
   OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES. Outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices,
lamps and similar devices, including solar powered lights, and all parts used
to distribute the light and/or protect the lamp, permanently installed or
portable; synonymous with "luminaires."
   SEASONAL LIGHTING. Temporary lighting displays installed and operated on a
property, typically in connection with holidays or traditions. Lighting shall
not be considered seasonal if the lighting display is installed or operated
more than 30 days prior to a holiday or tradition, or more than 30 days after
the holiday or tradition.
   SKY GLOW. The brightening of the nighttime sky that results from scattering
and reflection of artificial light by air molecules, moisture and dust
particles in the atmosphere. Sky glow is caused by light directed or reflected
upwards or sideways.
   STRING LIGHTS. Outdoor light fixtures or light source connected by free-
strung wires or inside of tubing resulting in several or many points of light
that are unshielded or partly shielded light sources.
(Ord. 4419, passed - -2021)
§ 83.07.040 Applicability.
   (a)   Application. Except as provided in subdivision (c), the provision of
this chapter shall apply to all outdoor lighting in the valley region, as
specified in § 83.07.050, and mountain and desert regions, as specified in §
83.07.060. All outdoor light fixtures installed after the effective date of
this chapter shall comply with this chapter.
   (b)   Non-conforming Lighting. Except as provided in subdivision (c), all
outdoor light fixtures installed prior to the effective date of this chapter
are subject to the compliance period set forth in § 83.07.080. Notwithstanding
the compliance period, the following requirements shall be complied with
immediately:
      (1)   Outdoor light fixtures that have the ability to be redirected,
shall be directed downward so as to minimize sky glow, glare and light trespass
onto adjacent properties; and
      (2)   Outdoor light fixtures that have adjustable dimmers with color
temperature that exceeds 3,000 Kelvin shall be dimmed to 3,000 Kelvin or lower
to minimize glare and light trespass onto adjacent properties.
   (c)   Exempt Lighting and Activities. The following lighting and activities
are not regulated by this chapter:
      (1)   Indoor lighting.
      (2)   Lighting within the public right-of-way for the principal purpose
of illuminating public streets or traffic control.
      (3)   Lighting solely used to illuminate signs for which a permit has
been received.
      (4)   Lighting solely used to illuminate address signs.
      (5)   Construction or emergency lighting provided such lighting is
temporary, necessary, and is discontinued immediately upon completion of the
construction work or termination of the emergency.
      (6)   Aircraft navigation lights such as those attached to radio/
television towers and regulated by federal or state standards.
      (7)   Short-term lighting associated with activities authorized by a
valid temporary use permit, special event permit or film permit during the
duration of the permit.
      (8)   Outdoor lighting fixtures on facilities or lands owned, operated,
or controlled by the United States Government or State of California.
      (9)   Short-term lighting associated with recreational facilities for
outdoor sport and recreational use. Recreational facilities shall not be
illuminated unless the facilities are being utilized. The illumination shall be
turned off no later than 11:00 p.m. or one hour after termination of the event
and/or use, whichever occurs last.
      (10)   Seasonal lighting.
      (11)   Outdoor lighting, or other facility lighting, for industrial
facilities that conduct outdoor operations after sunset and before sunrise
pursuant to a valid use permit, or other land use entitlement, or otherwise
applicable law.
(Ord. 4419, passed - -2021)
§ 83.07.050 Valley Requirements.
   This section provides standards for outdoor lighting in the Valley region of
the County.
   (a)   Light Trespass from Commercial or Industrial Use - Prohibited. Outdoor
lighting of commercial or industrial land uses shall be fully shielded to
preclude light pollution or light trespass in excess of the maximum allowed
foot-candles allowed by subdivision (b) on any of the following:
      (1)   An abutting residential land use zoning district;
      (2)   A residential parcel; or
      (3)   Public right-of-way.
   (b)   Maximum Allowed Foot-candles. Direct or indirect light from any light
source shall not cause light trespass exceeding five-tenths foot-candles when
measured at the property line of a residential land use zoning district,
residential parcel, or public right-of-way. Light levels shall be measured with
a light meter, following the standard spectral luminous efficiency curve
adopted by the International Commission on Illumination (CIE).
(Ord. 4419, passed - -2021)
§ 83.07.060 Mountain and Desert Requirements.
   This section provides standards for outdoor lighting in the mountain and
desert regions of the County.
   (a)   Shielding Required. All outdoor light fixtures shall be fully
shielded, installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding does not
permit light trespass in excess of amounts set forth in subdivision (f).
   (b)   Light Pollution Standards. Light pollution and trespass shall be
minimized through the use of directional lighting, fixture location, height and
the use of shielding and/or motion sensors and timers in such a manner that the
light source does not permit light trespass in excess of amounts set forth in
subdivision (f).
   (c)   Automated Controls. Automated control systems, such as motion sensors
and timers, shall be used to meet curfew requirements set forth in subdivision
(d). Photocells or photo controls shall be used to extinguish all outdoor
lighting automatically when sufficient daylight is available. Automated
controls should be fully programmable and supported by battery or similar
backup.
   (d)   Dark Sky Curfew. All outdoor lighting shall be extinguished by 11:00
p.m., close of business, or when people are no longer present in exterior
areas, whichever is later, except for the following:
      (1)   Lighting used for entry and exit points of a structure, parking
areas, driveways and driveway ingress/egress points; or
      (2)   Lighting activated by a motion sensor that extinguishes no later
than five minutes after activation.
   (e)   Lighting Color. The correlated color temperature of all outdoor
lighting shall be 3,000 Kelvin or less except for seasonal lighting.
   (f)   Allowable Light Trespass. Outdoor lighting shall not cause light
trespass exceeding one-tenths foot-candles measured with a light meter oriented
vertically or horizontally either at the property line of the adjacent property
or measured from some other point on the property where light trespass may be
reasonably determined to occur due to differences in property or improvement
elevations.
   (g)   Blinking, Flashing, or High Intensity Lighting. Permanently installed
lighting that blinks, flashes or is of high intensity or brightness that causes
a light trespass is prohibited.
   (h)   Residential String Lights. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary,
string lights may be allowed in outside dining areas, entertainment areas or
used as landscape lighting in connection with a residential dwelling or use
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The correlated color temperature of the light sources does not
exceed 3,000 Kelvin; and
      (2)   The emission of no individual lamp in the string exceeds forty
initial lumens, and the aggregate total of lumen output of such string lights
used as outdoor light fixtures does not exceed 4,000 lumens.
(Ord. 4419, passed - -2021)
§ 83.07.070 Conflicts with Other Laws.
   (a)   Conflicts. In the event the provisions in this chapter conflict with
federal or state law, this section shall be applied in a manner intended to
carry out all provisions of law to the maximum extent feasible. When there is
an irreconcilable conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
requirements of federal or state law, the provisions of federal or state law
shall prevail over the provisions contained in this chapter only to the extent
necessary to avoid a violation of those laws.
   (b)   Minimum Lighting Standards. This chapter provides for minimum outdoor
lighting standards. In order to further minimize light pollution and light
trespass, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the County from imposing
standards that are more restrictive as a condition of approval for a
discretionary land use. Nor shall this chapter prohibit a declaration of
covenants, conditions and restrictions for private enforcement from further
restricting lighting so long as it meets the minimum standards detailed in this
chapter.
(Ord. 4419, passed - -2021)
§ 83.07.080 Application of Ordinance to Legal Non-conforming Lighting.
   (a)   Compliance Period. Notwithstanding the provisions in
Chapter 84.17 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures), a property owner shall
comply with the requirements of this chapter by the compliance deadlines set
forth in paragraphs (1) or (2). Any non-compliant lighting still in place after
the compliance deadline shall remain extinguished at all times, except for
lighting provided for security or safety purposes.
      (1)   Outdoor lighting in commercial and industrial land use zoning
districts shall comply within 18 months from the effective date of this
ordinance.
      (2)   Outdoor lighting in all remaining land use zoning districts shall
comply within 24 months from the effective date of this ordinance.
   (b)   Extension. Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a property owner may
submit a written request to the Director for an extension of the deadline,
which shall clearly detail why an extension is needed. Upon demonstration of
good cause for providing a property owner additional time to comply with the
requirements of this section, the Director may extend the property owner's time
to comply and/or may require a plan for compliance that requires partial
compliance in advance of full compliance. For purposes of this section, the
term "good cause" shall mean a significant financial or other hardship which
warrants an extension or conditional extension of the time limit for compliance
established herein. In no instance shall the Director issue an extension of the
compliance period in excess of one year. The decision of the Director shall be
appealable pursuant to the same provisions and procedures as set forth in
subdivision (a) of §
81.02.020.
   (c)   Change of Use. If a property with non-compliant lighting changes use
after the effective date, then all outdoor lighting shall be brought into
compliance with this chapter, either by the property owner or tenant before the
new use begins.
(Ord. 4419, passed - -2021)
§ 83.07.090 Enforcement and Penalties.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be
punishable in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 86.09 (Enforcement) of this Development Code and Chapter 2 (Violations
and Enforcement) of Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code.
(Ord. 4419, passed - -2021)
CHAPTER 83.08: HILLSIDE GRADING STANDARDS
Section
   
83.08.010   Purpose.
   
83.08.020   Applicability.
   
83.08.030   Hillside Grading Review.
   
83.08.040   Hillside Grading Standards.
§ 83.08.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes regulations for development within hillside areas
to:
   (a)   Facilitate appropriate hillside development through standards and
guidelines for hillside areas.
   (b)   Ensure that development in the hillside areas is designed to fit the
existing landform.
   (c)   Preserve significant features of the natural topography, including
swales, canyons, streams, knolls, ridgelines, and rock outcrops.
   (d)   Provide a safe means of ingress, egress and traffic flow for all forms
of permissible traffic within hillside areas.
   (e)   Provide alternative approaches to conventional grading practices by
achieving development intensities that are consistent with the natural
characteristics of hillside areas (e.g., land form, scenic quality, slopes, and
vegetation).
   (f)   Encourage the planning, design, and development of sites that provide
maximum safety with respect to fire hazards, exposure to geological hazards,
drainage, erosion and siltation, and materials of construction; provide the
best use of natural terrain; and to discourage development that will create or
disproportionately increase fire, flood, slide, or other safety hazards to
public health, welfare, and safety.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.08.020 Applicability.
   (a)   Slope Gradient of 15 Percent or Greater. The standards contained in
this Chapter apply to all uses and structures within areas having a natural
slope gradient of 15 percent or greater over the area being graded and
requiring a Grading Permit. For the purpose of this Chapter, slope shall be
computed as set forth in §
83.08.040(b) for the area being graded before grading is commenced.
   (b)   Site Conditions Requiring Hillside Grading Review. If the slope
gradient is 15 percent or greater and if any one of the following thresholds
applies on a particular site meeting the criteria set forth in Subdivision (a)
above, a full analysis and compliance with this Chapter shall be required and a
Hillside Grading Review shall be conducted in compliance with §
83.08.030 (Hillside Grading Review):
      (1)   The volume of proposed grading is more than 500 cubic yards per lot
or more than a total of 2,000 cubic yards for the total project.
      (2)   If retaining walls or the proposed cut or fill slopes greater than
15 feet in height will be visible and exposed to permanent public view or will
be adjacent to designated open space or public lands.
      (3)   The width of proposed cut or fill slopes is greater than 75 feet in
the Valley and Mountain Regions and 150 feet in the Desert Region as measured
at the widest point of the slope.
      (4)   The area of proposed disturbance is more than 50 percent of the
site area, or the proposed disturbed area exceeds 10,000 square feet, whichever
is less.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 83.08.030 Hillside Grading Review.
   A subdivision, land use permit, or Building Permit application for a site or
development that meets or exceeds the thresholds in §
83.08.020 (Applicability) shall require a Hillside Grading Review.
   (a)   Procedure. The review shall be conducted concurrently with any
required discretionary review or in conjunction with an application for a
Grading Permit for any project that meets or exceeds the thresholds listed in §
83.08.020 (Applicability).
   (b)   Submittal Requirements. An application for a Hillside Grading Review
shall require the following documents, reports, maps and such others as
determined appropriate by the Director. Exceptions to the filing requirements
shall require a written justification supported by factual information
submitted to the Director for consideration. Some of the required submittals
listed below may be displayed on a single map or plan.
      (1)   Natural Features Map. A natural features map shall identify all
existing slope banks, ridgelines, canyons, natural drainage courses, Federally
recognized blue line streams, rock outcroppings, and existing vegetation. When
a geology report is required, landslides and other existing geologic hazards
shall also be depicted.
      (2)   Grading Plan. A conceptual grading plan shall include the following
items:
         (A)   A legend with appropriate symbols shall include the following
items: change in direction of drainage, elevation of regulated trees subject to
the provisions of §
88.01.070(b) (Regulated Trees), estimated volumes proposed to be cut and/or
filled, finished floor elevations, high point, low point, pad elevations, spot
elevations, top of curb, and top of wall;
         (B)   A separate map, with proposed fill areas colored in green and
cut areas colored in red, with areas where cut and/or fill exceed depths
established in compliance with this Chapter. If custom foundations are
proposed, this shall be noted on the map. Additionally, the area of cut and/or
fill, calculated as a percentage of the total surface area of the site, shall
be included on the plan; and
         (C)   Contours for existing and natural land conditions and proposed
work. Existing contours shall be depicted with a dashed line with every fifth
contour line darker; and proposed contours shall be depicted similarly with
solid lines. Contours shall be shown at maximum five-foot intervals above 20
percent slope.
         (D)   For the efficient use of water, grading of the project site
shall be designed so that soil erosion, runoff, and water waste are minimized.
As part of the landscape document package, if a project’s grading exceeds 100
cubic yards, then the project developer shall submit the most recent rough and/
or precise grading plan(s) that have been prepared and signed by a licensed
professional.
      (3)   Drainage Map. A conceptual drainage and flood control facilities
map describing planned drainage improvements.
      (4)   Slope Analysis Map. A slope analysis map for the purpose of
determining the amount and location of land as it exists in its natural state
falling into each slope category as specified in this Subdivision. This map
shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor, and shall have a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet and a
contour interval of not more than two feet, provided that the contour interval
may be five feet when the slope is more than 20 percent. A scale of not less
than one inch to 200 feet may be used for developments greater than 100 acres
in size. This map shall show the closest structures on all contiguous
properties. It shall delineate slope bands in the range of zero to less than 15
percent, 15 to less than 30 percent, 30 percent to less than 40 percent, and 40
percent or greater. Also included shall be a tabulation of the land/area in
each slope category specified in acres.
      (5)   Slope Profiles. A sufficient number of slope profiles shall be
provided as required by the Director to clearly illustrate the extent of the
proposed grading. The slope profiles shall:
         (A)   Be drawn at the same scale and indexed, or keyed, to the grading
plan, and project site map.
         (B)   Show existing and proposed topography, structures, and
infrastructure. Proposed topography, structures, and infrastructure shall be
drawn with a solid, heavy line. Existing topography and features shall be drawn
with a thin or dashed line.
         (C)   The slope profile shall extend far enough from the project site
boundary to clearly show impact on adjacent property, within at least 150 feet.
         (D)   The profiles shall be drawn along those locations of the project
site where:
            (I)   The greatest alteration of existing topography is proposed;
            (II)   The most intense or dense development is proposed;
            (III)   The site that is most visible from surrounding land uses;
and
            (IV)   At all site boundaries illustrating maximum and minimum
conditions.
         (E)   At least two of the slope profiles shall be roughly parallel to
each other and roughly perpendicular to existing contour lines. At least one
other slope profile shall be roughly at a 45-degree angle to the other slope
profiles and existing contour lines.
      (6)   Slope Design. Slopes with a 5:1 ratio or greater; cut slopes with a
five-foot vertical height or greater; and fill slopes with a three-foot
vertical height or greater shall be protected against damage from erosion. In
addition to the stabilizing mulch, drought-tolerant plant material and
hardscape features shall be utilized on slopes to promote water retention and
erosion control. Decorative boulders and other suitable hardscape materials may
be utilized on slopes, but the dominant visual character of the slope shall be
made up of drought-tolerant plant materials. Shrubs shall be used in
combination with lateral spreading groundcovers; trees shall be used where
slope exceeds 15 feet vertical height. Trees and shrubs shall be planted in
visually attractive groupings that provide a more natural appearance.
      (7)   Dust Control. If grading takes place, a dust control plan shall be
submitted for review. All grading and dust control measures shall be conducted
in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 88.02 (Soil and Water
Conservation).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
§ 83.08.040 Hillside Grading Standards.
   (a)   Landform Grading and Revegetation Standards. Incorporation of the
basic principles of the landform grading and revegetation concept in the design
and construction of hillside development projects shall be required so that
they will be in harmony with the natural topography and reflect existing plant
distribution patterns. The general principles of landform grading and
revegetation include the following elements:
      (1)   The basic land plan flows with the natural topography rather than
against it. This means that street patterns and building pad configurations
follow the underlying topographic features rather than cutting across them.
Figure 83-6 Development Follows Natural Topography
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11039.jpg]
 
      (2)   Manufactured Sites.
         (A)   All manufactured cut and fill slopes exceeding 15 feet in
height, which will be either exposed to permanent public view or are adjacent
to environmentally sensitive areas, shall be designed with features
characteristic of natural slopes so that their ultimate appearance will
resemble a natural slope. This shall include slopes along streets and highways,
slopes adjacent to parks, schools, open spaces, and other public facilities,
and other prominent and highly visible slopes. See
Figure 83-7.
         (B)   Side setback slopes and rear setback slopes, less than 25 feet
in height, need not have landform design applied.
         (C)   Slope drainage devices (i.e., down drains and interceptor
drains) shall be designed so that they are built into the natural slope
features and become hidden from view.
Figure 83-7 Characteristics of Manufactured Slopes
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11041.jpg]
 
      (3)   When not otherwise required, terracing and the associated concrete
drainage devices (i.e., terrace drains, down drains, and interceptor drains)
distract from efforts to give cut and fill slopes a natural appearance and are
therefore discouraged.
      (4)   Landscaping shall be applied in patterns resembling native plant
distribution. See
Figure 83-8.
Figure 83-8 Patterns of Landscaping
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11043.jpg]
 
   (b)   Slope Analysis.
      (1)   Calculating Average Slope.  Use one of the following formulas or an
acceptable alternative approved by the Director that would accurately portray
the steepness of areas throughout the site that are proposed for development
and preservation in open space to calculate the weighted average natural slope
by slope category for the entire project site and the weighted average for the
area to be graded:
Example #1:
Weighted Average Slope = 0.002296 IL/A
I = Contour interval in feet
L = Summation of length of all contours in feet
A = Area in acres of parcel being considered (minimum area to be considered
    shall be 10,000 square feet)
Example #2:
Weighted Average Slope = 100 IL/A
I = Contour interval in feet
L = Summation of length of all contours in feet
A = Area in square feet of parcel being considered (minimum area to be
    considered shall be 10,000 square feet)
 
      (2)   Slope Categories.  
Table 83-8 (Slope Categories) provides standards for hillside slopes in areas
that will not be landform graded. These standards ensure that development will
complement the existing character and topography of the land. The standards for
one category may be applied to limited portions of the site in an adjacent
category when a project is developed on a site with more than one slope
category. The maximum allowable density for residential projects shall be
determined by the formulas contained in §
84.18.030 (Development Standards) or in §
82.13.050 (General Development Standards) if the project is located within the
FS Overlay.
 
Table 83-8
Slope Categories
Slope Category Weighted Average Natural Slope Site Standards
               Gradient
                                              Structures shall conform to the
                                              natural topography and natural
                                              grade by using appropriate
                                              techniques, including stepped or
                                              split-level foundations, stem
                                              walls, stacking, and clustering.
1              15 percent to less than 30     Walls shall be as natural
               percent                        appearing as possible.
                                              Conventional grading may be
                                              considered for limited portions
                                              of a project when its plan
                                              includes special design features,
                                              extensive open space, or
                                              significant use of greenbelts.
                                              Development within this category
                                              shall be restricted to those
                                              sites where it can be
                                              demonstrated that safety will be
                                              maximized while environmental and
               30 percent to less than 40     aesthetic impacts will be
2              percent                        minimized. Use of large parcels,
                                              variable setbacks, and variable
                                              building structural techniques
                                              (e.g., stepped foundations) shall
                                              be expected. Extra erosion
                                              control measures may be included
                                              as conditions of approval.
                                              This is an excessive slope
                                              condition. Pad grading shall not
3              40 percent and greater         be allowed. Grading for driveways
                                              and roads shall be reviewed
                                              through the Minor Use Permit
                                              application process.
 
   (c)   Grading.
      (1)   Grading Standards.
         (A)   Cut and fill slopes shall not be created greater than 50 percent
(2:1).
         (B)   Where cut or fill conditions are created, slopes shall be varied
rather than left at a constant angle that may be unstable or create an
unnatural, rigid, “engineered” appearance. See
Figure 83-9.
Figure 83-9 Variations in Cut and/or Fill Slopes
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11045.jpg]
 
         (C)   The toe and crest of any slope in excess of ten feet in vertical
height shall be rounded with vertical curves of radii no less that five feet
and designed in proportion to the total height of the slope.
         (D)   A manufactured slope bank shall not exceed 30 feet in vertical
height unless no feasible alternative exists or unless grading can be
significantly reduced by increasing slope height. However, the use of an
alternative design is strongly recommended as the desirable approach in
reducing grading and slope height. Any bank exceeding 25 feet in height,
regardless of length, shall have variable gradients.
         (E)   Grading shall be phased so that prompt revegetation or
construction will control erosion. Where feasible, only those areas that will
be built on, resurfaced, or landscaped shall be disturbed. Topsoil shall be
stockpiled during rough grading and used on cut and fill slopes whenever
feasible. Revegetation of cut and fill slopes shall occur within three months
of grading completion.
         (F)   Grading operations shall be prohibited during the rainy season,
October 15 to April 15, unless adequate erosion control measures are
implemented as approved by the Director to control run-off and retain sediment
on-site.
         (G)   Retaining walls associated with lot pads shall not exceed four
feet in height, where they will be visible to the public. Where an additional
retained portion is necessary due to unusual or extreme conditions (i.e.,
parcel configuration, steep slope, or road design), the use of terraced
retaining structures shall be considered on an individual parcel basis and
shall only be allowed where landscaping is provided between the walls to soften
the overall appearance. Terraced walls shall be separated by a minimum of three
feet with appropriate landscaping. No more than three terraced or stepped walls
shall be permitted without obtaining a Variance for more. Terraced retaining
walls shall not be used as a typical solution within a development and shall be
limited to the minimum required subject to approval of the Director.
         (H)   Parcel lines shall be placed two feet beyond top of major slope
areas within public view corridors to help ensure their maintenance by the
downhill owner.
         (I)   Where feasible, graded areas shall be designed with manufactured
slopes located on the uphill side of structures, thereby hiding the slope
behind the structure. See
Figure 83-10.
Figure 83-10 Manufactured Slopes Located at Rear of Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11047.jpg]
 
         (J)   On parcels sloping with the street and other configurations not
addressed above in this Subdivision (1), one retaining wall, not to exceed 42
inches in height, may be used in a side setback where necessary. See
Figure 83-11.
Figure 83-11 Retaining Walls for Side Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11049.jpg]
 
      (2)   Drainage Standards.
         (A)   Debris basins, riprap, and energy dissipating devices shall be
provided where necessary to reduce erosion when grading is undertaken. Except
for necessary flood control facilities and road and utility crossings,
significant natural drainage courses shall be protected from grading activity.
In instances where crossing is required, a natural crossing and bank protection
shall be preferred over steel and concrete systems, where such crossing is
feasible. Where brow ditches are required, they shall be naturalized with plant
materials and native rocks.
         (B)   Terrace drains shall follow landform slope configuration. Down
drains shall not be placed in exposed positions. Down drains shall be hidden in
swales diagonally or curvilinearly across a slope face. In this manner they
shall be built into the overall landform of the slope. See
Figure 83-12.
Figure 83-12 Drains Follow Topography
This
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11051.jpg]
 
Not This
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11053.jpg]
 
         (C)   Building Permits and Grading Permits shall not be issued for
construction on any site without an approved location for disposal of runoff
waters, (i.e., a drainage channel, public street or alley, or private drainage
easement).
         (D)   The use of cross lot drainage shall be subject to the Director’s
review and may be approved after demonstration that this method will not
adversely affect the proposed parcels or adjacent properties, and that it is
absolutely required in order to minimize the amount of grading that would
result with conventional drainage practices. Where cross lot drainage is
utilized, the following shall apply:
            (I)   One parcel may drain across another parcel if an easement is
provided either within an improved, open V-swale gutter that has a naturalized
appearance or within a closed drainage pipe that should be a minimum 12 inches
in diameter. This drainage shall be conveyed to either a public street or to a
drainage easement. The easement width shall be determined on an individual
basis and shall be dependent on appropriate hydrologic studies and access
requirements.
            (II)   On-site drainage shall be conveyed in an improved, open V-
swale gutter that has a naturalized appearance, or within an underground pipe
as determined on an individual basis and shall be dependent on appropriate
hydrologic studies and access requirements.
         (E)   Slope drainage on graded slopes should be regulated per the
California Building Code.
         (F)   Natural drainage courses shall be preserved and enhanced to the
extent feasible. Rather than filling them in, drainage features shall be
incorporated as an integral part of the project design.
      (3)   Access, Trails, and Roadway Standards.
         (A)   Driveway grades up to a maximum of 20 percent shall be allowed
and shall be aligned with the natural contours of the land. Proper design
considerations shall be employed (i.e., vertical curbs and parking landings).
Parking landings shall be utilized on all driveways over ten percent in grade.
         (B)   Where retaining walls are necessary adjacent to roadways or
within street setbacks, they shall be limited to three feet in height where
they will be visible from the street in order to avoid obstruction of
motorists’ and pedestrians’ field of view and to create an aesthetically
pleasing streetscape. No more than four terraced or stepped retaining walls
shall be utilized. Walls shall be separated by a minimum of three feet and
include appropriate landscaping.
Figure 83-13 Retaining Walls Along Streets and in Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11055.jpg]
 
         (C)   Roadways and Driveways Shall Conform to the Natural Landform,
Where Feasible. They shall not greatly alter the physical and visual character
of a hillside by creating large notches in ridgelines, defining wide straight
alignments, or by building switch-backs on visually prominent hillsides. Split
sections and parking bays shall be utilized in the layout of hillside streets.
         (D)   Where Road Construction Is Allowed in Hillside Areas, the Extent
of Vegetation Disturbance and Visual Disruption Shall Be Minimized by the
Combined Use of Retaining Structures and Regrading to Approximate the Natural
Slope. The following techniques shall be used where feasible:
            (I)   Utilize landform revegetation planting in order to create a
natural appearance and provide a sense of privacy.
            (II)   Reduce the visual and safety impacts by use of terraced
retaining walls and landscaping.
            (III)   Split roadways increase the amount and appearance of
landscaping and the median can be used to handle drainage.
      (4)   Site Design.
         (A)   The dimensions of a structure parallel to the direction of the
slope shall be maximized in order to limit the amount of cutting and filling
and to better fit the structure to the natural terrain. See
Figure 83-14.
Figure 83-14 Streets and Lots Follow Contours
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11057.jpg]
 
         (B)   Design of building sites shall be sensitive to the natural
terrain. Structures shall be located in ways that minimize grading and preserve
natural features (i.e., knolls or ridgelines). See
Figure 83-15.
Figure 83-15 Preserve Natural Features
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11059.jpg]
 
         (C)   Projects shall incorporate variable setbacks, multiple
orientations, and other site planning techniques to preserve open spaces,
protect natural features, and offer views for residents.
      (5)   Landscaping Standards. In addition to the requirements in
Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards) the following standards shall apply to
hillside development subject to the requirements of this Chapter:
         (A)   Native or naturalized plants or other plant species that blend
with the landscape shall be utilized in all areas with required planting.
         (B)   Fire retardant plant materials shall be utilized.
         (C)   A permanent landscape and irrigation system, for purposes of
establishing and maintaining required planting, shall be installed on all
slopes. The emphasis shall be toward using plant materials that will eventually
need minimal irrigation. Water and energy conservation techniques shall be
utilized, including drip irrigation, reclaimed water, and xeriscape. Within the
Desert Region, if a natural landscape palette is selected, permanent irrigation
need not be provided if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director
that permanent irrigation is unnecessary. Drip irrigation need not be provided
for landscape palettes where such a system would not be water-efficient.
Reclaimed water need be used only in situations where it is available at the
site.
         (D)   Landscaping shall be used to screen views of downslope building
elevations. When the structure height exceeds 20 feet from finished grade on a
downslope, additional landscaping shall be required and a landscaping plan
shall be submitted for review with the submittal package.
         (E)   Slopes with required planting shall be planted with informal
clusters of trees and shrubs to soften and vary the slope plane. Where required
by the County, jute netting or similar material shall be used to help stabilize
planting and minimize soil erosion.
         (F)   Native vegetation shall be retained and supplemented within
undeveloped canyons and along natural drainage courses as allowed by State and
Federal resource agencies (e.g., State Department of Fish & Game, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, etc.).
         (G)   Landscaping shall become a “revegetation” process and be applied
in patterns that occur in nature: Trees and shrubs shall be concentrated
largely in concave areas, while convex portions shall be planted mainly with
groundcovers.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4334,
passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 83.09: INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Section
   
83.09.010   Purpose.
   
83.09.020   Applicability.
   
83.09.030   Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Valley Region.
   
83.09.040   Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Mountain Region.
   
83.09.050   Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Desert Region.
   
83.09.060   Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Countywide.
§ 83.09.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish the infrastructure improvements
required for proposed development in order to ensure that the development does
not result in fiscal liabilities to County residents. The intent is to require
an appropriate range of infrastructure facilities and services to support areas
of high intensity development and areas of low intensity development. The
requirements are based upon the direct relationship between the intensity of
land uses and the amounts of facilities and services that are needed to support
the uses.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.09.020 Applicability.
   The standards provided in this Chapter apply to all new residential and
nonresidential subdivisions and non-residential development in the Valley
Region, Mountain Region, and Desert Region of the County. Where indicated, some
of these standards may apply to ministerial permits (e.g., Building Permits).
Infrastructure requirements for residential development on existing lots of
record are listed in §
84.21.030 (Minimum Residential Construction Standards) and §
84.16.040 (Development Standards Applicable to All Multi-Family Projects).
   The road dedication and street improvement standards provided in this
Chapter do not apply to: (1) the alteration or enlargement of an existing
building or structure on a lot or parcel of land if the total square footage of
such alteration or enlargement, and all other alterations or enlargements
completed three years prior to the date of the application for a permit for
such alteration or enlargement, does not exceed one-half of the original square
footage of all buildings and structures on such lot or parcel of land, or (2)
the erection of one or more accessory structures (not including accessory
dwellings) as defined in §
810.01.030(g) of the County Code. For purposes of this section, “original
square footage” means the square footage of all buildings and structures that
existed on such lot or parcel of land three years prior to the date of the
application for such permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4181, passed - -2012)
§ 83.09.030 Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Valley Region.
   
Table 83-9 identifies the infrastructure improvements required for all new
residential and nonresidential subdivisions and non-residential development in
the Valley Region.
Table 83-9
Infrastructure Improvement Standards
Valley Region
          Residential and Agricultural Land Uses Commercial and Industrial
          (Lot sizes are the size of the         Institutional  Land Uses
          resultant parcels after subdivision)   Land Uses
Standards 1 acre or More than 1 to 2.5 acres or
          less      less than 2.5  greater       All lot sizes  All lot sizes
                    acres
          Y = Yes   NA = Not Allowed   N = Not required
Table 83-9
Infrastructure Improvement Standards
Valley Region
                                               Residential and
                                               Agricultural Land    Commercial
                                               Uses (Lot sizes are  and           Industrial
                                               the size of the      Institutional Land Uses
                                               resultant parcels    Land Uses
                                               after subdivision)
Standards                                             More
                                                      than  2.5
                                               1 acre 1 to  acres                 All lot
                                               or     less  or      All lot sizes sizes
                                               less   than  greater
                                                      2.5
                                                      acres
                                               Y = Yes   NA = Not Allowed   N = Not required
Legal and physical access                      Y      Y     Y       Y             Y
Grants of Easements(1)(9)                      Y      Y     Y       Y             Y
Paved Access(9)
   Internal access (internal roads)         Y      Y     Y       Y             Y
   Perimeter access (road abutting subject  Y      Y     Y       Y             Y
property)
   Off-site access (paving to nearest paved Y      Y     Y       Y             Y
road)
Curbs and gutters(2)(9)                        Y      Y     Y(3)    Y             Y
                                               Y      Y(4)
Sidewalks(2)(9)                                (2     (1    N       Y             Y
                                               sides) side)
Street lights
   Standard spacing including intersections Y      N     N       Y             Y
   Intersections only                       N      N     Y       N             N
Water
   Water purveyor(5)                        Y      Y     Y or Y  Y             Y
   Substantiated water well                 NA     NA    (6)     N             N
Sanitation
   Sewer(7)                                 Y or Y Y or  Y or Y  Y             Y
   Septic systems (8)                              Y             N             N
Drainage improvements(9)                       Y      Y     Y       Y             Y
Fireflow                                       Y      Y     Y       Y             Y
Notes:
(1)   Necessary rights-of way for transportation and circulation, drainage and flood control
facilities, and utilities included.
(2)   These requirements may be waived within infill areas where there is no plan or
financing mechanism in place to provide such improvements to other existing properties and
where, as a result, such improvements will not be connected to other infrastructure.
(3)   The Public Works Department shall require curbs and gutters, if necessary, to control
vehicle access and street drainage. May be required by Caltrans on State highways.
(4)   Sidewalks may be required on both sides of the street by the Public Works Department
if needed for pedestrian safety.
(5)   Projects shall connect to a water purveyor when the nearest property line is within
200 ft. of a water line. This requirement shall be increased by 100 ft. for each dwelling
unit in the project.
(6)   Individual well allowed if no water purveyor is available and when consistent with
Water Master requirements in adjudicated groundwater basins.
(7)   Sewers shall be required within established sewer service districts and outside such
districts when required by the WQCB. Projects shall connect to a sewer system when the
nearest property line is within 200 ft. of a sewer line. This requirement shall be increased
by 100 ft. for each dwelling unit in the project.
(8)   Septic systems are allowed only if the subject parcel is larger than one-half acre or
meets WQCB requirements.
(9)   Waivers or modifications to these requirements may be considered pursuant to §
83.05.070 of this Code.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4242, passed - -2014)
§ 83.09.040 Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Mountain Region.
   
Table 83-10 identifies the infrastructure improvements required for all new
residential and nonresidential subdivisions and non-residential development in
the Mountain Region.
Table 83-10
Infrastructure Improvement Standards
Mountain Region
          Residential and Agricultural Land Uses Commercial and Industrial
          (Lot sizes are the size of the         Institutional  Land Uses
          resultant parcels after subdivision)   Land Uses
Standards 1 acre or More than 1 to 2.5 acres or
          less      less than 2.5  greater       All lot sizes  All lot sizes
                    acres
          Y = Yes   NA = Not Allowed   N = Not required
Table 83-10
Infrastructure Improvement Standards
Mountain Region
                                               Residential and
                                               Agricultural Land  Commercial
                                               Uses (Lot sizes    and           Industrial
                                               are the size of    Institutional Land Uses
                                               the resultant      Land Uses
                                               parcels after
                                               subdivision)
Standards                                           More
                                               1    than  2.5
                                               acre 1 to  acres                 All lot
                                               or   less  or      All lot sizes sizes
                                               less than  greater
                                                    2.5
                                                    acres
                                               Y = Yes   NA = Not Allowed   N = Not
                                               required
Legal and physical accessY                     Y    Y     Y       Y             Y
Grants of Easements(1)(10)                     Y    Y     Y       Y             Y
Paved Access(10)
   Internal access (internal roads)         Y    Y     N       Y             Y
   Perimeter access (roads abutting subject Y    Y     Y       Y             Y
property)
   Off-site access (paving to nearest paved Y    Y     Y       Y             Y
road)
Curbs and gutters(2)(3)(10)                    Y    Y     N       Y             Y
Sidewalks(3)(4)(10)                            N    N     N       Y             N
Street lights at intersections only            Y    Y     N       Y             Y
(collectors or higher)(5)
Water
   Water purveyor(6)                        Y    Y     Y or Y  Y or Y(7)     Y
   Substantiated well water                 NA   NA    (7)                   N
Sanitation
   Sewer(8)                                 Y or Y or  Y or Y  Y             Y
   Septic systems (9)                       Y    Y             N             N
Drainage improvements(10)                      Y    Y     N       Y             Y
Fireflow                                       Y    Y     Y       Y             Y
Notes:
(1)   Necessary rights-of way for transportation and circulation, drainage and flood
control facilities, and utilities included.
(2)   The Public Works Department shall require curbs, gutters and sidewalks if necessary
to control vehicle access, street drainage, and to provide pedestrian safety. Curb and
gutters may be required by Caltrans on State highways.
(3)   These requirements may be waived within infill areas where there is no plan or
financing mechanism in place to provide such improvements to other existing properties and
where, as a result, such improvements will not be connected to other infrastructure.
(4)   Sidewalks may be required on both sides of the street by the Public Works Department
if needed for pedestrian safety.
(5)   Shall be in compliance with the requirements of
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
(6)   Projects shall connect to a water purveyor when the nearest property line is within
200 ft. of a water line. This requirement shall be increased by 100 ft. for each dwelling
unit in the project.
(7)   Individual well allowed if no water purveyor is available for residential and
institutional uses.
(8)   Sewers shall be required within established sewer service districts and outside such
districts when required by the WQCB. Projects shall connect to a sewer system when the
nearest property line is within 200 ft. of a sewer line. This requirement shall be
increased by 100 ft. for each dwelling unit in the project.
(9)   Septic systems are allowed only if the subject parcel is larger than one-half acre
or meets WQCB requirements.
(10)   Waivers or modifications to these requirements may be considered pursuant to §
83.05.070 of this Code.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4242, passed - -2014)
§ 83.09.050 Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Desert Region.
   
Table 83-11 identifies the infrastructure improvements required for all new
residential and nonresidential subdivisions and non-residential development in
the Desert Region.
Table 83-11
Infrastructure Improvement Standards
Desert Region
          Residential and Agricultural Land Uses Commercial and Industrial
          (Lot sizes are the size of the         Institutional  Land Uses
          resultant parcels after subdivision)   Land Uses
Standards 1 acre or More than 1 to 2.5 acres or
          less      less than 2.5  greater       All lot sizes  All lot sizes
                    acres
          Y = Yes   NA = Not Allowed   N = Not required
Table 83-11
Infrastructure Improvement Standards
Desert Region
                                               Residential and
                                               Agricultural Land    Commercial
                                               Uses (Lot sizes are  and           Industrial
                                               the size of the      Institutional Land Uses
                                               resultant parcels    Land Uses
                                               after subdivision)
Standards                                             More
                                                      than  2.5
                                               1 acre 1 to  acres                 All lot
                                               or     less  or      All lot sizes sizes
                                               less   than  greater
                                                      2.5
                                                      acres
                                               Y = Yes   NA = Not Allowed   N = Not required
Legal and physical access                      Y      Y     Y       Y             Y
Grants of Easements(1)(16)                     Y      Y     Y       Y             Y
Paved Access
   Internal access (internal roads)         Y      Y     Y(2)(3) Y(2)(3)       Y(4)
   Perimeter access (roads abutting subject Y      Y(2)  Y(2)(3) Y(2)(3)       Y
property)                                             (3)
   Off-site access (paving to nearest paved Y      Y(2)  Y(2)(3) Y(4)          Y
road)                                                 (3)
Curbs and gutters(5)(6)(16)                    Y      N(7)  N(7)    N(7)          N(7)
                                               Y (2   Y(8)
Sidewalks(6)(16)                               sides) (1    N       N(8)          N(8)
                                                      side)
Street lights
   Standard spacing including intersections(Y)     N     N       Y             Y
   Intersections only(9)                    N      Y     N       N             N
Water
   Water purveyor(10)                       Y      Y(11) Y or Y
   Substantiated water well                 NA     N(11) (12)    Y or Y(12)    Y or Y(12)

Sanitation
   Sewer(13)                                Y or Y Y or  N       Y or Y        Y or Y
   Septic systems (14)                             Y     Y
Drainage improvements (16)                     Y      Y     Y       Y             Y
Fireflow(15)                                          Y     Y       Y             Y
Notes:
(1)   Necessary rights-of way for transportation and circulation, drainage and flood control
facilities, and utilities included.
(2)   This requirement shall not apply to subdivisions where the resultant parcel sizes are
at least twice the minimum lot size for the land use zoning district in which they are
located.
(3)   This requirement applies to all subdivisions creating 5 or more parcels. It will not
apply to subdivisions created by Parcel Map unless the subdivision is adjacent to an
existing paved road.
(4)   Required on driveway approach when accessed from a paved road. For alternate paving
standards in parking areas, refer to §
83.11.090 (Parking and Loading Development Standards).
(5)   A rolled asphalt berm may be substituted at the discretion of Public Works.
(6)   These requirements may be waived within infill areas where there is no plan or
financing mechanism in place to provide such improvements to other existing properties and
where, as a result, such improvements will not be connected to other infrastructure.
(7)   The Public Works Department shall require curbs and gutters, if necessary, to control
vehicle access and street drainage. May be required by Caltrans on State highways.
(8)   Sidewalks may be required on both sides of the street by the Public Works Department
if needed for pedestrian safety.
(9)   Shall be in compliance with the requirements of
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
(10)   Projects shall connect to a water purveyor when the nearest property line is within
200 ft. of a water line. This requirement shall be increased by 100 ft. for each residential
lot in the project.
(11)   This requirement applies to all subdivisions creating 5 or more parcels. It will also
apply to subdivisions created by Parcel Map if the provisions of §
83.09.060 cannot be met.
(12)   Individual well allowed if no water purveyor is available and when consistent with
Water Master requirements in adjudicated groundwater basins.
(13)   Sewers shall be required within established sewer service districts and outside such
districts when required by the WQCB. Projects shall connect to a sewer system when the
nearest property line is within 200 ft. of a sewer line. This requirement shall be increased
by 100 ft. for each residential lot in the project.
(14)   Septic systems are allowed only if the subject parcel is consistent with the WQCB
requirements or is not within sewer service district.
(15)   Shall not be required for single-family dwellings and accessory structures on parcels
of 2.5 acres or greater where such structures are located 50 ft. from the property lines.
Structures on the same parcel shall be separated in compliance with County fire standards.
(16)   Waivers or modifications to these requirements may be considered pursuant to §
83.05.070 of this Code.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4242, passed - -2014)
§ 83.09.060 Infrastructure Improvement Standards - Countywide.
   The water and sanitation provisions in
Table 83-11 shall be met for proposed subdivisions created by Parcel Map in the
Desert Region unless the following standards can be met:
   (a)   Wells shall be setback from all leach lines by 100 feet and from
seepage pits by 150 feet.
   (b)   Wells shall be set back from all property lines where no leach lines
exist on the adjacent property by 50 feet.
   (c)   Septic systems with leach lines shall be setback from all wells by 100
feet.
   (d)   Septic systems with leach lines shall be setback from property lines
where no leach lines exist on the adjacent property by 50 feet.
   (e)   Septic systems with seepage pits shall be setback from all wells by
150 feet.
   (f)   Septic systems with seepage pits shall be setback from property lines
where no leach lines exist on the adjacent property by 75 feet.
   (g)   Applicants providing a preliminary Composite Development Plan showing
the envelope locations of the building/house pad, septic tanks/pits/leach
fields, and water well do not have to meet these requirements for the
requirements listed above when supporting engineering data is provided
demonstrating feasibility of septic systems and wells. The location will be
denoted on the final Composite Development Plan that accompanies a Final Map or
Parcel Map.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 83.10: LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
Section
   
83.10.010   Purpose.
   
83.10.020   Applicability.
   
83.10.030   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
   
83.10.040   Modification to the Landscaping Requirements
   
83.10.050   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
   
83.10.060   Landscape Area Requirements
   
83.10.070   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
   
83.10.080   Regional Landscaping Standards
   
83.10.090   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
   
83.10.100   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
   
83.10.110   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
   
83.10.120   (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
§ 83.10.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to:
   (a)   Enhance the aesthetic appearance of the County by providing standards
related to the quality and functional aspects of landscaping and to recognize
that landscapes are essential to the quality of life within the County by
providing areas for active and passive recreation. Additionally, landscapes are
an enhancement to the environment by benefitting air and water quality, helping
to prevent and manage erosion, offering fire protection, and helping to replace
valuable ecosystems that may be lost during development.
   (b)   Increase the compatibility between abutting land uses and public
rights-of-way by providing landscape screening and buffers.
   (c)   Protect public health, safety, and welfare by preserving property
values and enhancing pedestrian and vehicular traffic and safety.
   (d)   Provide for the conservation and protection of water resources through
the efficient use of water; appropriate use of plant materials suitable for
climate and location; regular maintenance of landscaped areas; and provide
regional standards pursuant to §
83.10.080, in addition to those required by the State Model Water Efficient
Landscape Ordinance (MWELO), as adopted by reference in Title 6 of the San
Bernardino County Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4136, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4245,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
§ 83.10.020 Applicability.
   (a)   A landscape document package shall be submitted when required by the
MWELO.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4136, passed--2011; Am. Ord. 4400, passed
- -2021)
§ 83.10.030 (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - - 2021).
§ 83.10.040 Modification to the Landscaping Requirements.
   (a)   Director Approval. The Director may approve modifications to the
requirements of this Chapter. The modifications shall be limited to the
following:
      (1)   Minor modifications to the approved landscape documentation package
that comply with the spirit and intent of the requirements, including, but not
limited to, revising or substituting plant varieties, container sizes, plant
locations, irrigation specifications, hardscape components, berm heights and/or
locations, slope features, and other similar changes.
      (2)   Any minor modifications of planting, installation, and/or soil
preparation details as listed within the approved landscape documentation
package.
      (3)   The occupancy of structures prior to the installation of
landscaping due to exceptional and unforeseen circumstances when a bond or
other surety is provided. When required by the Director, a statement of surety
in the form of cash, performance bond, letter of credit, or certificate of
deposit in the amount equal to 120 percent of the total value of all plant
materials, irrigation equipment, installation, and maintenance shall be posted
with the County for a two-year period. The Director may require statements of
surety for phased development projects, a legitimate delay in landscape
installation due to seasonal requirements (including adverse weather
conditions) and similar circumstances where it may not be advisable or
desirable to install all of a project's landscaping before occupancy of a site.
   (b)   Conditions Imposed in Connection with Modifications. In granting
modifications to any approved landscape documentation package, the Director may
impose conditions as deemed necessary to comply with the spirit and intent of
these regulations.
   (c)   Fire Safety (FS) Overlay. The standards in this Chapter may be
modified by
Chapter 82.13 (Fire Safety (FS) Overlay).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4136, passed--2011; Am. Ord. 4400, passed
- -2021)
§ 83.10.050 (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021).
§ 83.10.060 Landscape Area Requirements.
   (a)   General Requirements.
      (1)   Setbacks. Setback and open space areas required by this Development
Code shall be landscaped based on the requirements of this Chapter and the
MWELO, except the portion where a sidewalk or driveway occur in the required
setback. Required setbacks that are screened from public view in commercial and
industrial zones, and are not adjacent to residentially-zoned property, are
exempt from the provisions of this Chapter.
      (2)   Unused Areas. Areas of a project site not intended for a specific
use shall be landscaped based on the requirements of this Chapter, unless
exempt in compliance with the MWELO.
      (3)   Parking Areas. Parking areas shall be landscaped in compliance with
§
83.11.080 (Landscape Requirements for Parking Areas) and the water-efficient
landscaping requirements of this Chapter. Areas dedicated to parking lots shall
not be counted as part of the total lot area needed when computing the minimum
landscaped area in compliance with Table 83-12, nor shall the parking lot
landscaping be counted as part of the minimum landscaping required.
      (4)   Minimum Area. Projects specified in §
83.10.020 (Applicability) shall provide and maintain landscaped areas in
compliance with Table 83-12 (Minimum Landscaped Area). No landscaped area
having a width of less than five feet shall be considered in the minimum
landscaping requirement.
Table 83-12
Minimum Landscaped Area
Land Use Minimum Landscape Area
         The factor resulting in the larger landscaped area shall be used.
         As a Percentage of Lot Area Area in Sq. Ft.
Table 83-12
Minimum Landscaped Area
Land Use                Minimum Landscape Area
                        The factor resulting in the larger landscaped area
                        shall be used.
                        As a Percentage of Lot Area Area in Sq. Ft.
Residential
Single-Family           Front and street side       900
                        setbacks
Multi-Family (4 or more 40 percent                  N/A
units)
Nonresidential
Industrial/Warehouse    15 percent                  1,000
Institutional           20 percent                  500
Office                  20 percent                  1,000
Retail                  20 percent                  1,000
 
   (b)   Area Increase in Lieu of Parking Spaces. In addition to required
landscaping areas, landscaping may be provided in lieu of 10 percent of the
total number of parking spaces required, provided the landscaping is arranged
so that parking may be installed at a later date if a demand arises, and
further provided, that the owner agrees to provide parking at the request of
the reviewing agency.
   (c)   Variation of Area Coverage in Planned Developments. Variation of
landscape coverage may be allowed for individual parcels within planned
developments established in compliance with
Chapter 85.10 (Planned Development Permits) when the development as a whole
meets the required coverage and the landscape documentation package is
consistent with the purpose and water-efficient requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4136,
passed--2011; Am. Ord. 4400, passed --2021)
§ 83.10.070 (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021).
§ 83.10.080 Regional Landscaping Standards.
   (a)   Valley Region. In the Valley Region, the following additional
landscaping standards shall apply:
      (1)   Existing Trees. Where possible, trees that are existing on a site
shall remain and be protected in place. If existing trees are removed to
accommodate development, those trees shall be replaced at the rate of 2:1.
Fruit or nut bearing trees planted in groves shall be exempt from this
provision. Replacement trees shall be a mixture of 15 gallon and 24-inch box
container sizes. Wherever possible, preservation of existing trees and shrubs
shall be used to meet site landscaping requirements.
      (2)   Plant Materials. Plant materials shall be a cohesive mix of
deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs, groundcovers, native plant material,
and, where applicable, turf. A list of acceptable plant materials for the
Valley Region is available from the Land Use Services Department to assist
developers and their landscape professionals in preparing the landscape
documentation package. If existing plant material is used as part of the site
landscaping requirements, it shall be included into the sites water budget
calculations.
      (3)   Tree Removal Permit. If any local, State, and/or Federally
protected plant material is found on-site, removal and/or protection shall be
in compliance with Chapter 88.01 (Plant Protection and Management).
      (4)   Landscaped Setbacks. The front yard and street side yard setback
areas of a parcel shall be landscaped, except for sites where no disturbance of
the natural terrain within a setback is proposed or the natural terrain
precludes setback landscaping (i.e., mountainsides or hillsides). Landscaping
of interior side yard setbacks may be required in compliance with §
83.02.060 (Screening and Buffering).
   (b)   Mountain Region. In the Mountain Region, the following additional
landscaping standards shall apply:
      (1)   Forest Conservation Plan and Insect Infestation Prevention Program.
Any landscaping proposed shall be in conjunction with a forest conservation
plan and insect infestation prevention program. These plans shall be prepared
by a Registered Professional Forester (RPF), and submitted with the landscape
documentation package by the developer. The plan shall include guidelines for
tree preservation, both during and after construction.
      (2)   Existing Trees. Any existing trees that are removed to accommodate
development shall be replaced according to the recommendations of the forest
conservation plan submitted with the landscape documentation package by the
developer. Wherever possible, preservation of existing trees and shrubs shall
be used to meet site landscaping requirements.
      (3)   Plant Materials. Plant materials shall be a cohesive mix of
evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, groundcovers, native plant materials
that are drought and infestation tolerant, and fire-resistant; turf shall be
minimized and be installed in compliance with this Chapter. A list of
acceptable plant materials for the Mountain Region is available from the Land
Use Services Department to help assist developers and their landscape
professionals in the preparation of the landscape document package. If existing
plant material is used as part of the site landscaping requirements, it shall
be included into the site’s water budget calculations. If any local, State,
and/or Federally protected plant material is found on-site, removal and/or
protection shall be in compliance with
Chapter 88.01 (Plant Protection and Management). Seedlings may be considered a
viable container size as part of the planting plan.
      (4)   Landscaped Setbacks. The front yard and street side yard setback
areas shall be landscaped except for sites where no disturbance of the natural
terrain is proposed. Landscaping of interior side yard setbacks may be required
in compliance with §
83.02.060 (Screening and Buffering).
   (c)   Desert Region. In the Desert Region, the following additional
landscaping standards shall apply:
      (1)   Existing Plant Material. Any existing native desert plant material,
or any part thereof, except the fruit, shall not be removed without the
issuance of a tree removal permit in compliance with
Chapter 88.01 (Plant Protection and Management). Additionally, if native desert
plant materials are to be replaced, then the replacement of those materials are
to be in compliance with
Chapter 88.01 (Plant Protection and Management), except as provided for in this
Subdivision. If Joshua trees (Yucca brevifolia) exist on-site and are proposed
to be relocated, they shall be relocated on-site in the landscaped areas;
unless, in writing, the Director of the Land Use Services Department
specifically allows another option.
      (2)   Plant Materials. Plant materials shall be a cohesive mix of
evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, groundcovers, succulents, and native
plant material that are drought and infestation tolerant; turf shall be
minimized and be placed in compliance with this Chapter. A list of acceptable
plant materials for the Desert Region is available from the Land Use Services
Department to help assist developers and their landscape professionals in
preparing their landscape documentation package. If any local, State, and/or
Federally protected plant material is found on-site, removal and/or protection
shall comply with Chapter 88.01 (Plant Protection and Management).
      (3)   Landscaped Setbacks. The front yard and street side yard setback
areas of a parcel shall be landscaped using xeriscape landscaping techniques,
which combines drought tolerant plant and hardscape materials in a variety of
aesthetically pleasing designs. For sites where no disturbance of land within
setbacks is proposed, landscaping shall not be required. Landscaping of side-
yard setbacks may be required in compliance with §83.02.060 (Screening and
Buffering).
      (4)   Unpaved Parking Lots. Those parking lots not requiring paving shall
not be required to be landscaped, nor will they count as part of the overall
landscape total needed for the project. Only those parking lots required to be
paved shall be landscaped in compliance with this Chapter and with §83.11.080
(Landscape Requirements for Parking Areas). Parking lot landscaping shall not
be counted as part of the minimum landscaping requirement for a project.
      (5)   Dust Control. If grading takes place, then a dust control plan
shall be submitted for review. All grading and dust control measures shall be
conducted in compliance with the provisions of §
88.02.40 (Dust Control Desert Region).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4136,
passed--2011; Am. Ord. 4400, passed --2021)
§ 83.10.090 (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - - 2021).
§ 83.10.100 (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021).
§ 83.10.110 (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021).
§ 83.10.120 (Deleted by Ord. 4400, passed - -2021).
CHAPTER 83.11: PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
Section
   
83.11.010   Purpose.
   
83.11.020   Applicability.
   
83.11.030   General Parking Provisions.
   
83.11.040   Number of Parking Spaces Required.
   
83.11.050   Adjustments to Parking Requirements.
   
83.11.060   Disabled Parking Requirements.
   
83.11.070   Development Standards.
   
83.11.080   Landscape Requirements for Parking Areas.
   
83.11.090   Parking and Loading Development Standards.
   
83.11.100   Commercial Vehicle Parking in Residential Areas.
§ 83.11.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide parking and loading standards to:
   (a)   Ensure the provision and maintenance of safe, adequate, well-designed,
off-street parking facilities in conjunction with a use or development.
   (b)   Reduce street congestion and traffic hazards.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.11.020 Applicability.
   Unless otherwise provided in the specific applicable land use zoning
district, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to appropriate uses and
development. The standards in this Chapter shall be considered minimums, and
more extensive parking provisions as a condition of project approval may be
required by a review authority for a discretionary permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.11.030 General Parking Provisions.
   (a)   Location. The required parking spaces shall be located on the same
site with the primary use or structure, on premises contiguous to them, or in a
location conforming to a Site Plan approved in compliance with
Chapter 85.08 (Site Plan Permits). Property within the ultimate right-of-way of
a street or highway shall not be used to provide required parking or loading
facilities. Parking shall not be allowed in the front yard setback other than
in the driveway for a single-family residential use or within a driveway in a
multi-family development that is specifically designed for and has sufficient
length to provide off-street parking for a specific dwelling unit.
   (b)   Change in Use. When the occupancy or use of a property is changed to a
different use, parking to meet the requirements of this Chapter shall be
provided for the new use or occupancy. In the case of an infill multi-family or
affordable (income-restricted) residential development, a Minor Use Permit may
be used to review and approve any additional parking required that is a result
of the change in use.
   (c)   Increase in Use. When the occupancy or use of a premises is altered,
enlarged, expanded, or intensified, additional parking to meet the requirements
of this Chapter shall be provided for the enlarged, expanded, altered, or
intensified portion only.
   (d)   Two or More Uses. Where two or more uses are located in a single
structure or on a single parcel, required parking shall be provided for each
specific use (i.e., the total parking required for an establishment that has
both industrial and office uses shall be determined by computing the parking
for the industrial use and the office use and then adding the two requirements
together.)
   (e)   Parking and Loading Spaces to Be Permanent. Parking and loading spaces
shall be permanently available, marked and maintained for parking or loading
purposes for the use they are intended to serve. The Director may approve the
temporary reduction of parking or loading spaces in conjunction with a seasonal
or intermittent use with the approval of a Temporary Use Permit issued in
compliance with
Chapter 85.15.
   (f)   Parking and Loading to Be Unrestricted. Owners, lessees, tenants, or
persons having control of the operation of a premises for which parking or
loading spaces are required by this Chapter shall not prevent, prohibit or
restrict authorized persons from using these spaces without prior approval of
the Director.
   (g)   Use of Parking Area for Activities Other than Parking. Required off-
street parking, circulation, and access areas shall be used exclusively for the
temporary parking and maneuvering of vehicles and shall not be used for the
sale, lease, display, repair, or storage of vehicles, trailers, boats, campers,
mobile homes, merchandise, or equipment, or for any other use not authorized by
the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.11.040 Number of Parking Spaces Required.
   (a)   Number of Parking Spaces Required. Each land use shall provide at
least the minimum number of off-street parking spaces, including disabled
access spaces required by §
83.11.060 (Disabled Parking Requirements), except where a parking reduction has
been granted in compliance with §
83.11.050 (Adjustments to Parking Requirements) or a variance has been granted
in compliance with
Chapter 85.17 (Variances). Additional spaces may be required through approval
of a discretionary permit.
   (b)   Minimum Requirements for Nonresidential Uses. A nonresidential use
shall provide a minimum of four spaces with one additional parking space for
each facility vehicle, except where otherwise noted in this Chapter.
   (c)   Area Calculations. The minimum required number of parking spaces for
the following uses shall be determined based upon the indicated area
calculations:
      (1)   Food establishments: Gross leasable area (GLA).
      (2)   General retail uses: Gross leasable area (GLA).
      (3)   Industrial uses: Gross floor area (GFA).
      (4)   Personal services: Gross leasable area (GLA).
      (5)   Professional offices: Gross leasable area (GLA).
Table 83-15
Parking Requirements by Land Use
Uses Number of Spaces Required
Table 83-15
Parking Requirements by Land Use
Uses           Number of Spaces Required
Industrial     1 for each 1,000 sq. ft. of the first 40,000 sq. ft. of GFA; and
uses of all    1 for each 4,000 sq. ft. of GFA for the portion over 40,000 sq. ft.; and
types,
including
warehouses or
structures
used
exclusively
for storage
purposes,
wholesale
houses and
distributors
and public
utility        1 for each facility vehicle
facilities
including, but
not limited
to, electric,
gas, water,
telephone, and
telegraph
facilities not
having
business
offices on the
premises
               Mini-storage office: 1 for each 250 sq. ft. of office area with 4 minimum
               Additional requirements:
Storage - Mini •   A parking lane shall be provided adjacent to the storage structure’s openings
storage        that is a minimum of 9 feet in width and outlined (painted). The parking lane is
facilities     for temporary parking only (30 minutes maximum) and this time restriction shall be
               clearly marked with signs.
               •   Driveways adjacent to the parking lane shall be a minimum width of 15 feet for
               one-way and 24 feet for two-way.
Recreation, Education & Public Assembly Uses(4)
Amusement      1 for each 4 persons of the facility’s allowed maximum attendance
enterprises
Bowling alleys 5 for each bowling lane; and
and billiard   2 for each billiard table
halls
Churches,      1 for each 3 fixed seats; and
synagogues,    1 for every 25 sq. ft. of seating area where there are no fixed seats; and
temples,
mosques and    1 for each 400 sq. ft. of floor area outside the main assembly area
other places
of worship(1)
Commercial
recreation and
similar uses
(e.g.,
shooting
ranges, race
tracks,        1 for each 4 persons of the facility’s allowed maximum attendance
miniature golf
courses, pitch
and putt
courses,
parks, and
zoos)
Commercial     1 for each 500 sq. ft. of water surface area
swimming pools
and swimming   10 minimum
schools
               1 for each 20 sq. ft. of dance floor area; and
Dance halls    1 for each 3 fixed seats and for each 20 sq. ft. of seating area where there are no
               fixed seats
Golf courses   4 for each hole on all golf courses; and
and driving
ranges, but
not to include 1 for each tee for driving ranges
miniature golf
courses
               1 bus parking space per 20 campers
Organizational 2 for each resident staff
camps          1 for each nonresident staff on the largest shift
               1 for each facility vehicle
Meeting
facilities -
Theaters,
auditoriums,
stadiums,      1 for each 3 fixed seats or for every 25 sq. ft. of seating area within the main
sport arenas,  auditorium where there are no fixed seats(1)
gymnasiums and
similar places
of public
assembly
Schools -      1 for each staff member, faculty member, and employee
general
curriculum
Kindergarten   1 for each facility vehicle
through Grade
9
Schools -      1 for each 4 students; and
general        1 for each staff member, faculty member and employee; and
curriculum
Grades 10
through 12,
colleges and   1 for each facility vehicle
universities,
business and
professional
schools
Schools -      1 for each 3 students; and
special        1 for each staff member, faculty member, and employee
schools or     1 for each facility vehicle
trade schools
Skating rinks, 1 for each 3 fixed seats and for each 20 sq. ft. of seating area where there are no
ice or roller  fixed seats; and(1)
               1 for each 250 sq. ft. of skating area
Residential Uses
Caretaker      2, with one covered
housing
Group          1 for each bedroom
residential
(sorority,
fraternity,
boarding       1 for the house manager, staff member or employee
house, private
residential
club, etc.)
Mobile home    2; one covered on each mobile home parcel (may be in tandem); and
parks          1 guest space for each 10 spaces, or fraction thereof
               2.5 per unit for projects of 4 or more units, one shall be covered for each
Multi-family   dwelling unit on the project site to accommodate resident and visitor parking(2)
dwelling       2.0 per unit for projects of 2 or 3 units, one shall be covered for each dwelling
               unit(2)
Parolee and/or 1 for each bedroom
probationer    1 for the house manager, staff member or employee
home
Accessory      1 uncovered for each unit(5)
dwelling unit
Single-family  2, one shall be covered on the same site with the primary structure(2)
dwelling
Retail Trade
Automobile     3 for each service bay (service bays do not count as spaces); and
repair and
service        1 for each facility vehicle
stations
Automobile     1 for each 2,000 sq. ft., or portion thereof, for open area devoted to display or
sales, boat    sales; for the first 10,000 sq. ft.; and
sales, mobile  1 for each 5,000 sq. ft., or portion thereof, over 10,000 sq. ft.; and
home sales,
retail
nurseries, and 1 for each facility vehicle
other open
uses not in a
structure
Food           1 for each 200 sq. ft. of GLA; and
establishments 1 for each facility vehicle
with take-out
provisions     4 minimum
only
General retail 1 for each 250 sq. ft. of GLA
               4 minimum
Restaurants in The greater of the following:
the Valley and    1 for each 100 sq. ft. of GLA; or
Desert            1 for each 3 fixed seats and/or 1 for every 50 sq. ft. of floor area where seats
Regions,       may be placed; or
including
drive-ins,
cafes, night
clubs,
taverns, and   10 minimum
other similar
places where
food or
refreshment
are dispensed
Restaurants in
the Mountain
Region,
including
drive ins,
cafes, and
other similar
places that
have 5,000 sq.
ft. of GLA or  1 space per 250 sq. ft. of GLA with a 4 space minimum
less, where
food or
refreshment
are dispensed
and where no
alcoholic
beverages of
any type are
sold or served
Restaurants in
the Mountain
Region,
including
drive ins,
cafes, and
other similar
places that
have over
5,000 sq. ft.  1 space per 100 sq. ft. of GLA with a 4 space minimum
of GLA where
food or
refreshment
are dispensed,
regardless of
whether or not
alcoholic
beverages are
served
Restaurants in
the Mountain
Region,
including
drive ins,
cafes, and
other similar
places, where
food or
refreshments
are dispensed
and where
alcoholic
beverages are  1 space per 100 sq. ft., regardless of GLA with a 4 space minimum
sold under
State
Alcoholic
Beverage
Control
license types
42 (bar/
tavern) or 48
(bar/night
club),
regardless of
the square
footage of the
restaurant
Restaurants in 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of GLA with 5,000 sq. ft. or less of GLA with a 4 space
the Mountain   minimum
Region,
including
drive ins,
cafes, and
other similar
places where
food or
refreshment
are dispensed
and where      1 space per 100 sq. ft. of GLA for restaurant uses over 5,000 sq. ft. of GLA with a
alcoholic      4 space minimum
beverages are
sold under
State
Alcoholic
Beverage
Control
license type
47
(restaurant)
Shopping       1 for each 200 sq. ft. of GLA up to 100,000 sq. ft.; and
centers
(projects over
200,000 sq.    1 for each 250 sq. ft. of GLA for square footage above 100,000 sq. ft.
ft. of floor
area)
Wholesale
commercial     1 for each 500 sq. ft. of display area
nurseries
Services General
Beauty and     2 for each station
nail salons
Child care     1 for each 5 children that the facility is designed to accommodate
centers
Emergency      1 for each guest room
shelter
Hospital       1 for each 2 patient beds
Medical
offices,
clinics,       1 for each 250 sq. ft. of GLA
veterinary
hospital
Motels,
hotels, and    1 for each unit/room
boarding house
Licensed
Residential
care facility  2, one shall be covered on the same site with the primary structure(2)
of 6 or fewer
persons
Offices,
general,
financial,     1 for each 250 sq. ft. of GLA
business and
professional
uses
Personal       1 for each 250 sq. ft. of GLA
services
Short-Term
Residential    1 for each four occupants or guests, see §83.28.060(e)
Rentals
Unlicensed     1 for each bedroom
Residential
Care Facility  1 for the house manager, staff member or employee
with 6 or
fewer persons
Unlicensed     1 for each bedroom
Residential
Care Facility  1 for the house manager, staff member or employee
with 7 or more
persons
Other Uses
Bed and        1 for each guest room
breakfast
Home           1 for each nonresident employee in addition to residential requirements
occupations
On-Your-Lot    2 per office
builder model
home/sales     2 for visitors
office
Notes:
(1)   Twenty-four (24") linear inches of bench or pew shall be considered a fixed seat.
(2)   Residential parking spaces shall be located to the rear of the front setback line, except
that in the Mountain Region, the parking spaces may be located within the setback areas. Tandem
parking is not allowed except in the Mountain Region. Areas outside the driveway in front of the
primary structure, whether outside the front yard setback or not, shall not be used for parking.
In the Valley and Desert Regions, the covered parking requirement only applies to the RS and RM
Land Use Zoning Districts.
(3)   In dormitories, each 100 sq. ft. shall be considered equivalent to a guest room.
(4)   Nonresidential uses shall provide a minimum of four spaces with an additional parking space
for each facility vehicle, except where otherwise noted.
(5)   Residential parking spaces for an accessory dwelling unit may be provided through tandem
parking on an existing driveway.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4161,
passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014;
Am. Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4341, passed - -2018; Ord. 4383, passed
- -2020)
§ 83.11.050 Adjustments to Parking Requirements.
   (a)   Shared Parking Reduction. Where two or more adjacent nonresidential
uses have distinct and differing peak parking usage periods, (e.g. a theater
and a bank), a reduction in the required number of parking spaces may be
approved by the Commission based on the findings and recommendations of a
parking study prepared by a qualified parking or traffic consultant. The amount
of reduction may be up to the number of spaces required for the least intensive
of the uses sharing the parking.
   (b)   Transportation Control Measures. Parking requirements may be adjusted
in compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 83.14 (Transportation Control Measures). An approved Conditional Use
Permit/Minor Use Permit (
Chapter 85.06) may authorize adjustments to parking requirement not to exceed
individually or cumulatively ten percent of the total required parking spaces,
as depicted in
Table 83-16.
Table 83-16
Transportation Control Measures
                               Parking Credit
Transportation Control Measure (Cumulative Maximum Credit = 10 percent of
                               Required Parking Spaces)
Table 83-16
Transportation Control Measures
                                  Parking Credit
Transportation Control Measure    (Cumulative Maximum Credit = 10 percent of
                                  Required Parking Spaces)
Car pool space (9 ft. x 19 ft.)   1 car pool space = 2 spaces
Bus ridership                     2 riders = 1 space(1)
Motorcycle spaces (4 ft. x 8 ft.) 2 motorcycle spaces = 1 space(2)
Boat slips on waterfront          1 slip = 1 space
Notes:
(1)   Bus stop shall be within 1,320 feet of the proposed use with a path of
travel from the bus stop to the facility that complies with disabled access
requirements.
(2)   Motorcycle stalls shall be on concrete and have a permanent tie-down
ring.
 
   (c)   Landscaping in Lieu of Parking Spaces. In compliance with §
83.10.060 (Landscape Area Requirements), landscaping may be provided in lieu of
ten percent of the total number of parking spaces required, provided the
landscaping is arranged so that parking may be installed at a later date if a
demand arises, and further provided, that the owner agrees to provide parking
at the request of the reviewing agency.
   (d)   Variance. Other than changes to parking requirements provided for in
this Section, a Minor Variance or a Variance in compliance with
Chapter 85.17 (Variances) shall be required for any change to a parking
requirement.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.11.060 Disabled Parking Requirements.
   (a)   Required Number of Disabled Parking Spaces. For multi-family
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and public uses, State law
establishes the required number of disabled parking spaces, which are reflected
in
Table 83-17.
Table 83-17
Required Number of Parking Spaces for Disabled
Total Number of Parking Spaces # of Parking Spaces for the Disabled
Table 83-17
Required Number of Parking Spaces for Disabled
Total Number of Parking Spaces # of Parking Spaces for the Disabled
1 - 25                         1
26 - 50                        2
51 - 75                        3
76 - 100                       4
101 - 150                      5
151 - 200                      6
201 - 300                      7
301 - 400                      8
401 - 500                      9
501 - 1,000                    2 percent of total
1,001 and over                 20 plus 1 for each 100 or fraction, over 1,001
 
   (b)   Size of Parking Space for the Disabled.
      (1)   Dimensions. Except as provided below, each parking space for the
disabled shall be 14 feet wide and outlined to provide a nine foot parking area
and a five foot loading/unloading area on the passenger side. When more than
one space is provided, two spaces may be provided within a 23-foot wide area
lined to provide a nine foot parking area on each side of a five foot loading
and unloading area in the center. The minimum length of each parking space
shall be 19 feet.
      (2)   Van Accessibility. One in every eight parking spaces for the
disabled, but not less than one, shall be served by an access aisle 96 inches
wide and shall be designated van accessible. This means that when only one
space is required, it shall be 17 feet wide and outlined to provide a nine-foot
parking area and an eight-foot loading/unloading area on the passenger side.
When only two spaces are required, they may be provided within a 26-foot wide
area lined to provide a nine-foot parking area on each side of an eight-foot
loading/unloading area in the center. These spaces may be grouped on one level
of a parking structure.
      (3)   Less than Five Spaces. When only four parking spaces are required
for a specific project, the parking space for the disabled shall be 17 feet
wide, but does not need to be marked or reserved exclusively for the disabled.
   (c)   Arrangement and Identification. The arrangement and design of these
spaces shall be subject to the Code of Regulations Title 24, Chapter 2-71, and
they shall be identified as required in Vehicle Code § 22511.8.
   (d)   Additional Spaces Based on Actual or Anticipated Usage. Additional
spaces shall be provided where usage indicates a greater need, or where a
higher than normal percentage of disabled persons is anticipated to use the
parking facility.
   (e)   Location of Spaces. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be located
as near as practical to a primary entrance to a single structure, or shall be
located to provide for safety and optimum proximity to the entrances of the
greatest incidence of use when more than one structure is served by the parking
lot. The spaces shall be located to ensure that a disabled individual is not
compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars other than their own.
   (f)   Walkways and Ramps. Pedestrian walkways that are accessible to the
physically disabled shall be provided from each disabled parking space to
related facilities, including curb cuts or ramps as needed. Ramps shall not
encroach into parking spaces.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.11.070 Development Standards.
   (a)   Minimum Parking Space Sizes and Lot Dimensions.
      (1)   Each required parking space shall be at least nine feet wide by 19
feet long, with adequate provisions for ingress and egress by a standard full
size passenger vehicle. This standard shall be apply to all uses, including
single-family residential, except where noted in Subdivisions (2), (3), (4) and
(5) below. Parking spaces in parking lots shall comply with the minimum
dimension requirements in
Table 83-18 (Minimum Off-Street Parking Dimensions) and as illustrated in
Figure 83-16 (Off-Street Parking Dimensions). The Director shall not reduce
these requirements.
 
Table 83-18
Minimum Off-Street Parking Dimensions
Angle of     Space Width (in Space Length   Space Depth     Driveway Width
Parking (in  feet) (B)       (per vehicle)  (from curb) (D) (in feet) (E)(1)
degrees) (A)                 (C)
Parallel (0  9 ft.           19 ft.         9 ft.           12 ft.
degrees)
45 degrees   9 ft.           19 in.         20 ft.          14 ft.
60 degrees   9 ft.           19 in.         21 ft.          19 ft.
90 degrees   9 ft.           19 ft.         19 ft.          24 ft.
(1)   Also, see §
83.11.070(h)(3) for additional requirements relative to fire access aisles.
 
Figure 83-16 Off-Street Parking Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11061.jpg]
 
      (2)   If wheel stops or curb with overhang area are installed in parking
spaces, the distance from the end of the space to the rear of the wheel stop/
curb shall not exceed two feet. For parallel parking spaces (i.e., spaces where
vehicles park in a line, front to rear, next to a curb or side of a road), each
space shall be separated from the next space by a distance of four feet.
      (3)   Enclosed parking spaces (i.e., residential garages) shall be ten
feet in width and 20 feet in length.
      (4)   Mobile home parking spaces shall be at least ten feet wide by 20
feet long, with adequate provisions for ingress and egress by a standard full
size passenger vehicle.
      (5)   Tractor trailer parking spaces shall be at least 12 feet wide by 50
feet long.
   (b)   Circulation Requirements. The parking area shall be designed so that a
car entering the parking area shall not be required to enter a public street to
move from one location to any other location within the parking area or
premises.
   (c)   Forward Entry into Right-of-Way. Parking and maneuvering areas shall
be arranged so that vehicles entering a vehicular right-of-way can do so
traveling in a forward direction only.
   (d)   Head-in Parking. Where curbs and gutters do not exist and where
barriers do not restrict vehicular access to the private property, head-in
parking shall not be allowed.
   (e)   Driveway Access. Off-street parking facilities shall be designed to
limit access to private property from streets and highways to a minimum number
of standard driveways in compliance with the Department of Public Works
specifications.
   (f)   Lighting. Parking area lighting and glare shall reflect away from
public thoroughfares and adjacent residences and shall comply with
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
   (g)   Maintenance. Individual parking stalls shall be clearly striped and
permanently maintained with double or hairpin lines on the surface of the
parking facility, with the two lines being located an equal nine inches on
either side of the stall sidelines. Arrows shall be painted on paving to
indicate direction of traffic flows.
   (h)   Minimum Aisle Widths.
      (1)   One-Way Traffic. One-way access driveways leading to aisles within
a parking area shall be a minimum width of 12 feet, and driveways within the
parking aisles shall be as shown in
Table 83-19 (Minimum Aisles):
 
Table 83-19
Minimum Aisles
Parking Stall Angle     Minimum Aisle Width (feet)
Parallel (0 degrees)    12
1 degrees - 45 degrees  14
46 degrees - 60 degrees 17
61 degrees - 90 degrees 24
 
      (2)   Two-Way Traffic. The aisles and the two-way access drives leading
to aisles within a parking area shall be a minimum width of 24 feet.
      (3)   Fire Access Aisles. The aisles adjacent to nonresidential
structures shall be a minimum width of 26 feet to accommodate fire emergency
vehicles and shall be located so that the vehicles can park within 150 feet of
all sides of the structures. Aisles adjacent to structures that are greater
than two stories in height shall be a minimum width of 30 feet.
      (4)   Truck Aisles. Access aisles for multiple-axle trucks in commercial
and industrial projects shall be a minimum width of 40 feet for projects with a
gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or greater or where the design of the
project includes a loading dock. Truck movement templates (i.e., turning radii
elements including wheel paths, which define the needed width of pavement, and
the front overhang, which is the zone beyond the pavement edge that must be
clear of obstructions above curb height) shall be included on the site plan
design to indicate turning conditions.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 83.11.080 Landscape Requirements for Parking Areas.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   Unpaved Parking Areas in the Desert Region. For sites in the Desert
Region where parking area paving is not required, landscaping shall not be
required.
      (2)   Countywide Paved Parking Areas. Landscaping for paved parking areas
Countywide shall be provided as outlined in Subdivisions (b) through (i),
below.
      (3)   Parking Garages and Structures. The landscaping standards in this
Section shall not apply to parking garages or other parking structures.
   (b)   Landscape and Irrigation Plan Required. A comprehensive landscape and
irrigation plan shall be submitted to the Director for approval in compliance
with
Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards).
   (c)   Landscape Materials. Landscaping materials shall be provided
throughout the parking lot area using a combination of trees, shrubs, and
vegetative ground cover. Water conserving landscape plant materials shall be
emphasized.
   (d)   Curbing. Areas containing plant materials shall be bordered by a
concrete curb at least six inches high and six inches wide. Alternative barrier
designs may be approved by the Director.
   (e)   Irrigation. Except where xeriscaping is specifically designed and
intended not be irrigated, an automatic irrigation system, including drip
systems, bubblers, and soakers, shall be provided for landscaped areas,
including tree wells, planters, and planting islands.
   (f)   Location of Landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall be located so
that pedestrians are not required to cross through landscaped areas to reach
building entrances from parked cars. Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that
at maturity they shall not interfere with a driver's or pedestrian's view of
public rights-of-way (e.g. the view of approaching, merging, or intersecting
traffic, etc.) or otherwise impair public safety, or interfere with the safe
operation of a motor vehicle on public streets.
   (g)   Bumper Overhang Areas. A maximum of two feet of the parking stall
depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hearty materials in lieu of paving,
allowing a two-foot bumper overhang while maintaining the required parking
dimensions. Bumper overhang areas shall not encroach into required walkways or
rights-of-way.
   (h)   Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping.
      (1)   Adjacent to Streets. Parking areas adjoining a public street shall
be designed to provide a landscaped planting strip between the street right-of-
way and parking area that is equal to the setback area required by the
development standards of the subject land use zoning district. The Director may
grant an exception to this requirement if existing structures or substandard
parcels preclude its implementation. In this case, the maximum planting strip
area shall be provided based on-site conditions.
         (A)   Parking areas adjoining a public street shall be designed to
provide a minimum 15-foot-wide landscaped planting strip between the street
right-of-way and parking area. The Director may grant an exception to this
requirement if existing structures or substandard parcels preclude its
implementation. In this case, the maximum planting strip area shall be provided
based on site conditions.
         (B)   The landscaping, other than trees, shall be designed and
maintained to screen cars from view from the street and shall be approximately
three feet in height.
         (C)   Screening materials may include a combination of plant
materials, earth berms, raised planters, or other screening devices that meet
the intent of this requirement and have been approved by the Director.
         (D)   Plant materials, walls, or structures within a clear sight
triangle of a driveway shall not exceed 30 inches in height in compliance with
§
83.02.030 (Clear Sight Triangles).
      (2)   Adjacent to Residential Use. Parking areas for nonresidential uses
adjoining residential uses shall provide a landscaped buffer yard with a
minimum 10-foot width between the parking area and the common property line
bordering the residential use. A solid masonry wall in compliance with §
83.06.050 (Walls Required Between Different Land Use Districts) and landscaping
shall be provided along the property line. Trees shall be provided at a rate of
one for each 30 feet of landscaped area and shall be a minimum 15-gallon
container stock with a caliper size, at time of planting, which is appropriate
for a normal, healthy example of the specified tree variety and no less than
three-fourths inches in diameter.
      (3)   Larger Projects. Parking lots with more than 100 spaces shall
provide an appropriate entry feature consisting of a concentration of landscape
elements at primary entrances, including specimen trees, flowering plants,
enhanced paving, and project identification.
   (i)   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping. Multi-family residential uses and
nonresidential uses shall provide landscaping consistent with the following
requirements.
      (1)   Trees Required.
         (A)   Number and location. Trees shall be evenly spaced throughout the
interior parking area at a rate of one tree for every ten parking spaces. The
required number of trees shall not include trees required around the perimeter
of the parking area. In the Valley Region, parking lot planters shall provide a
minimum of one 15 gallon, multi-branched tree, unless healthy existing trees
are used in the planters.
         (B)   Size. Trees within the parking area shall be a minimum 15-gallon
container stock with a caliper size, at time of planting, that is appropriate
for a normal, healthy example of the specified tree variety and no less than
three-fourths inch in diameter.
      (2)   Planting areas. Trees shall be located in planting areas that are
designed and constructed throughout the parking area. In order to be considered
within the parking area, trees shall be located in planters that are bounded on
at least three sides by parking area paving. Planters shall have a minimum
interior dimension of six feet. Ends of parking lanes shall have landscaped
islands.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008)
§ 83.11.090 Parking and Loading Development Standards.
   Every parcel of land used or maintained for residential parking, public
parking, private parking, new car sales lots, used car sales lots, mobile home,
camper or trailer sales lots, boat sales lots or other uses of a similar
nature, shall be improved as follows, including loading spaces and access
drives.
   (a)   Loading Spaces. Every institutional, commercial, industrial, or
special use established or erected on land that abuts a street or an alley
shall have one permanently maintained loading space of not less than ten feet
in width, 20 feet in length, and 14 feet clear in height, for each 5,000 square
feet of structure floor area provided. However, not more than four loading
spaces shall be required for each use. An approved Use Permit may allow
adjoining uses to share loading areas where appropriate.
   (b)   Surface Requirements in Desert Region. In the Desert Region, where the
parcel abuts a paved street or road, the required off-street parking and
loading areas and access drives shall be surfaced with a minimum of two inches
of asphaltic concrete paving except as follows:
      (1)   For residential uses on parcels of 18,000 square feet or larger,
the required off-street parking, loading areas and access drives shall be dust-
proofed with materials that may include slag, gravel, or other similar
materials, or fully paved.
      (2)   For commercial, industrial, or institutional uses with less than
4,000 square feet of structure area in rural areas, the required off-street
access driveway parking for the disabled and loading area(s) shall be surfaced
with a minimum of two inches of asphaltic concrete paving. The remaining
parking may be either asphaltic concrete paving or dustproofed with materials
that may include slag, gravel, or other similar materials. Areas that are
dustproofed shall be required to be maintained with periodic dustproofing as
necessary to minimize the creation of airborne dust. The non-paved area(s) of
the parking shall have a positive barrier to prevent direct access onto the
adjacent paved road.
   (c)   Surface Requirements in Mountain Region. In the Mountain Region, where
the parcel abuts a paved street or road, the required off-street parking and
loading areas and access drives shall be surfaced with a minimum of two inches
of asphaltic concrete or road-mixed surfacing, in compliance with County
Department of Public Works Specification No. 38.
   (d)   Surface Requirements in Valley Region. In the Valley Region, the
required off-street parking and loading areas and access drives shall be
surfaced with a minimum of two inches of asphaltic concrete paving or plant-mix
surfacing, in compliance with County Department of Public Works Specification
No. 38.
   (e)   Dust-Proofing. Truck terminals or yards and motor vehicle storage/
impound facilities shall be provided with a dust-proofed surface of slag,
crushed rock, or an equivalent measure.
   (f)   Parking Areas for Nonresidential Uses Abutting Residential Uses.
Nonresidential parking areas that abut residential land use zoning districts
shall be separated and buffered by a six-foot high solid fence or masonry wall.
The solid fence or masonry wall shall be four feet in height within the
required residential setback for residential uses.
   (g)   Parking Areas Abutting Streets. Where a boundary of a parking area
abuts a street, a suitable concrete curb or barrier not less than six inches in
height shall be securely installed and maintained where there is no solid fence
or masonry wall.
   (h)   Hours of Operation. Except as otherwise provided by this Code, the
required parking area shall not be used for a purpose other than the temporary
parking of motor vehicles, during the operating hours of the supporting primary
land use.
   (i)   Parking Area Notices. Parking area signs may be located in all land
use zoning districts at the entrance or exit of a parking area, but shall not
exceed six square feet in area and five feet in height. The signs may contain
the name of the owner or occupant of the property and a combination of the
following words and symbols only: “Parking,” “Park Here,” “Entrance,” “Exit,”
“Do Not Enter,” “Stop,” “Private Parking,” “Public Parking,” “Customers Only,”
“Handicap Parking,” no parking directional arrow, and “Tow Away” notice.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.11.100 Commercial Vehicle Parking in Residential Areas.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   Residential Land Use Zoning Districts.
         (A)   The provisions of this Section shall apply only to the Single
Residential (RS), Multiple Residential (RM), Rural Living (RL), and Special
Development (SD) land use zoning districts in the Valley Region and the Desert
Region.
         (B)   Except as provided in Subdivision (b) (Acceptable Commercial
Vehicles on Streets or Adjacent to Residential Uses), below, parking of
commercial vehicles shall not be allowed in the Single Residential (RS),
Multiple Residential (RM), Rural Living (RL), and Special Development land use
zoning districts in the Mountain Region.
      (2)   Nonresidential Land Use Zoning Districts. In nonresidential land
use zoning districts in the Valley, Mountain, and Desert Regions, commercial
vehicle parking shall comply with the land use regulations established for the
land use zoning district of the subject property.
   (b)   Acceptable Commercial Vehicles on Streets or Adjacent to Residential
Uses. Except as provided in Title 5: Highways, Traffic, §
52.0125 (Weight Limitations), § 52.0128 (Restriction or Prohibition of Parking
of Commercial Vehicles), and §
52.0131 (Prohibition of Certain Vehicles on Highways) of the County Code,
commercial truck tractors, motor trucks, semi-trailers, or combinations of
them, exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds,
may be parked on public streets, roads, highways, alleys, or public rights-of-
way adjacent to a residential use, or on a residential property as follows:
      (1)   While making pick-ups or deliveries of goods, wares, or merchandise
from or to a property adjacent to or abutting upon streets or highways.
      (2)   When this type of vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid
of, the ongoing performance of a service to, or on, a property in the block
where the vehicle is left standing. This includes the temporary parking of
construction and similar types of service vehicles, as well as snow removal
equipment in the mountain communities during the winter months. In remote
mountain areas where there are no commercial or industrial land use zoning
districts, service vehicles may be parked on residential parcels during other
times of the year, provided they are covered. Where possible, they shall be
parked behind the residence. The vehicles may project into the side and rear
yard areas. A vehicle shall not be parked or left standing on the paved portion
of a street, highway, or alley unless the paved portion of the half-width
roadway is at least 22 feet wide.
      (3)   A vehicle that is used in conjunction with an approved Home
Occupation Permit.
   (c)   Commercial Vehicles at Residences. An owner/operator of a commercial
vehicle may park the vehicle at their residence under the following standards/
conditions:
      (1)   The owner and operator of the vehicle shall be a resident of the
home on the parcel where it is parked.
      (2)   Except as provided in Subdivision (11) below of this Subdivision,
the commercial vehicle shall be parked off of the street and behind the front
setback.
      (3)   The operator of the vehicle shall not idle the vehicle’s engine for
longer than ten minutes.
      (4)   A vehicle shall not be loaded or unloaded or have cargo transferred
to or from the vehicle except during the first 24 hours during which a vehicle
is mechanically disabled.
      (5)   A refrigeration unit on the vehicle shall not be operated between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. unless the noise level of the operation is
reduced to 45 dB(A) or less as measured at the property line in compliance with
§
83.01.080 (Noise).
      (6)   No dispensing of fuel on-site in excess of ten gallons shall be
allowed.
      (7)   The property owner shall provide appropriate design measures to
minimize dust.
      (8)   Outdoor storage of equipment, materials, or supplies shall not be
allowed.
      (9)   Mechanical work and routine maintenance or repair work that causes
an excessive amount of noise shall be done off-site. The following maintenance
work shall not be done on-site:
         (A)   Steam-cleaning or degreasing the vehicle.
         (B)   Welding.
         (C)   Use of pneumatic equipment, other than to repair a disabled
vehicle.
      (10)   Parking shall be allowed in compliance with the following:
         (A)   Desert Region. One truck tractor with a trailer or semi-trailer
may be parked on the owner/operator’s residential parcel if it is at least one-
half acre in size. One additional truck tractor with a trailer or semi-trailer,
up to a maximum of three vehicles of this type, may be parked on the owner/
operator’s residential parcel for each additional one-half acre the parcel
contains. Vehicles shall not be parked in compliance to this Subdivision unless
all parts of the vehicle are at least five feet from each interior property
line, at least 15 feet from public rights-of-way and easements, and at least 70
feet from a structure used for human habitation or public assembly (e.g.,
parks, churches, etc.) on adjoining properties. The area of human habitation
shall not include cabanas, patios, attached, or detached private garages or
storage structures.
         (B)   Mountain Region. Except as provided in Subdivision (A) of this
Section, commercial vehicle parking in residential areas shall not be allowed
in the Mountain Region.
         (C)   Valley Region. One truck tractor with a trailer or semi-trailer
may be parked on the owner/operator's residential parcel if the parcel is at
least one acre in size. Only one truck tractor with a trailer or semi-trailer
may be parked on the parcel. A vehicle shall not be parked in compliance to
this Subdivision unless all parts of the vehicle are at least five feet from
each interior property line, at least 15 feet from public rights-of-way and
easements, and at least 70 feet from a structure used for human habitation or
public assembly (e.g., parks, churches, etc.) on adjoining properties. The area
of human habitation shall not include cabanas, patios, attached or detached
private garages or storage structures.
         (D)   Parking on Vacant Parcels. In the Valley Region and the Desert
Region, commercial vehicles may be allowed on an adjacent vacant parcel under
the same ownership as the owner/operator’s residence only when there is no
access and/or adequate space to the rear or side of the residence, subject to
compliance with all other conditions, including:
            (I)   Commercial vehicles parked on a vacant parcel shall be parked
the same distance from the roadway as the owner/operator’s residence.
            (II)   The commercial vehicle shall be parked within 20 feet of the
fence line of the owner/operator’s residential parcel.
            (III)   The commercial vehicle shall be parked perpendicular to the
street and behind the front setback.
            (IV)   If needed, the additional square footage of the adjacent
vacant parcel may be added to the subject parcel to meet the acreage area
requirement listed in Subdivisions (A) and (C), above, of this Subdivision
(10).
      (11)   Truck tractors may be parked in the driveway of the owner/
operator’s residential parcel of any size, provided the tractor is completely
clear of public streets, sidewalks, and easements.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009)
CHAPTER 83.12: ROAD SYSTEM DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
   
83.12.010   Purpose.
   
83.12.020   Applicability.
   
83.12.030   Road System Design Standards.
§ 83.12.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards for the various types of
roads within the County maintained road system.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.12.020 Applicability.
   This Chapter shall apply to all the roads within the unincorporated portions
of San Bernardino County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.12.030 Road System Design Standards.
   
Table 83-20 provides road system design standards. For diagrams and specific
features on the County maintained road system, refer to the Road Planning and
Design Standards and the San Bernardino County Standards and Specifications
Manual, as may be amended from time to time. The Road Planning and Design
Standards and the Standards and Specifications Manual are maintained by the
Department of Public Works.
Table 83-20
Road System Design Standards
Highway Designation Number of Lanes Right-of-Way Width Curb-to-Curb Separation
Table 83-20
Road System Design Standards
Highway Designation    Number of Lanes Right-of-Way Width Curb-to-Curb
                                                          Separation
Freeway                Variable (per   Variable (per      Variable (per
                       Caltrans)       Caltrans)          Caltrans)
State Highway (special Variable (per   Variable (per      Variable (per
standards/conditions)  Caltrans)       Caltrans)          Caltrans)
Major Arterial Highway 6               120 ft. minimum    104 ft.
Major Divided Highway  4               120 ft.            94 ft.
Major Highway          4               104 ft. minimum    80 ft.
Secondary Highway      4               88 ft.             64 ft.
Controlled/Limited     2               66 ft.             44 ft.
Access Collector
Mountain Major Highway 4               80 ft.             64 ft.
Mountain Secondary     2               60 ft.             44 ft.
Highway
Collector Street       2               66 ft.             44 ft.
Local Street           2               60 ft.             36 ft.
Mountain Collector     2               50 ft.             —
Mountain Local         2               40 ft.             —
Notes: Collector Streets and Local streets are not shown on the General Plan
Transportation/Circulation Maps.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4180, passed - -2012)
CHAPTER 83.13: SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
   
83.13.010   Purpose.
   
83.13.020   Applicability.
   
83.13.030   Sign Permits and Exemptions.
   
83.13.035   Comprehensive Sign Program for Crest Forest.
   
83.13.040   Prohibited Signs.
   
83.13.050   On-Site Signs.
   
83.13.060   Off-Site Signs.
   
83.13.070   Temporary Signs.
   
83.13.080   Standards for All Types of Signs.
   
83.13.090   Standards for Specific Types of Signs.
   
83.13.100   Sign Standards for Specific Uses
   
83.13.110   Enforcement.
   
83.13.120   Nonconforming Signs.
   
83.13.130   Abandoned Signs.
§ 83.13.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to:
   (a)   Establish general regulations for signs and other exterior advertising
formats.
   (b)   Establish additional standards and regulations applicable to land use
zoning districts.
   (c)   Recognize that the eventual elimination of existing signs that do not
comply with the provisions of this Code is as important as is the denial of new
signs that violate these regulations.
   (d)   Safeguard and enhance property values; protect public and private
investment in structures and open spaces; and improve the appearance of the
County as a place in which to live and work and as an attraction to
nonresidents who come to visit or trade
   (e)   Encourage sound signing practices as an aid to business and provide
information to the traveling public.
   (f)   Prevent excessive and confusing sign displays.
   (g)   Reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians and promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.13.020 Applicability.
   The sign standards provided in this Chapter shall apply to signs in all land
use zoning districts in the County. Only signs authorized by this Chapter shall
be allowed in that land use zoning district, unless otherwise expressly
provided in this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.13.030 Sign Permits and Exemptions.
   (a)   Sign Permits. No sign regulated by this chapter shall be erected
without appropriate permits from the Land Use Services Department. Signs shall
be erected in compliance with the provisions of this Development Code and
applicable specific plans.
   (b)   Sign Location Plan. A sign location plan shall be required for
subdivisions, and may be utilized to propose commercial sign programs in
compliance with
Chapter 85.13 (Sign Location Plans).
   (c)   Exempt Signs. The following signs shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Development Code and applicable specific plans:
      (1)   Signs, flags, banners, emblems, or notices issued or endorsed by a
constituted governmental body, public agency, court, person, or officer in
performance of a public duty, including traffic or highway signs, railroad
crossing signs or similar regulatory or warning devices and legal notices.
      (2)   Holiday displays and decorations not to exceed 60 days.
      (3)   Signs, located inside a structure, courtyard, mall, or other
similar structure, provided these signs are not conspicuously visible and
readable from a public street or adjacent properties not under the same
ownership.
      (4)   Utility company signs identifying conduits, cables, dangerous
conditions, or providing other notices of this type.
      (5)   Memorial tablets or signs and historic markers.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4298, passed - -2016)
§ 83.13.035 Comprehensive Sign Program for Crest Forest.
   A comprehensive sign program developed with local input for the Crest Forest
Community Plan area is presented in
Table 83-31. In addition to the on-site sign standards specified for Crest
Forest in
Table 83-31, a project-level commercial sign program may be proposed for a
commercial complex or group of individual businesses in the Crest Forest
Community Plan area, to allow sharing and averaging of the signage permitted
for the participating businesses. Proposal of a commercial sign program shall
require an application to the Land Use Services Department, with notification
of surrounding property owners and approval by the Planning Commission. As a
condition of acceptance of a commercial sign program application, any illegal
signs displayed on the site shall be removed. Submittal of a commercial sign
program application shall not preclude Code Enforcement action. Approval of a
commercial sign program shall not conflict with the Crest Forest Community
Plan, or the comprehensive sign program set forth in
Table 83-31, or with the other regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 4298, passed - -2016)
§ 83.13.040 Prohibited Signs.
   The following signs shall be prohibited in all land use zoning districts:
   (a)   Signs having animated, moving, or rotating parts, including signs that
have alternating messages that change more than once every five seconds.
   (b)   Moveable or portable signs, including signs attached to or painted on
trailers or vehicles parked on private property for the purpose of gaining
unauthorized sign area.
   (c)   Signs that make sounds.
   (d)   Signs that obscure, imitate, or otherwise limit the effectiveness of
official traffic control signs or devices.
   (e)   Signs that display statements or symbols of an obscene or immoral
nature as to offend the public morals or decency.
   (f)   Tethered balloon(s) or other inflatable(s) used to draw attention to a
use or event.
   (g)   Signs with flashing neon elements or signs with neon lighting on their
support structures.
   (h)   Signs that are not effectively shielded to prevent beams or rays of
light from being directed on the traveled way, or whose intensity or brilliance
cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle, or that
otherwise interfere with drivers of motor vehicles.
   (i)   A beacon or searchlight, except for emergency purposes.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4298, passed - -2016)
§ 83.13.050 On-Site Signs.
   The provisions of this Section regulate on-site signs and structures. On-
site signs shall be allowed in the land use zoning districts specified.
   (a)   Residential On-Site Signs. On-site signs shall be allowed in land use
zoning districts that allow residential land uses and shall be subject to the
following standards:
      (1)   On-site residential signs are signs that give notice of the name
and/or address of residential land uses on the same parcel and/or the name of a
resident on the parcel. Except as otherwise provided, on-site residential signs
shall not exceed a total of six square feet in area for each residential
dwelling and shall not exceed six feet in height.
      (2)   On-site residential signs for multi-family structures shall not
exceed 20 square feet in area.
      (3)   On-site residential signs shall also include signs that identify a
residential development by name or give similar notice to identify a
residential area or neighborhood. Each residential area or development shall be
limited to a maximum of two permanent signs per principal entrance to the
residential development. The maximum total sign area shall be 100 square feet
for each development and individual signs shall not exceed a maximum height of
six feet when the sign is located outside the front setback area and four feet
when the sign is within the front setback area. These signs shall not advertise
the sales of parcels or homes.
   (b)   Nonresidential On-Site Signs in Residential, Agricultural, and
Conservation Land Use Zoning Districts. When a nonresidential use is allowed
within a residential, agricultural, or conservation land use zoning district,
the use may be accompanied by one unlighted single or double faced sign not to
exceed six feet in height or 12 square feet in area, for each 60 feet of street
frontage and not to exceed a maximum of 24 square feet in total area.
   (c)   On-site Commercial/Industrial Complex Signs. On-site signs shall be
allowed in land use zoning districts that allow commercial and industrial land
uses and shall be subject to the following standards:
      (1)   A shopping center occupant located:
         (A)   On the perimeter of a shopping center with street frontage may
have one monument sign in addition to a wall, roof, or projecting sign. The
additional sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area.
         (B)   Adjacent to, or that backs onto, a major arterial, or a major or
secondary highway, may have an additional wall sign on the rear of the
structure.
      (2)   A complex occupant sign shall also include the use of one five
square foot pedestrian walkway sign for each occupant within the complex in
addition to other sign configurations and sign area allowed by the land use
zoning district.
      (3)   A complex shall have a minimum street frontage of one 150 feet. A
shopping center complex, abutting two street frontages of at least 150 feet
each, may have one additional monument sign. However, the total cumulative
square footage of the monument signs shall not exceed 100 square feet.
      (4)   On-site signs in Office Commercial (CO) land use zoning district.
Table 83-21 indicates the types of signs allowed in the Office Commercial (CO)
land use zoning district and the standards applicable to those signs.
Table 83-21
On-Site Signs in Office Commercial (CO) Land Use Zoning District
             Individual Business/                         Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not a Part of Multi-Tenant Complex Multi-Tenant Complex
             a Complex
Table 83-21
On-Site Signs in Office Commercial (CO) Land Use Zoning District
                   Individual
Type of Sign       Business/Structure  Multi-Tenant        Occupant within a
                   Not a Part of a     Complex             Multi-Tenant Complex
                   Complex
Freestanding
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
Pole or Pylon      height              height
                   100 sq. ft. maximum 100 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
                   4 ft. maximum       4 ft. maximum       Sign not allowed
Monument           height              height
                   36 sq. ft. maximum  36 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
Attached
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
                   height              height
                   100 sq. ft. maximum 100 sq. ft. maximum
Projecting         area 8 ft. minimum  area 8 ft. minimum
                   clearance from      clearance from
                   underlying walkway  underlying walkway
                   or thoroughfare     or thoroughfare
                   1:1 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:1 (bldg. frontage
Roof               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
                   1:1 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:1 (bldg. frontage
Wall               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
Total area sq. ft. 150                 100                 50
Total number       1 Freestanding      1 Per Frontage
                   1 Attached                              1
 
      (5)    On-site signs in Neighborhood Commercial (CN) land use zoning
district.
Table 83-22 indicates the types of signs allowed in the Neighborhood Commercial
(CN) land use zoning district and the standards applicable to those signs.
Table 83-22
On-Site Signs in Neighborhood Commercial (CN) Land Use Zoning District
             Individual Business/                         Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not a Part of Multi-Tenant Complex Multi-Tenant Complex
             a Complex
Table 83-22
On-Site Signs in Neighborhood Commercial (CN) Land Use Zoning District
                   Individual
Type of Sign       Business/Structure  Multi-Tenant        Occupant within a
                   Not a Part of a     Complex             Multi-Tenant Complex
                   Complex
Freestanding
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
Pole or Pylon      height              height
                   100 sq. ft. maximum 100 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
                   4 ft. maximum       4 ft. maximum       Sign not allowed
Monument           height              height
                   36 sq. ft. maximum  36 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
Attached
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
                   height              height
                   100 sq. ft. maximum 100 sq. ft. maximum
Projecting         area 8 ft. minimum  area 8 ft. minimum
                   clearance from      clearance from
                   underlying walkway  underlying walkway
                   or thoroughfare     or thoroughfare
                   1:2 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Roof               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
                   1:2 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Wall               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
Total area sq. ft. 150                 100                 50
                   1 Freestanding      1 per frontage
Total number       1 Attached per                          1
                   Frontage
 
      (6)    On-site signs in Rural Commercial (CR) land use zoning district.
Table 83-23 indicates the types of signs allowed in the Rural Commercial (CR)
land use zoning district and the standards applicable to those signs.
Table 83-23
On-Site Signs in Rural Commercial (CR) Land Use Zoning District
             Individual Business/                         Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not a Part of Multi-Tenant Complex Multi-Tenant Complex
             a Complex
Table 83-23
On-Site Signs in Rural Commercial (CR) Land Use Zoning District
                   Individual
Type of Sign       Business/Structure  Multi-Tenant        Occupant within a
                   Not a Part of a     Complex             Multi-Tenant Complex
                   Complex
Freestanding
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
Pole or Pylon      height              height
                   100 sq. ft. maximum 100 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
                   4 ft. maximum       4 ft. maximum       Sign not allowed
Monument           height              height
                   36 sq. ft. maximum  36 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
Attached
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
                   height              height
                   50 sq. ft. maximum  50 sq. ft. maximum
Projecting         area                area
                   8 ft. minimum       8 ft. minimum
                   clearance from      clearance from
                   underlying walkway  underlying walkway
                   or thoroughfare     or thoroughfare
                   1:2 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Roof               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
                   1:2 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Wall               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
Total area sq. ft. 150                 100                 50
                   1 Freestanding      1 per frontage
Total number       1 Attached per                          1
                   Frontage
 
      (7)    On-site signs in Highway Commercial (CH) land use zoning district.
Table 83-24 indicates the types of signs allowed in the Neighborhood Commercial
(CN) land use zoning district and the standards applicable to those signs.
Table 83-24
On-Site Signs in Highway Commercial (CH) Land Use Zoning District
             Individual Business/                         Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not a Part of Multi-Tenant Complex Multi-Tenant Complex
             a Complex
Table 83-24
On-Site Signs in Highway Commercial (CH) Land Use Zoning District
                   Individual
Type of Sign       Business/Structure  Multi-Tenant        Occupant within a
                   Not a Part of a     Complex             Multi-Tenant Complex
                   Complex
Freestanding
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
Pole or Pylon      height              height
                   200 sq. ft. maximum 200 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
                   4 ft. maximum       4 ft. maximum       Sign not allowed
Monument           height              height
                   50 sq. ft. maximum  50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
Attached
                   35 ft. maximum      35 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
                   height              height
                   200 sq. ft. maximum 200 sq. ft. maximum
Projecting         area 8 ft. minimum  area 8 ft. minimum
                   clearance from      clearance from
                   underlying walkway  underlying walkway
                   or thoroughfare     or thoroughfare
                   1:3 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Roof               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
                   1:3 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Wall               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   200 sq. ft. maximum                     50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
Total area sq. ft. 300                 200                 100
Total number       1 Freestanding      1 per frontage
                   2 Attached                              1
 
      (8)    On-site signs in General Commercial (CG) land use zoning district.
Table 83-25 indicates the types of signs allowed in the General Commercial (CG)
land use zoning district and the standards applicable to those signs.
Table 83-25
On-Site Signs in General Commercial (CG) Land Use Zoning District
             Individual Business/                         Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not a Part of Multi-Tenant Complex Multi-Tenant Complex
             a Complex
Table 83-25
On-Site Signs in General Commercial (CG) Land Use Zoning District
                   Individual
Type of Sign       Business/Structure  Multi-Tenant        Occupant within a
                   Not a Part of a     Complex             Multi-Tenant Complex
                   Complex
Freestanding
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
Pole or Pylon      height              height
                   200 sq. ft. maximum 200 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
                   4 ft. maximum       4 ft. maximum       Sign not allowed
Monument           height              height
                   50 sq. ft. maximum  50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
Attached
                   35 ft. maximum      35 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
                   height              height
                   200 sq. ft. maximum 200 sq. ft. maximum
Projecting         area 8 ft. minimum  area 8 ft. minimum
                   clearance from      clearance from
                   underlying walkway  underlying walkway
                   or thoroughfare     or thoroughfare
                   1:3 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Roof               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
                   1:3 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Wall               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
Total area sq. ft. 300                 200                 50
Total number       1 Freestanding      1 per frontage
                   2 Attached                              1
 
      (9)    On-site signs in Service Commercial (CS) land use district.
Table 83-26 indicates the types of signs allowed in the Service Commercial (CS)
land use district and the standards applicable to those signs.
Table 83-26
On-Site Signs in Service Commercial (CS) Land Use Zoning District
             Individual Business/                         Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not a Part of Multi-Tenant Complex Multi-Tenant Complex
             a Complex
Table 83-26
On-Site Signs in Service Commercial (CS) Land Use Zoning District
                   Individual
Type of Sign       Business/Structure  Multi-Tenant        Occupant within a
                   Not a Part of a     Complex             Multi-Tenant Complex
                   Complex
Freestanding
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
Pole or Pylon      height              height
                   200 sq. ft. maximum 200 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
                   4 ft. maximum       4 ft. maximum       Sign not allowed
Monument           height              height
                   50 sq. ft. maximum  50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
Attached
                   35 ft. maximum      35 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
                   height              height
                   200 sq. ft. maximum 200 sq. ft. maximum
Projecting         area 8 ft. minimum  area 8 ft. minimum
                   clearance from      clearance from
                   underlying walkway  underlying walkway
                   or thoroughfare     or thoroughfare
                   1:3 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Roof               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
                   1:3 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Wall               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   200 sq. ft. maximum                     50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
Total area sq. ft. 300                 200                 50
Total number       1 Freestanding      1 per frontage
                   1 Attached                              1
 
      (10)    On-site signs in Community Industrial (IC) land use zoning
district.
Table 83-27 indicates the types of signs allowed in the Community Industrial
(IC) land use zoning district and the standards applicable to those signs.
Table 83-27
On-Site Signs in Community Industrial (IC) Land Use Zoning District
             Individual Business/                         Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not a Part of Multi-Tenant Complex Multi-Tenant Complex
             a Complex
Table 83-27
On-Site Signs in Community Industrial (IC) Land Use Zoning District
                   Individual
Type of Sign       Business/Structure  Multi-Tenant        Occupant within a
                   Not a Part of a     Complex             Multi-Tenant Complex
                   Complex
Freestanding
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
Pole or Pylon      height              height
                   200 sq. ft. maximum 200 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
                   6 ft. maximum       6 ft. maximum       Sign not allowed
Monument           height              height
                   100 sq. ft. maximum 100 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
Attached
Projecting         Sign not allowed    Sign not allowed    Sign not allowed
                   1:3 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    Sign not allowed
Roof               to sign area ratio)
                   150 sq. ft. maximum
                   area
                   1:3 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Wall               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   200 sq. ft. maximum                     150 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
Total area sq. ft. 400                 320                 150
Total number       1 Freestanding      1 per frontage
                   2 Attached                              1
 
      (11)    On-site signs in Regional Industrial (IR) land use zoning
district.
Table 83-28 indicates the types of signs allowed in the Regional Industrial
(IR) land use zoning district and the standards applicable to those signs.
Table 83-28
On-Site Signs in Regional Industrial (IR) Land Use Zoning District
             Individual Business/                         Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not a Part of Multi-Tenant Complex Multi-Tenant Complex
             a Complex
Table 83-28
On-Site Signs in Regional Industrial (IR) Land Use Zoning District
                   Individual
Type of Sign       Business/Structure  Multi-Tenant        Occupant within a
                   Not a Part of a     Complex             Multi-Tenant Complex
                   Complex
Freestanding
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
Pole or Pylon      height              height
                   200 sq. ft. maximum 200 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
                   6 ft. maximum       6 ft. maximum       Sign not allowed
Monument           height              height
                   100 sq. ft. maximum 100 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
Attached
                   25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed    Sign not allowed
                   height
                   200 sq. ft. maximum
Projecting         area 8 ft. minimum
                   clearance from
                   underlying walkway
                   or thoroughfare
                   1:4 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:1 (bldg. frontage
Roof               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   200 sq. ft. maximum                     50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
                   1:4 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Wall               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   200 sq. ft. maximum                     150 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
Total area sq. ft. 400                 400                 150
Total number       1 Freestanding      1 per frontage
                   2 Attached                              1
 
      (12)   On-Site Signs in Institutional (IN) Land Use Zoning District.  
Table 83-29 indicates the types of signs allowed in the Institutional (IN) land
use zoning district and the standards applicable to those signs.
Table 83-29
On-Site Signs in Institutional (IN) Land Use Zoning District
             Individual Business/                         Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not a Part of Multi-Tenant Complex Multi-Tenant Complex
             a Complex
Table 83-29
On-Site Signs in Institutional (IN) Land Use Zoning District
                   Individual
Type of Sign       Business/Structure  Multi-Tenant     Occupant within a
                   Not a Part of a     Complex          Multi-Tenant Complex
                   Complex
Freestanding
                   25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed Sign not allowed
Pole or Pylon      height
                   48 sq. ft. maximum
                   area
                   6 ft. maximum       Sign not allowed Sign not allowed
Monument           height
                   48 sq. ft. maximum
                   area
Attached
                   15 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed Sign not allowed
                   height
                   48 sq. ft. maximum
Projecting         area
                   8 ft. minimum
                   clearance from
                   underlying walkway
                   or thoroughfare
                   1:1 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed Sign not allowed
Roof               to sign area ratio)
                   100 sq. ft. maximum
                   area
                   1:1 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed Sign not allowed
Wall               to sign area ratio)
                   100 sq. ft. maximum
                   area
Total area sq. ft. 150
Total number       1 Freestanding
                   2 Attached
 
      (13)   On-Site Signs in Special Development (SD) Land Use Zoning
District.  
Table 83-30 indicates the types of signs allowed in the Special Development
(SD) land use zoning district and the standards applicable to those signs.
Table 83-30
On-Site Signs in Special Development (SD) Land Use Zoning District
             Individual Business/                         Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not a Part of Multi-Tenant Complex Multi-Tenant Complex
             a Complex
Table 83-30
On-Site Signs in Special Development (SD) Land Use Zoning District
                   Individual
Type of Sign       Business/Structure  Multi-Tenant        Occupant within a
                   Not a Part of a     Complex             Multi-Tenant Complex
                   Complex
Freestanding
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
Pole or Pylon      height              height
                   100 sq. ft. maximum 100 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
                   4 ft. maximum       4 ft. maximum       Sign not allowed
Monument           height              height
                   36 sq. ft. maximum  36 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                area
Attached
                   25 ft. maximum      25 ft. maximum      Sign not allowed
                   height              height
                   100 sq. ft. maximum 100 sq. ft. maximum
Projecting         area 8 ft. minimum  area 8 ft. minimum
                   clearance from      clearance from
                   underlying walkway  underlying walkway
                   or thoroughfare     or thoroughfare
                   1:2 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Roof               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
                   1:2 (bldg. frontage Sign not allowed    1:2 (bldg. frontage
Wall               to sign area ratio)                     to sign area ratio)
                   50 sq. ft. maximum                      50 sq. ft. maximum
                   area                                    area
Total area sq. ft. 150                 100                 50
                   1 Freestanding      1 per frontage
Total number       2 Attached per                          1
                   frontage
 
      (14)   On-Site Signs in Crest Forest Community Plan Commercial Land Use
Zoning Districts.  
Table 83-31 indicates the types of signs allowed in commercial land use
districts in the Crest Forest Community Plan area, and the standards applicable
to those signs.
Table 83-31
On-Site Signs in Crest Forest Community Plan (CF) Commercial Land Use Zoning
Districts
             Individual Business/  Multi-Tenant Complex Occupant within a
Type of Sign Structure Not Part of or Center            Multi-Tenant Complex or
             a Complex or Center                        Center
Table 83-31
On-Site Signs in Crest Forest Community Plan (CF) Commercial Land Use Zoning
Districts
              Individual Business/     Multi-Tenant    Occupant within a Multi-
Type of Sign  Structure Not Part of a  Complex or      Tenant Complex or Center
              Complex or Center        Center
Freestanding
              25 ft. maximum height    25 ft. maximum
Pole or Pylon                          height          Sign not allowed
              50 sq. ft. maximum area  50 sq. ft.
                                       maximum area
              4 ft. maximum height in  4 ft. maximum
              addition to 2 ft. solid  height in
Monument      base                     addition to 2   Sign not allowed
                                       ft. solid base
              32 sq. ft. maximum area  32 sq. ft.
                                       maximum area
Attached
                                       35 ft. maximum
              35 ft. maximum height,   height, not to
              not to exceed roof ridge exceed roof
              or parapet height.       edge or parapet
Projecting                             height.
(may require  32 sq. ft. maximum area  32 sq. ft.      Sign not allowed
encroachment                           maximum area
permit)                                8 ft. minimum
              8 ft. minimum clearance  clearance from
              from underlying walkway  underlying
              or thoroughfare          walkway or
                                       thoroughfare
              3:1 (bldg. frontage to                   3:1 (bldg. frontabe to
              sign area ratio)         Sign not        sign area ratio)
Roof          32 sq. ft. maximum area  allowed         32 sq. ft. maximum area
              Placement subject to §                  Placement subject to §
              83.13.090(f)                             83.13.090(f)
              3:1 (bldg. frontage to   Sign not        3:1 (bldg. frontage to
Wall          sign area ratio)         allowed         sign area ratio)
              50 sq. ft. maximum area                  50 sq. ft. maximum area
              1 freestanding per
Total number  frontage                 1 per frontage  1 attached per frontage
              2 attached per frontage
 
   (d)   On-Site Civic Signs. On-site civic signs are signs that give notice of
the name or service, or other function or operation, of a publicly owned land
use type on the same parcel, or that gives notice of the address or conditions
of use of a parking area or other facility serving the activity. On-site civic
signs are allowed in all land use zoning districts subject to the following
limitations:
      (1)   In land use zoning districts where on-site business signs are not
allowed, on-site civic signs with a maximum area of 32 square feet and a
maximum height of 12 feet are allowed.
      (2)   In land use zoning districts where on-site business signs are
allowed, the maximum height and area for on-site civic signs shall be the same
as that allowed for on-site business signs.
   (e)   Freeway Oriented On-Site Signs.
      (1)   Freeway oriented signs shall be located within 200 feet of the
structure or use to which the sign is an on-site use.
      (2)   A maximum of two steel support poles shall be required for a
freestanding freeway oriented on-site sign that has an area of 18 square feet
or greater.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4298,
passed - -2016; Am. Ord. 4393, passed - -2020)
§ 83.13.060 Off-Site Signs.
   (a)   General Regulations for Off-Site Signs. Unless otherwise specified in
this Section, the following standards shall be applicable to off-site signs:
      (1)   Allowability of Off-Site Signs.
         (A)   Where Allowed. Off-site signs shall be allowed in the CG
(General Commercial) and CH (Highway Commercial) land use zoning districts
subject to a Conditional Use Permit.
         (B)   Where Prohibited. Off-site signs shall be prohibited in the
Phelan/Pinon Hills Community Plan area and the Crest Forest Community Plan
area.
      (2)   Dimensions and Area.
         (A)   Overall Height. The maximum height of an off-site freestanding
sign shall be 35 feet. The maximum height of an off-site freestanding sign
whose leading edge is not within 500 feet of a freeway right-of-way nor located
within 50 feet of a railroad line shall be 25 feet.
         (B)   Height of Sign Face. The maximum vertical height of the face of
an off-site sign shall be 25 feet.
         (C)   Width of Sign Face. The maximum horizontal width of the face of
an off-site sign shall be 50 feet.
         (D)   Area. The maximum area of the face of an off-site sign shall be
500 square feet. The maximum area of the face of an off-site sign whose leading
edge is not within 500 feet of a freeway right-of-way shall be 300 square feet.
The area and height of a freestanding sign may be expanded by no more than ten
percent for the addition of temporary embellishments, cut-outs, and other add-
ons. The embellishments shall not exceed 50 square feet in area, nor add more
than five feet in additional height.
      (3)   Construction Standards. A maximum of two steel support poles shall
be allowed for an off-site freestanding sign. Steel support poles shall be
required for the construction of an off-site freestanding sign required in this
Chapter to have a Building Permit.
      (4)   Access. Off-site signs shall not obstruct an access route,
including setback areas needed for emergency vehicle or personnel access.
      (5)   Designated Scenic Route. No off-site freestanding signs greater
than 18 square feet in area shall be oriented toward a State or County Highway
that has been designated as a Scenic Route by the Federal, State, or a local
jurisdiction.
      (6)   Visibility from Freeway When Sign Not Oriented Towards Freeway.
Where off-site signs are oriented towards thoroughfares other than freeways,
the message displayed on the signs may be visible to the operators of vehicles
from on-and-off ramps, but the message shall not be designed to be viewed by
the operators of vehicles being driven on the main traveled way of the freeway.
      (7)   Double-faced, Back-to-Back Signs Allowed.  Provisions of this
Section shall not prevent the erection of double-faced, back-to-back off-site
signs or V-shaped signs erected in compliance with Subdivision (1)(d) (Area),
above.
      (8)   Minimum Spacing. Off-site signs shall maintain the following
minimum spacing between the leading edge of each sign on the same side of the
same street or freeway. Measurements shall be calculated from the leading edge
or footing of the sign nearest to the planned right-of-way.
Sign Area Minimum Spacing
Sign Area                      Minimum Spacing
(A)   Freeway Oriented Off-site Signs
   0 - 500 square feet      750 feet
   500.01 square feet and ovNot allowed
(B)   All other Off-site Signs
   0 - 50 square feet       50 feet
   50.01 - 100 square feet  150 feet
   100.01 - 300 square feet 500 feet
   300.01 square feet and ovNot allowed
 
      (9)   Setback. The leading edge of off-site signs shall maintain the
following minimum setback from the planned right-of-way:
 
Sign Height            Setback
(A)   Freeway oriented off-site signs
   Any height       3 feet
(B)   All other off-site signs
   0 - 16 feet      3 feet
   16.01 - 25 feet  5 feet
   25.01 feet and ovNot allowed
 
      (10)   State Outdoor Advertising Permit. A copy of the current valid
State Outdoor Advertising Permit, where one is required by the State, shall be
submitted to the Building Official before approval of a plot plan for an off-
site sign, except where specific County findings are required by the State
Department of Transportation before the issuance of the State Outdoor
Advertising Permit. When a valid State Outdoor Advertising Permit is required
by the State, it shall be submitted before issuance of a Building Permit for
the construction of the sign.
      (11)   Illumination. Lighting of off-site signs shall comply with §
83.07.040 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting Mountain and Desert Regions).
   (b)   Freeway Oriented Off-Site Signs.
      (1)   Message Orientation. Freeway oriented off-site signs shall be
erected, constructed, or maintained, to ensure that the message displayed on
the signs shall be designed to be viewed by the operators of vehicles traveling
on freeways.
      (2)   Applicable Land Use Development Standards. In addition to the
provisions of this Subdivision, signs shall be subject to the provisions of the
land use zoning district in which they are located.
      (3)   Conditional Use Permit Required. Freeway oriented off-site signs
shall be allowed subject to a Conditional Use Permit.
      (4)   Minimum Spacing. See §
83.13.060(a)(8) (Minimum Spacing).
      (5)   Location and Design Standards. Unless otherwise specified in this
Chapter, the location and design standards for freeway oriented off-site signs
shall be as provided in the:
         (A)   Outdoor Advertising Act (Business and Professions Code §§ 5200
et seq.).
         (B)   Code of Regulations, Title 4 (Business Regulations), Chapter 4
(Directional and Other Official Signs and Notices).
      (6)   Activities Exempt from Permit Requirements. The changing of a
message or customary maintenance of a legally existing sign structure as
defined in § 2270 (Customary Maintenance) of the Code of Regulations, Title 4
(Business Regulations), Chapter 1 (Outdoor Advertising General) shall not
require a Use Permit in compliance with this Subdivision.
      (7)   Location Standards. In addition to other applicable Federal, State,
and local requirements, freeway oriented off-site signs shall not be
constructed until a permit has been issued by the Building Official in
compliance with the following:
         (A)   Location in Established Business Area.
            (I)   Freeway oriented off-site freestanding signs shall be located
where allowed within an established business area, which shall mean an area
within 1,000 feet, measured in any direction, from the leading edge of the
nearest edge of a commercial or industrial activity or structure, and that is
located in a commercial or industrial land use zoning district. For purposes of
calculating the 1,000-foot measurement, the freeway right-of-way shall be
excluded.
            (II)   The area of a commercial or an industrial activity shall be
presumed to be that portion of a parcel lying within a single rectangle that
encloses improvements, storage areas, and parking areas related to that
commercial or industrial activity. This activity includes accessory and primary
land uses that are both directly and traditionally related to a commercial or
industrial land use, but does not include infrastructure or access improvements
(e.g., driveways, railways, power lines, etc.).
         (B)   Sign Separation Requirement. Freeway oriented off-site signs
shall be not be placed within 750 feet from another freeway oriented off-site
sign on the same side of the freeway. If a particular land use zoning district
specifies a more restrictive spacing, then the more restrictive spacing shall
prevail.
   (c)   Freeway Oriented Directional Signs.
      (1)   Location and Design Standards. Freeway oriented directional signs
shall be located and designed in compliance with the:
         (A)   Outdoor Advertising Act (Business and Professions Code §§ 5200
et seq.).
         (B)   Code of Regulations, Title 4 (Business Regulations), Chapter 4
(Directional and Other Official Signs and Notices).
      (2)   Message. The message on directional signs shall be limited to the
identification of an attraction or activity and directional information useful
to the traveler in locating the corresponding attraction or activity.
      (3)   State Outdoor Advertising Permit. A copy of the current valid State
Outdoor Advertising Permit, where it is required by the State, shall be
submitted to the Building Official before approval of a plot plan for a freeway
oriented directional sign, except where specific County findings are required
by the State Department of Transportation before the issuance of State Outdoor
Advertising Permit. When a valid State Outdoor Advertising Permit is required
by the State, it shall be submitted before issuance of a Building Permit for
the construction of the sign.
   (d)   Additional Off-Site Signs. The following off-site signs are allowed in
addition to those specified within individual land use zoning districts:
      (1)   Off-Site Permanent Civic Signs. Signs that serve to identify a
community shall be allowed in all land use zoning districts subject to the
following:
         (A)   In land use zoning districts where off-site business signs are
allowed, the maximum height and area for a off-site civic sign shall be the
same as the allowed on-site business sign, unless otherwise specified by this
Chapter.
         (B)   In land use districts where off-site signs are not allowed,
signs shall have a maximum area of 100 square feet and a maximum height of 15
feet, except in those land use zoning districts where on-site signs are not
allowed.
         (C)   In land use districts where off-site signs are not allowed, off-
site civic signs shall have a maximum area of 32 square feet and a maximum
height of 12 feet.
         (D)   Off-site civic signs shall only display the name, surname, and/
or slogan of the city or community.
      (2)   Off-Site Business Directional Signs. Off-site business directional
signs are signs that direct attention to, or otherwise pertain to, a commodity
or service that is sold, produced, conducted or offered by a nonresidential
land use type not located on the same site where the sign is located but is
within 50 are miles of the business or establishment being identified. Off-site
business directional signs are allowed in all land use zoning districts subject
to the following restrictions:
         (A)   Off-site business directional signs shall not be allowed when an
on-site business sign will serve to adequately identify the establishment.
         (B)   Off-site business directional signs shall not be located within
50 feet of another off-site sign.
         (C)   In those nonresidential land use zoning districts where on-site
business signs are not allowed, off-site business directional signs shall not
exceed 32 square feet in area nor ten feet in height.
         (D)   In those land use zoning districts where on-site business signs
are allowed, off-site business directional signs shall not exceed 64 square
feet in area, nor 15 feet in height or the signs shall conform to the size and
height provided for on-site business signs within the land use zoning district,
whichever is smaller.
         (E)   Whenever an off-site business directional sign is used, there
shall be a one square foot reduction of allowed sign area for on-site business
signs for the establishment for each square foot of sign area in the business
directional sign.
         (F)   If an off-site business directional sign is oriented towards a
State Highway or freeway, the sign shall also comply with the provisions of §
83.13.060(c) (Freeway Oriented Directional Signs), above.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4298, passed - -2016)
§ 83.13.070 Temporary Signs.
   (a)   Temporary On-Site Signs. The following signs shall be allowed as on-
site signs in all land use zoning districts on a temporary basis:
      (1)   Temporary On-Site Realty Signs.
         (A)   On-site realty signs are temporary on-site signs that pertain to
the sale, lease, rental, or display of parcels, structures, or facilities that
exist or are in the process of being constructed or altered.
         (B)   On-site realty signs shall be allowed subject to the following
height and area limitations:
            (I)   In land use zoning districts where on-site business signs are
not allowed, the maximum area of an on-site realty sign shall be six square
feet and the maximum height shall be five feet. These signs shall have a
maximum height of four feet when placed within the front setback or side street
setback areas.
            (II)   In land use zoning districts where on-site business signs
are allowed, the maximum area for an on-site reality sign shall be 50 percent
of the allowable area for the on-site business signs, but not more than 32
square feet. Allowed height for an on-site realty sign shall be the same as
that allowed for an on-site business sign.
      (2)   Temporary On-Site Development Signs. On-site development signs are
temporary on-site signs that announce future activities and facilities to be
located on the site, and that may identify the persons or firms engaged in the
promotion, design, construction, or alteration of the facilities. On-site
development signs shall be allowed in all land use zoning districts subject to
the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit.
      (3)   Temporary On-Site Residential Development Signs.
         (A)   Temporary on-site residential development signs are for on-site
advertisement of residential development projects.
         (B)   A maximum of three signs are allowed within the boundaries of
the residential development project. These signs are to be located as follows:
one at the entrance, and one at the exit of the residential development
project, and one at the sales office site.
         (C)   Temporary on-site residential development signs shall only state
the name of the developer, type of financing, price range, and the developer’s
telephone number.
         (D)   Temporary on-site residential development signs may be located
in front, side, or rear setbacks, but shall not be located closer than five
feet from the edge of the planned right-of-way.
         (E)   Each individual sign structure shall have no more than 64 square
feet of total sign area. The total square footage of the on-site signs shall
not be more than 100 feet.
         (F)   Nonconforming signs on the proposed site shall be removed.
         (G)   An approved Temporary Use Permit may allow the use of flags or
other alternate advertising displays, provided the conditions of approval
specify the type, maximum area, maximum height, maximum number, minimum
spacing, time limitation, and maintenance requirements for the alternate
advertising displays.
         (H)   See also §
84.25.040(g)(3) (Temporary On-Your-Lot Builder Model Home/Sales Office).
      (4)   Temporary Banners and Flags. Temporary banners and flags shall be
allowed without a permit, subject to the owner maintaining the banners and
flags in good condition, and subject to the following standards: On-site
banners and flags shall not exceed 15 feet in length or three feet in width.
Any banners or flags exceeding 15 feet in length or three feet in width shall
be subject to a temporary use permit. Banners and flags shall be displayed on
roof, wall, or fence areas only. Banners and flags shall be placed in a manner
that will not obstruct the visibility of other signs or pose a safety hazard
for drivers or pedestrians. The total number of banners or flags for each
occupant shall not exceed one for each street frontage. The maximum time period
for display of a banner or flag shall be 60 days. Banners and flags advertising
a special event shall be removed within five days following the event. Banners
and flags propsed for display in the public right-of-way shall be subject to an
encroachment permit.
         (A)   “Banana flags” shall not be allowed in the Crest Forest
Community Plan area.
   (b)   Temporary Off-Site Signs. The following signs shall be allowed in all
land use zoning districts on a temporary basis:
      (1)   Temporary Off-Site Political Signs. 
         (A)   A temporary off-site political sign is a sign that indicates any
one or a combination of the following:
            (I)   The name or picture of an individual seeking election or
appointment to a public office.
            (II)   Relates to an upcoming public election or referendum.
            (III)   Advocates a person’s, group’s, or party’s political views
or policies.
         (B)   A temporary off-site political sign shall be allowed in any land
use zoning district subject to the following limitations:
            (I)   Political signs shall be removed within 30 days after the
election.
            (II)   Political signs shall have a maximum area of eight square
feet in residential land use zoning districts, and 32 square feet in other land
use zoning districts, unless the sign is an on-site sign (e.g., campaign
headquarters, etc.) or is an off-site sign allowed by this Chapter.
            (III)   Political signs shall not be erected within a street
intersection, clear sight triangle, or at a location where the sign may
interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with an authorized traffic
sign.
            (IV)   Political signs shall not be nailed or affixed to a tree,
fence post, or public utility pole and shall not be located in the public
right-of-way, parkway, or on publicly owned land.
      (2)   Temporary Off-Site Residential Directional Signs. Temporary off-
site residential directional signs shall be used for identifying a housing
project or a new apartment complex of five or more units. These signs shall be
allowed in all land use zoning districts subject to a Sign Location Plan and
the following provisions:
         (A)   The maximum height shall be eight feet.
         (B)   The top panel shall measure 60 inches by 16 inches and shall
identify the County or the community where the sign is located.
         (C)   Each subsequent panel shall measure not less than 60 inches by
ten inches and shall only specify the name of the development project and a
directional arrow. A maximum of six advertising panels shall be allowed per
sign.
         (D)   Colors for lettering and background and type of lettering shall
be uniform for each community and shall be approved by the Director.
         (E)   Double wide sign structures may be installed at locations
subject to the approval of the Director.
         (F)   In areas where it is not practical to install the standard sized
sign, a small sign may be installed. The sign shall measure no more than 30
inches high and 30 inches wide. A maximum of two panels shall be used per sign.
         (G)   Temporary off-site residential directional signs shall be
located at least 300 feet away from another off-site residential directional
sign, unless it is determined by the Director that a closer spacing will better
accomplish the intent of this Subdivision.
         (H)   Temporary off-site residential directional signs placed on
private property shall receive written consent of the property owner that shall
be filed with the Department before issuance of a permit. Signs placed in the
public right-of-way shall require an Encroachment Permit from the Department.
         (I)   Temporary off-site residential directional signs shall be
located away from a scenic highway or outside a Sign Control Overlay with a
designation of SC[p] whenever possible. However, if a location is sufficiently
justified, the maximum number of advertising panels shall be restricted to two.
         (J)   Temporary off-site residential directional signs shall not be
allowed within clear sight triangles in compliance with §
83.02.030 (Clear Sight Triangles).
         (K)   There shall not be additions, tag signs, streamers, flags,
devices, display boards, or appurtenances added to the sign as originally
approved. Further, other directional signs shall not be used (e.g., posters,
trailer signs, etc.).
         (L)   Nonconforming subdivision or apartment complex directional signs
that are advertised under this Subdivision shall be removed before the issuance
of a New Sign Permit. These signs may be removed by the County, with the cost
of removal charged to the developer. Additional costs incurred by the County
resulting from the removal of illegal signs shall also be charged to the
developer.
         (M)   Signs shall not be illuminated
         (N)   Signs shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and orderly manner.
Broken, damaged, or defaced signs shall be repaired within 30 days.
         (O)   Signs shall not obstruct the use of sidewalks, walkways, bike or
multi-use trails.
         (P)   The County, and its officers and employees, shall be held free
and harmless of costs, claims, and damages levied against them.
         (Q)   Temporary Weekend Signs. Small temporary signs may be placed
during two or three day weekends on private property with the property owner’s
permission or within the public right-of-way so long as the signs are requested
from and placed by the County’s authorized administrator. These signs shall not
be larger than 24 inches by 25 inches, and they shall be made of either plastic
or cardboard, and shall be mounted with stakes that are either wood or metal.
These signs shall not be erected earlier than 12 midnight on Friday and shall
not be removed later than 12 midnight on Sunday. In the event of a three-day
holiday, these signs may be erected no earlier than 12 midnight on Thursday, if
the holiday falls on Friday, and shall not be removed later than 12 midnight on
Monday, if the holiday falls on a Monday.
         (R)   An off-site residential directional sign program may be
implemented and installed through the Building Industry Association (BIA) if an
agreement is approved for the regulation and control between the County and the
BIA. Directional signs erected through this program shall be regulated and
installed in compliance with the agreement and approvals between the BIA and
the County. The BIA shall not install new structures without express written
consent of the Director.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4298, passed - -2016)
§ 83.13.080 Standards for All Types of Signs.
   (a)   Maintenance. Signs and their components shall be regularly maintained
and kept in good repair and appearance. If a sign is not properly maintained,
it shall be removed or repaired within 30 days, following written notice of
insufficient maintenance by an authorized County official.
   (b)   Maximum Sign Area and Calculation of Sign Area.
      (1)   Where a maximum overall sign area is specified, the sum of the
areas of walls, roofs, or display sign faces shall be calculated in compliance
with the provisions of this Section.
      (2)   Where a ratio of structure frontage to sign area is used, the
structure frontage shall be the linear dimension of the structure foundation or
base that is adjacent to the street right-of-way, or that is the main entrance
to the structure when it is not adjacent to the street right-of-way.
      (3)   Where a ratio of structure footage to sign area is used, separate
attached signs are allowed on each structure footage, provided that this ratio
and the maximum total area and total number of attached signs provided for
within the land use zoning district is not exceeded.
      (4)   The area of a single sign shall not exceed 500 square feet and
shall be calculated as follows:
         (A)   Except as otherwise provided by this Section or the provisions
of a land use zoning district, decorative trim six inches or less in width
immediately surrounding the perimeter of a sign, pole covers not exceeding 24
inches in width, and roofs attached immediately above the top of the sign that
do not exceed 24 inches in height nor 12 inches in width beyond the width of
each side of the sign face, shall not be included for purposes of calculating
sign area, unless decorative trim is part of, is associated with or implies the
commercial, noncommercial, or political message that is being displayed.
         (B)   The maximum area allowed for each face of the following signs
shall be equal to the maximum sign area allowed by the applicable land use
zoning district or this Chapter.
            (I)   Single face signs.
            (II)   Double face signs, as measured on the largest single face.
            (III)   V-shaped signs with an acute or right angle between the
sign faced on the side away from the right-of-way to which the sign is
oriented.
      (5)   The maximum area allowed for one of the following signs shall be 75
percent of the maximum sign area allowed by the applicable land use zoning
district or this Chapter. The total area of these sign faces shall not exceed
the maximum sign area allowed by the applicable land use zoning district or
this Chapter.
         (A)   Signs with more than two faces.
         (B)   Signs with more than one face oriented in the same direction.
         (C)   V-shaped signs with an obtuse angle greater than 90 degrees and
less than 180 degrees between the sign faces on the side away from the right-
of-way to which the sign is oriented.
      (6)   The area of a figure or other irregular or three-dimensional
display used for advertising purposes shall be computed by enclosing the entire
area within parallelograms, triangles, or circles in a size sufficient to cover
the entire area and computing only the maximum single display surface that is
visible from a ground position at one time.
      (7)   A sign that includes an automatic time or temperature display shall
be given a bonus of 30 percent increase in area over the maximum area allowed
by a land use zoning district or this Chapter. This bonus area shall only be
utilized for the time or temperature display. The bonus shall not exceed a
maximum of 50 square feet.
      (8)   Animals, man-made objects or natural features that are part of or
incorporated into the design of the sign, and are associated with or imply the
commercial, noncommercial, or political message that is being displayed shall
be calculated as part of the total sign face area.
      (9)   The area of a monument sign shall be calculated by using only the
area devoted to display of a commercial, noncommercial, or political message.
   (c)   Design.
      (1)   Illumination. Except for time and temperature components, signs
shall only be lit by steady, stationary, shielded light directed only at the
sign, by light inside the sign, by direct neon lighting, or by an alternating
light system that does not change more than once five seconds. The glare from
luminous sources shall not exceed one-half footcandle. See also §
83.07.040 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting Mountain and Desert Regions).
      (2)   Visibility of Sign Faces. More than two faces of a single sign
shall not be viewable at one time from one place.
      (3)   Setback from Right-of-Way. The leading edge or footing of a sign
shall not be located closer that one foot from the ultimate right-of-way line.
   (d)   Height.
      (1)   Measurement. The height of signs shall be measured along the
leading edge of the sign and shall be measured from the finished grade of the
ground below the leading edge to the top of the sign, except that freestanding
signs shall be measured from grade or the surface of the adjacent roadbed,
whichever yields the greater sign height.
      (2)   Maximum Height. The maximum height of an on-site freestanding sign
shall be 25 feet. A more restrictive maximum sign height standard may be
specified by this Chapter or by the provisions of the applicable land use
zoning district or overlay.
   (e)   Location.
      (1)   A sign or portion of sign shall not extend over a property line
onto an adjacent property or right-of-way.
      (2)   A sign shall not interfere with a driver’s or pedestrian’s view of
public rights-of-way (e.g., the view of approaching, merging, or intersecting
traffic, etc.) or otherwise impair public safety, or interfere with the safe
operation of a motor vehicle on public streets.
      (3)   Signs shall comply with the provisions §
83.02.030 (Clear Sight Triangles) that include the following:
         (A)   Monument signs shall not be allowed within a clear sight
triangle.
         (B)   There shall not be more than two posts or columns, each with a
width or diameter no greater than 12 inches, within a clear sight triangle.
         (C)   When a freestanding sign is located within a clear sight
triangle, the lower edge of the sign face shall be at least eight feet above
grade.
      (4)   A sign shall not be attached to or painted on a public utility
pole, traffic sign, or streetlight.
      (5)   Where it is determined that vegetation will obstruct the visibility
of more than ten percent of the face of a proposed sign, as viewed from the
edge of the abutting paved roadway for ten percent of the distance up to 750
feet away from the proposed sign face, the following shall be submitted before
issuance of a Building Permit:
         (A)   The sign owner shall submit a statement indicating what
vegetation will be cut, trimmed, and/or left undisturbed.
         (B)   The sign owner shall submit a letter from an affected agency or
property owner, where trees are proposed to be cut or trimmed, authorizing the
removal or trimming operation.
         (C)   Where vegetation is authorized to be removed to accommodate
visibility of a sign on a publicly owned right-of-way, then the remaining
vegetation shall be enhanced by the planting of one specimen tree or plant of
the same or similar species for each tree or plant removed. This shall be
accomplished before the final Building Permit inspection for the proposed sign.
The specimen plants shall be planted along the same roadway as close as
botanically sound, but not in a manner that obstructs the proposed sign during
the life of the tree or plant. The applicant shall obtain permission from the
responsible agency or property owner for the plantings before the issuance of
the Building Permit and shall maintain the vegetation after planting for a
period of six months or until the plant is self-sustaining, whichever is
longer. This requirement shall be modified or waived by the Building Official
where it is determined that an alternate mitigation measure is acceptable or
where compliance is not practicable.
      (6)   A sign shall not be attached to or painted on natural features
(e.g., trees, shrubs, rocks, etc.).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4298, passed - -2016)
§ 83.13.090 Standards for Specific Types of Signs.
   (a)   Accessory Signs. An accessory sign, as allowed by this Code, may be
mounted on the same sign structure as a permanent freestanding sign, provided
that the accessory sign shall have a maximum area that is no more than 50
percent of the area of the off-site sign face on the same sign structure, and
provided that the maximum total area and height allowed within a land use
zoning district is not exceeded.
   (b)   Complex or Center Occupant Signs. Complex or center occupant signs
shall be allowed in conjunction with individual occupants within a shopping
center, business, or other complex. The complex or center occupant sign shall
also include the use of one five square foot pedestrian walkway sign for each
occupant within the complex or center, in addition to other sign configurations
and sign area allowed by the land use zoning district.
   (c)   Freestanding Signs - General.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified by this Chapter or a land use zoning
district, a maximum of one freestanding sign shall be allowed on each parcel,
per frontage. A portion of a new freestanding sign structure, erected after
November 1987, shall not be closer than 10 feet to an existing sign.
      (2)   Freestanding signs that have an area 18 square feet or greater and/
or a height of six feet or greater shall require a Building Permit before
construction.
      (3)   No part of a freestanding sign, including the footing, shall be
located closer than one foot away from an interior property line and from the
right-of-way of a street or highway adjoining the parcel on which the sign is
located. Provided, however, that when a freestanding sign is within a front or
street side setback, the sign shall be constructed to provide an open space of
at least eight feet in height measured from grade.
      (4)   When a freestanding sign is located within a street front or side
setback area, the sign face shall be at least eight feet above grade.
      (5)   Freestanding signs located in a front setback or street side
setback area shall not have more than two posts or columns, each with a width
or diameter no greater than 12 inches. Exceptions to this design standard shall
be subject to Director approval, subject to a safety review for clear sight
triangle obstruction by the Land Development Division.
   (d)   Freestanding Signs - Monument Signs.
      (1)   A monument sign may be substituted for a freestanding sign allowed
by the provisions of this Code or an applicable plan, provided the monument
sign complies with the provisions of this Chapter.
      (2)   The maximum height of a monument sign located in a setback area
shall be the height of an allowed wall or fence in the same setback area.
      (3)   Monument signs shall not interfere with a driver’s line of sight
and shall not be closer than one foot from the right-of-way and shall not have
a height greater than that allowed for a wall or fence, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable land use zoning district.
   (e)   Projecting signs. A projecting sign shall not:
      (1)   Exceed the height of the structure to which it is attached.
      (2)   Project more than five feet from the supporting wall.
      (3)   Be less than eight feet from grade or any underlying walkway or
thoroughfare.
   (f)   Roof Signs. Roof signs shall be mounted on the roof parallel to the
ridge of the roof and shall not project above a ridge line or top of the
parapet, whichever is greater, nor project beyond the end of the structure wall
or edge of the roof. Roof signs shall not be displayed on a pole mounted on the
roof. Approval of a roof sign shall be subject to demonstration by the
applicant that the building design will not accommodate adequate signage on the
walls. Whenever possible, roof signs shall be placed flat on the roof surface,
and on the lower one-third of the roof slope surface.
   (g)   Wall Signs. Wall signs shall be attached flat against a wall of the
structure. These signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the wall, and
shall not project above the roof line or extend over a public sidewalk or
right-of-way.
   (h)   Window Display Signs. Display signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the
window area on which the sign is placed.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4298, passed - -2016)
§ 83.13.100 Sign Standards for Specific Uses.
   The following signs shall comply with the requirements of this Development
Code or applicable specific plans:
   (a)   Service Station Signs. The following regulations shall apply to
service stations, in addition to all other provisions of this Chapter.
      (1)   Monument.
         (A)   Number. One per street frontage.
         (B)   Area. Not to exceed 36 square feet.
         (C)   Height. Not to exceed four feet.
         (D)   Additional Regulations. Ground signs shall be located in a
landscaped planter with a minimum area equal to two times the area of the sign
      (2)   Wall Signs.
         (A)   Number. One per building frontage facing a street
         (B)   Area. The area of a wall sign shall not exceed two square feet
for each lineal foot of building frontage.
      (3)   Canopy Signs.
         (A)   Number. Two canopy signs per canopy.
         (B)   Area. The area of a canopy sign shall not exceed eight square
feet.
         (C)   Additional Regulations. Canopy signs shall not extend beyond the
gable or fascia board of the canopy.
      (4)   Service Island Signs. One sign, not exceeding four square feet,
shall be allowed on or in front of each end of a service island to identify
methods of sale (i.e., self-serve or full-serve).
      (5)   Window Signs.
         (A)   Number. One per window.
         (B)   Area. Window signs shall not cover more than 25 percent of the
window area.
      (6)   Service Station Product Price Signs. Not to exceed 24 square feet
in area per sign. One such sign shall be allowed per street frontage. Any
additional sign area shall be calculated as part of the total sign area allowed
by the land use district.
   (b)   Drive-In Restaurant Menu Board. Drive-in restaurant menu boards,
including those with speakers, shall be allowed provided each sign does not
exceed 50 square feet. More than two of these signs shall not be allowed on
each site.
   (c)   Garage Sales Signs. Temporary signs for garage sales shall be allowed
in compliance with
Chapter 84.10 (Garage Sales).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008)
§ 83.13.110 Enforcement.
   (a)   In addition to the following provisions, violations of this Chapter
shall be enforced in compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 86.09 (Enforcement).
   (b)   The following signs are hereby declared to be public nuisances:
      (1)   A sign or advertising structure, including flags, unlawfully
constructed, placed on or unlawfully projecting over land owned in fee simple
by a governmental entity, or unlawfully on or over a public right-of-way
without an Encroachment Permit as provided in the County Code.
      (2)   A sign declared to be hazardous or unsafe by the Director, Building
Official, or Fire Chief.
      (3)   Illegal signs.
   (c)   A County Enforcement Officer may, without notice, move, remove, and/or
dispose of a sign or advertising structure that has been declared a public
nuisance in compliance with Subdivision (b) above. In addition, an Enforcement
Officer may authorize work required to correct a hazardous or unsafe condition.
   (d)   A County Enforcement Officer shall charge the cost of moving,
removing, disposing, correcting, storing, repairing, or working on a sign or
sign structure to any one or all of the following, each of which shall be
jointly and individually liable for the expense:
      (1)   The permittee.
      (2)   The owner of the sign.
      (3)   The owner of the premises on which the sign is located.
      (4)   The sign lessee or lessor.
   (e)   The charge for expenses shall be in addition to penalty for the
violation. Recovery of the sign does not necessarily abrogate the penalty.
   (f)   Signs made of paper, cardboard, lightweight plastic, or similar
materials, that are removed, may be discarded immediately. Other removed signs
shall be held no less than 30 days by the County, during which period it may be
recovered by the owner upon paying the County for costs of removal and storage.
If not recovered within the allowed 30-day period, the sign and structure is
hereby declared abandoned and the Title of it shall vest to the County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014)
§ 83.13.120 Nonconforming Signs.
   (a)   Amortization of Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs shall be
removed or altered to be conforming as provided below.
      (1)   Nonconforming on-site signs that are located in an agricultural or
residential district shall be removed from the site without compensation after
the expiration of 15 years from the date the sign became nonconforming. Upon
the expiration of the amortization period, the sign shall be an illegal use
subject to immediate removal. Nonconforming on-site signs that are also illegal
signs shall be removed immediately from the site without compensation.
      (2)   Legal nonconforming commercial signs and billboards existing at the
time this Code became effective may be continued, although the use does not
conform with these provisions provided, however, that these nonconforming signs
and billboards and their supporting structures shall be completely removed by
their owners not later than five years from the effective date of this Code.
      (3)   Legal nonconforming off-site sign displays located in an area
designated on the County General Plan and designated as either agricultural or
residential and located more than 660 feet from the edge of the right-of-way of
a freeway or primary highway, that have copy not visible or intended to be read
from the freeway or primary highway, shall be removed from the site without
compensation in compliance with the following schedule. This amortization
period shall commence upon receipt of written notice of nonconformance.
 
Fair Market Value on Date of Notice Maximum Years Allowed
Under $1,999.00                     2.0
$2,000.00 to $3,999.00              4.5
$4,000.00 to $5,999.00              6.0
$6,000.00 to $7,999.00              7.5
$8,000.00 to $9,999.00              9.0
$10,000.00 and over                 10.5
 
      (4)   The Building Official shall determine the fair market value in
compliance with the latest material valuation schedules and send notice of the
determined value to the owner. Disagreement over the value shall be resolved
under the appeal procedures identified in this Code. Upon the expiration of the
appeal period, the sign shall be an illegal use, subject to immediate removal.
   (b)   Continuance of Nonconforming Signs. A nonconforming sign may be
continued and shall be maintained in good condition as required by these
regulations, but it shall not be:
      (1)   Structurally changed to another nonconforming sign, but its
pictorial content may be changed.
      (2)   Structurally altered to prolong the life of the sign, except to
meet safety requirements.
      (3)   Expanded or altered in a manner that increases the degree of
nonconformity.
      (4)   Reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of
reconstruction exceeds 75 percent of the replacement cost as determined by the
Building Official.
   (c)   New Signs on Sites with Nonconforming Signs. No new sign shall be
approved for a site, structure, building, or use that contains a nonconforming
sign unless the nonconforming sign is removed or modified to conform to the
provisions of this Chapter. No building permit shall be issued for any
structures, building expansions, or new building construction on a site that
contains nonconforming signs, unless all signs on the site are brought into
compliance with this Chapter. This does not include interior alterations that
do not substantially change the character or intensity of the site.
   (d)   Repairing and Painting. Nonconforming signs shall only be painted and
repaired in place and shall not be removed from their existing location except
for building remodeling.
   (e)   Change of Business Ownership. Upon a change of ownership, the new
owner of a nonconforming sign may change a name or names on the sign so long as
there is no change in the structure or configuration of the sign.
   (f)   Structure Remodeling. Nonconforming signs may be removed for the
purpose of remodeling a structure and shall be replaced immediately after the
remodeling is completed. No alteration of the sign cabinet or structure is
allowed.
   (g)   Hardship Cases.
      (1)   Under cases of extreme hardship and unusual circumstances, the
Commission shall have the authority to allow the retention of a legal
nonconforming sign if the Commission specifically finds that extreme hardship
and unusual circumstances exist. The proponent of the request shall have the
burden of clearly demonstrating that an extreme hardship and unusual
circumstance exists and warrants the retention of the nonconforming sign. The
Commission shall conduct a public hearing and shall find the following to be
true before allowing retention of a nonconforming sign:
         (A)   The site has a unique character or features that cause
visibility problems.
         (B)   The sign does not create a traffic hazard.
         (C)   The sign does not create a visual blight to the community.
         (D)   The sign does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
         (E)   The sign is properly maintained and structurally sound.
         (F)   Other sign alternatives or designs would not be feasible or be
able to provide reasonable signing in compliance with this Code.
      (2)   If the Commission finds that an extreme and unusual circumstance
exists, but that the design or condition of the sign creates a visual blight,
then the Commission may grant a relief from the amortization of the
nonconforming sign with the condition that the sign be remodeled to improve the
condition of the sign and/or to create a more aesthetic design.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.13.130 Abandoned Signs.
   (a)   Removal of Abandoned Signs.
      (1)   A sign that identifies a business or activity that is no long
conducted on the premises where the sign is located or pertains to a time,
event, or purpose that no longer applies, shall be considered an abandoned sign
and shall be prohibited. An abandoned sign shall be removed by the owner or
lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located immediately upon closure
of the business or the passing of the event.
      (2)   A sign frame or structure that supported an abandoned sign and that
conforms to all applicable regulations shall be allowed to remain in place.
However, in the event a sign frame or structure is inconsistent with
regulations, the sign structure and/or frame shall be either altered to comply
with the regulations of this Chapter, or removed by the owner or lessee of the
property.
      (3)   Signs considered by the County to have historic value or cultural
significance shall be exempt from this requirement.
      (4)   If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the County,
following a public hearing, may have the sign removed.
   (b)   Recovery of Costs. When the County is required to remove an illegal
sign, the reasonable cost of the removal and storage may be assessed against
the owner of the sign(s) and/or the property owner. If not paid, the applicable
costs may be imposed as a tax lien against the property.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 83.14: TRANSPORTATION CONTROL MEASURES
Section
   
83.14.010   Purpose.
   
83.14.020   Applicability.
   
83.14.030   Transportation Control Measures Development Standards.
§ 83.14.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to reduce vehicle trips thereby reducing air
congestion and pollutants and improving air quality, to comply with State law,
and to promote an improved quality of life. This Chapter is intended to satisfy
the legal requirements of Chapter 6 of the San Bernardino County Congestion
Management Program (CMP).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.14.020 Applicability.
   This Chapter shall apply to all non-residential projects within the
unincorporated portions of San Bernardino County that are greater than 10,000
square feet in area.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 83.14.030 Transportation Control Measures Development Standards.
   (a)   Bicycle Parking Required. Bicycle parking facilities or secured
bicycle lockers shall be provided for all non-residential and multi-family (of
ten or more units) developments when discretionary review is required. Parking
racks or secured lockers shall be provided at a rate of one per 30 parking
spaces with a minimum of a three-bike rack.
   (b)   Pedestrian and Bicycle Connections to Streets. On-site pedestrian
walkways and bicycle facilities shall be provided connecting each structure in
a development to public streets for all new non-residential and multi-family
(of ten or more units) development
   (c)   Shower Facility. A minimum of one shower facility accessible to both
men and women shall be provided for persons bicycling or walking to work for
all new non-residential development generating 250 or more peak hour trips.
   (d)   Passenger Loading Area. Passenger loading areas in locations close to
building entrances (but not interfering with vehicle circulation) shall be
provided for all new non-residential and multi-family (of ten or more units)
developments with at least 100 parking spaces. (Loading area shall be
equivalent to a minimum of five parking spaces.)
   (e)   Vanpool Parking. Preferred parking facilities shall be provided near
building entrances for vanpools in all new non-residential developments where
appropriate. A vertical clearance of no less than nine feet shall be provided.
   (f)   Transit Improvements. Transit improvements (i.e., bus pullouts, bus
pads, and bus shelters) shall be provided for all new residential and non-
residential development along existing or planned transit routes. The need for
and nature of those improvements shall be determined in cooperation with the
designated local transportation authority.
   (g)   On-Site Video Conferencing Facilities. On-site video conferencing
facilities shall be provided for all office park developments with 1,000 or
more employees.
   (h)   Reduction in Parking Space Requirements. Parking space requirements
for new non-residential development shall be reduced when linked to other
actions that reduce trips to account for increased ridesharing and other modes
of transportation. The amount of reduction shall be based on the
recommendations of a parking study prepared by a qualified traffic engineer.
   (i)   Incentives for On-site Child Care and Senior Citizen Facilities.
Incentives to incorporate on-site child care facilities and senior citizen
facilities (e.g., increased parcel coverage, reduced parking requirements,
etc.) shall be provided.
   (j)   Bicycle Plan. Participate in implementation of the Countywide Bicycle
Plan (when adopted).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 83.15: CONDITIONAL COMPLIANCE FOR WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLANS
Section
   
83.15.010   Purpose.
   
83.15.020   Applicability.
   
83.15.030   Quality Control Engineer’s Role and Responsibilities.
   
83.15.040   Developer’s Deposit.
   
83.15.050   Land Development Engineering Authority.
   
83.15.060   Authority to Contract.
   
83.15.070   Expenditure of Funds.
§ 83.15.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure compliance with conditions of
approval on projects involving Water Quality Management Plan features.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 83.15.020 Applicability.
   The provisions of this Chapter apply to projects when a Water Quality
Management Plan is required.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 83.15.030 Quality Control Engineer’s Role and Responsibilities.
   (a)   Independent. The Quality Control Engineer shall not be employed by,
have any relationship to, or interest in the developer, or any contracting,
engineering, or geotechnical companies performing work on or providing services
to the project being inspected.
   (b)   Duties and Responsibilities. The Quality Control Engineer shall:
      (1)   Inspect the work in progress to ensure compliance with the
conditions of approval for Water Quality Management Plan’s site design, source
control and treatment control features;
      (2)   Set provisions regarding Water Quality Management Plan compliance;
and
      (3)   Report to and file reports with the Department of Public Works,
Land Development Engineering Division Chief relative to Water Quality
Management Plan compliance.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 83.15.040 Developer’s Deposit.
   (a)   Deposit Required for Services of Quality Control Engineer. Before the
issuance of building permits and where a Water Quality Management Plan is
required, the developer shall post a deposit with Department of Public Works,
Land Development Engineering Division in the amount and in the form specified
by that Division. The deposit funds held in trust shall be dispersed to the
quality control engineer by the Land Development Division under the terms of
the agreement between the County and the quality control engineer to pay for
the services of the quality control engineer.
   (b)   Additional Deposits Required. The Land Development Engineering
Division shall notify the developer if and when it becomes apparent that the
deposit will be exhausted and the developer shall make the additional deposit
as is required by the Land Development Division.
   (c)   Suspension or Revocation of Grading Permit. If the developer fails to
submit the additional deposit by the date specified by the Land Development
Engineering Division, the Land Development Division shall suspend or revoke the
development permit, in compliance with the provisions of this Code and order
that work on the project be ceased.
   (d)   Refunds. Upon completion of the work, unused funds shall be returned
to the developer within 60 days following the quality control inspection
approvals.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 83.15.050 Land Development Engineering Division Authority.
   The Land Development Engineering Division shall have authority to adopt
reasonable rules and regulations to clarify, interpret, and enforce the
provisions of this Chapter. The Land Development Engineering Division may
approve variations when the variations are not detrimental to the life, health,
safety or welfare of the public and are necessary because of particular or
peculiar circumstances, and will achieve the same level of protection as the
original condition.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 83.15.060 Authority to Contract.
   For the purpose of the Chapter, the Land Development Engineering Division
may retain, on behalf of the County, independent engineers to serve as the
quality control engineer on projects regulated by this Chapter using a standard
form contract approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 83.15.070 Expenditure of Funds.
   Authority to Expend Deposited Funds. The Land Development Engineering
Division shall have the authority to expend any remaining funds in the
developer's deposit to obtain compliance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009)
DIVISION 4: STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES AND ACTIVITIES
CHAPTER 84.01: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
Section
   
84.01.010   Purpose and Severability.
   
84.01.020   General Development Standards.
   
84.01.030   Agricultural Accessory Structures and Uses.
   
84.01.040   Commercial and Industrial Accessory Structures and Uses.
   
84.01.050   Residential Accessory Structures and Uses.
   
84.01.060   Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.
§ 84.01.010 Purpose and Severability.
   This Chapter establishes the regulations and criteria that determine the
location of compatible accessory structures and uses within various land use
zoning districts. The purpose of this Chapter is also intended to provide for
the creation of accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units in
accordance with applicable state law. If for any reason any provision in this
Chapter is declared invalid, then all other provisions shall remain valid and
enforceable.
(Ord. 4383, passed - -2020)
§ 84.01.020 General Development Standards.
   (a)   Land Use Zoning District Regulations Applicable. Unless otherwise
provided, accessory structures and uses shall be subject to the same
regulations as the primary structure or use, including projections into
setbacks specified in §
83.02.080 (Allowed Projections).
   (b)   Legally Established Primary Use. An accessory structure or use shall
always exist in conjunction with, and never without, a legally established
primary structure or primary use that has the same common owner. Where the
primary use is a residence, it shall not be enclosed within an accessory
structure. Where the primary use has not yet been established, an accessory
structure may only be built subject to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit
in compliance with
Chapter 84.25 (Temporary Structures and Uses).
   (c)   Use of Accessory Structure. The use of an accessory structure may be
for either a primary or an accessory use allowed by the applicable land use
zoning district.
   (d)   Determination of Accessory Uses. In addition to the accessory uses
specifically provided for by this Chapter or elsewhere within this Development
Code, each land use shall be deemed to include other accessory uses that are
necessarily and customarily associated with and are clearly incidental and
subordinate to the primary land use. Whenever the accessory uses are
questioned, the Director shall be responsible for determining if a proposed
accessory use meets the criteria in this Chapter. Before making a
determination, the Director shall give notice to contiguous property owners in
compliance with §
85.02.030 (Staff Review with Notice).
   (e)   Maximum Site Coverage. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter,
the combination of accessory and primary structures on a parcel shall not
exceed the maximum site coverage allowed by the applicable land use zoning
district regulations in Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land
Uses).
   (f)   Location on Same or Contiguous Parcel. Accessory structures or uses,
which may or may not entail the use of a structure, shall be located on either:
      (1)   The same parcel as the primary structure or use; or
      (2)   A contiguous parcel that is owned by the same owner who owns the
parcel that has the primary structure or use, with the exception of:
         (A)   Guest housing and accessory dwelling units in compliance with §
84.01.050(a), below.
         (B)   Those properties that touch property lines of a subject parcel
when the lines are projected across public or private rights of way, easements,
roads, streets, or railroad rights of way.
         (C)   Utilities shall not be constructed across the property line(s)
of two or more contiguous parcels. If the placement of proposed utilities would
otherwise cross the property line of two or more contiguous parcels held by the
same owner, the property owner shall apply for and receive an approved
voluntary lot merger before issuance of a building permit.
(Ord. 4383, passed - -2020; Ord. 4393, passed - -2020)
§ 84.01.030 Agricultural Accessory Structures and Uses.
   This Section provides standards for accessory structures and uses that are
related to a primary agricultural use.
   (a)   Animal Keeping. Animal keeping activities are governed by
Chapter 84.04 (Animal Keeping) of this Code.
   (b)   Row Field Tree and Nursery Crop and Animal Product Sales Stand. The
retail trade of plant or animal products primarily grown on the subject
property shall be allowed when displayed from one stand with a floor area no
larger than 200 square feet on parcels greater than 10,000 square feet in area.
Standards for produce stands are provided in
Chapter 84.03 (Agritourism Enterprises) of this Code.
   (c)   Caretaker Housing. The caretaker dwelling unit shall be subject to
accessory dwelling unit development standards in §
84.01.060(e).
   (d)   Seasonal Labor Quarters. Labor quarters for agricultural operations
that are limited to three months of the year that encompass the harvest season
of the agricultural product may utilize recreational vehicles as temporary
labor quarters. A Site Plan Permit shall still be required to ensure proper
services are supplied to the temporary laborers. Also, a Special Use Permit
shall be required to monitor the use.
(Ord. 4383, passed - -2020)
§ 84.01.040 Commercial and Industrial Accessory Structures and Uses.
   This Section provides standards for accessory structures and uses that are
related to primary commercial and industrial uses.
   (a)   Exterior Storage. Exterior storage shall comply with Title 3 (Health
and Sanitation and Animal Regulations) of the County Code. Screening of
exterior storage shall comply with §
83.02.060 (Screening and Buffering).
   (b)   Caretaker Housing. The caretaker dwelling unit shall be subject to
accessory dwelling unit development standards in §
84.01.060(e).
   (c)   Seasonal Labor Quarters. Labor quarters for commercial or industrial
operations that are limited to three months of the year may utilize
recreational vehicles as temporary labor quarters. A Site Plan Permit shall
still be required to ensure proper services are supplied to the temporary
laborers. Also, a Special Use Permit shall be required to monitor the use.
Failure to obtain both the Site Plan Permit and the Special Use Permit required
under this subsection shall render the placement, use and/or occupancy of
recreational vehicles or similar vehicles unlawful and subject to enforcement
under
Chapter 86.09 of this Code.
(Ord. 4383, passed - -2020)
§ 84.01.050 Residential Accessory Structures and Uses.
   This Section provides standards for Accessory Structures and Uses that are
related to residential single-family and multi-family dwelling units (e.g.,
play yards, pools, storage sheds, etc.) or that are residential in nature
(e.g., guest housing, accessory dwelling units, etc.).
   (a)   Number of Accessory Residential Units. In addition to a single-family
or multi-family dwelling unit, unless indicated otherwise a combination of two
of the following additional accessory units shall be allowed; parcels five
acres in size or greater shall be allowed to have three of the following:
      (1)   Accessory Dwelling Unit. An accessory dwelling unit shall be
located on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit and may be attached,
detached or converted from an existing structure. Refer to §
84.01.060(d) for additional information on types of accessory dwelling units
and their standards. Additional accessory dwelling units may be allowed on
parcels with multi-family dwelling structures pursuant to §
84.01.060(g).
      (2)   Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit. A junior accessory dwelling unit
shall be located on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit. Refer to §
84.01.060(d) for additional information on junior accessory dwelling units and
their standards.. Only one junior accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed per
parcel.
      (3)   Guest House. Guest housing shall be located on the same parcel as
the primary dwelling unit and shall be separated from it by at least ten feet.
Guest housing shall be for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the
primary dwelling unit and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate
dwelling; the guest house may be used as a short-term rental when in compliance
with
Chapter 84.28 (Short-Term Residential Rentals). In the Single Residential (RS)
or the Multiple Residential (RM) land use zoning districts on parcels less than
two and one-half acres in size, the guest housing unit shall not extend in
front of the primary structure. The provisions of §
84.21.030(i) shall apply to a manufactured home used as guest housing.
   (b)   Parking. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, parking for
accessory residential dwelling units shall comply with
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards).
   (c)   Carport and/or Garage.  Detached carports or garages shall be limited
to 1,200 square feet when located on parcels that are less than 20,000 square
feet in size.
   (d)   Other Residential Accessory Structures and Uses. See §
83.02.080 (Allowed Projections into Setbacks).
      (1)   Except in the Mountain Region, structures and uses such as cabanas,
tennis courts, ramadas, water towers and wells, swimming pools, or storage
buildings shall not extend in front of the primary structure where the primary
structure faces a street right-of-way.
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units may be located in front of the primary
structure when in compliance with setback standards.
      (3)   Ground mounted solar may be located in front of the primary
structure when in compliance with setback standards, screened and not
prominently visible from the street.
   (e)   Detached Storage Structures. Parcels that are one acre or less in size
shall be limited to only one detached storage structure that exceeds 120 square
feet and the storage structure shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. Except in
the Mountain Region, detached storage structures shall not extend in front of
the primary structure where the primary structure faces a right-of-way.
   (f)   Freight Containers and Similar Storage-Type Structures.
      (1)   Freight containers, railroad cars, intermodal containers, and other
similar storage-type structures shall be allowed as accessory structures in the
RS (Single Residential) or RM (Multiple Residential) land use zoning districts
provided that they are compatible with the appearance of the on-site primary
structure and the surrounding neighborhood and setting. A Compatibility
Determination application shall be approved by the Planning Division of the
Land Use Services Department to allow such a structure. Screening such a
structure from view from the street or the physical alteration of such a
structure, such as painting or otherwise altering the structure, may be
considered in the approval of the application. Such railroad car, container or
similar storage-type structure shall be placed behind the primary structure and
not prominently visible from the street.
      (2)   Freight containers, railroad cars, intermodal containers, and other
similar storage-type structures shall be allowed as accessory structures in the
Agriculture (AG) or Rural Living (RL) land use zoning districts provided that
they shall be altered, either painted or structurally altered, to appear to be
similar to, and compatible with, the appearance of the on-site primary
structure and the surrounding neighborhood or to blend in with the surrounding
environment. Such railroad car, container or similar storage-type structure
shall be allowed provided that the container can be placed behind the primary
structure and not prominently visible from the street.
   (g)   Animal Keeping. Accessory animal keeping shall be conducted as
specified in
Chapter 84.04 (Animal Keeping).
   (h)   Exterior Storage. Exterior storage shall be fully and solidly screened
and kept below the level of the fence or other screening mechanism. Exterior
storage shall comply with Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal
Regulations) of the County Code. Screening of exterior storage shall comply
with §
83.02.060 (Screening and Buffering).
   (i)   Residential Crop Production. Accessory crop production shall be
allowed on parcels of 10,000 square feet or more, with a temporary sales
facility for plant or animal products grown on the subject property. The sales
facility shall not be larger than 200 square feet in area and shall display
produce for sale for no longer than 72 hours in any calendar month. Standards
for produce stands are provided in
Chapter 84.03 (Agritourism Enterprises). This does not include wholesale or
retail nurseries.
   (j)   Private Office. A private office shall be for the sole use of the
dwelling unit occupants within a primary structure and shall have no external
advertising or signs.
   (k)   Compatibility. In the RS (Single Residential) and RM (Multiple
Residential) land use zoning districts, the appearance of an accessory
structure shall be similar to, and compatible with, the appearance of the
primary structure and the surrounding neighborhood and setting.
   (l)   Storage of Firewood. The storage of firewood shall comply with
Chapter 84.09 (Firewood Storage).
(Ord. 4383, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4400, passed --2021)
§ 84.01.060 Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.
   (a)   General Provision. Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory
dwelling units shall comply with all provisions of this Chapter as well as the
underlying zoning district.
   (b)   Location Criteria. Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory
dwelling units shall be permitted where allowed in compliance with Division 2
(Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and on any lot that contains
a proposed or an existing dwelling. Accessory dwelling units and junior
accessory dwelling units shall not be permitted in those areas where a
development moratorium has been imposed, including a moratorium for water or
sewer connection, whether imposed by the County or another public agency.
   (c)   Common Ownership, Occupancy, and Rental Terms.
      (1)   Accessory dwelling units are not intended for sale separate from
the primary residence but may be rented separately from the primary residence
in all regions of the County for a term longer than 30 days, or in the Mountain
and Desert Regions for a term less than 30 days provided the short-term rental
unit complies with
Chapter 84.28 (Short-Term Residential Rentals) and is not a unit constructed
pursuant to Subdivision (g) below.
      (2)   Junior accessory dwelling units require owner-occupancy in the
single-family residence in which the junior accessory dwelling unit will be
permitted. The owner may reside in either the remaining portion of the
structure or the newly created junior accessory dwelling unit. Owner-occupancy
shall not be required if the owner is a governmental agency, land trust, or
housing organization. If the owner chooses not to reside in the junior
accessory dwelling unit, then the recordation of a deed restriction, which
shall run with the land, shall be filed with the permitting agency, shall be
required and shall include both of the following:
         (A)   A prohibition on the sale of the junior accessory dwelling unit
separate from the sale of the single-family residence, including a statement
that the deed restriction may be enforced against future purchasers.
         (B)   A restriction on the size and attributes of the junior accessory
dwelling unit that conforms with this Section.
   (d)   Types of Units.
      (1)   Attached unit. An accessory dwelling unit that is attached to the
proposed or existing primary dwelling. Attached units may have a separate
entrance or share a common entrance with the primary dwelling. The maximum size
of an attached accessory dwelling unit is 1,200 square feet of livable space.
      (2)   Detached Unit. An accessory dwelling unit that is separated from
the proposed or existing primary dwelling. The detached accessory dwelling unit
shall be considered the primary unit if it is a larger size than the primary
dwelling. The maximum size of a detached accessory dwelling unit is 1,200
square feet of livable space.
      (3)   Converted Existing Structure or Space. An accessory dwelling unit
that is created from, an existing space (e.g. master bedroom, attached garage,
storage area, or similar use), or existing structure (e.g. detached garage,
barn, storage structure or existing residential structure) on the lot of the
primary residence that is converted into an independent living unit. This may
also include an existing primary residence that is converted to an accessory
dwelling unit when a larger dwelling is established. The accessory dwelling
unit may exceed 1,200 square feet of livable space when converted from an
existing space or structure, but may not expanded the physical dimension of the
existing space or structure unless otherwise authorized by §65852.2 of the
Government Code.
      (4)   Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit. A specific type of conversion of
existing space that is contained entirely within an existing or proposed
single-family residence. A junior accessory dwelling units is no more than 500
square feet in size for livable space. The maximum size can be increased up to
150 square feet if necessary to allow for ingress and egress to the unit. A
junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities, or
may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure. A junior accessory
dwelling unit shall have a minimum of an efficiency kitchen.
   (e)   Development Standards for Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior
Accessory Dwelling Units. The development standards for an accessory dwelling
unit and junior accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the following
additional requirements:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, an accessory dwelling
unit or junior accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all development
standards of the land use zoning designation in which the lot is located.
      (2)   Written confirmation from the sewer district having jurisdiction of
the availability of sewer service for the accessory dwelling unit or written
approval from the Division of Environmental Health Services for use on an
existing or new septic system shall be obtained. Holding tanks shall not be
permitted for accessory dwelling units.
      (3)   Written confirmation from the water district having jurisdiction of
the availability of water service for the accessory dwelling unit or written
approval from the Division of Environmental Health Services for use of an
existing or new well shall be obtained.
      (4)   In addition to the requirements of §84.01.020 (General Development
Standards), the minimum accessory dwelling unit size will be determined by the
current edition of the California Residential Code or as certified by
California Department of Housing and Community Development. In no event shall
the minimum square footage for either an attached or detached accessory
dwelling unit prohibit an efficiency unit as defined in §17958.1 of the Health
and Safety Code.
      (5)   Approval for setbacks from the applicable Fire Department shall be
required prior to the issuance of a building permit for an accessory dwelling
unit.
      (6)   Approval for site drainage, egress, and exit requirements from the
Building and Safety Division shall be required prior to the issuance of a
building permit for an accessory dwelling unit.
   (f)   Development Standard Exemptions. An accessory dwelling unit and junior
accessory dwelling unit are exempt from the following development standards:
      (1)   Lot Coverage. Lot coverage requirements shall not preclude the
construction or either an attached or detached accessory dwelling units that is
at least 800 square feet in size.
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (A)   No setback shall be required for an existing living area or
accessory structure or a structure constructed in the same location and to the
same dimensions as an existing structure that is converted to an accessory
dwelling unit or to a portion of an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory
dwelling unit.
         (B)   A setback of more than four feet or rear and interior side yards
shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit not otherwise constructed in
accordance with Subparagraph (A) above.
      (3)   Fire Sprinklers. Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory
dwelling units are not required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not
required for the primary dwelling.
      (4)   Utility Connections. Unless an accessory dwelling unit is
constructed with a new single-family dwelling, an applicant is not required to
install new or separate utility connections and shall not be subject to
separate utility connection fee or capacity charge for an accessory dwelling
unit described in Paragraph (1) of Subdivision (g) below.
      (5)   Parking. The parking requirements for accessory dwelling units, as
set forth in
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards), shall not apply in any of the
following instances:
         (A)   The unit is considered a junior accessory dwelling unit.
         (B)   The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile
walking distance of public transit.
         (C)   The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally
and historically significant historic district.
         (D)   The accessory dwelling unit is part of the proposed or existing
primary residence or a converted accessory structure.
         (E)   When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to
the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit.
         (F)   When a car share vehicle located within one block of the
accessory dwelling unit.
         (G)   When a garage, carport or covered parking structure is
demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit
or converted into an accessory dwelling unit, the off-street covered parking
does not need to be replaced.
   (g)   By-Right Permitting Exemptions. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary, an application for a building permit for a use authorized by Division
2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) shall be approved to create
any of the following:
      (1)   One accessory dwelling unit and junior accessory dwelling unit per
lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling if all of the following
apply:
         (A)   The accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit is
within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling or existing space of a
single-family dwelling or accessory structure and may include an expansion of
not more than 150 square feet beyond the same physical dimensions as the
existing accessory. An expansion beyond the physical dimensions of the existing
accessory structure shall be limited to accommodating ingress and egress.
         (B)   The space has exterior access from the proposed or existing
single-family dwelling.
         (C)   The side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire and safety.
         (D)   The junior accessory dwelling unit, if applicable, complies with
the requirements of § 65852.22 of the Government Code.
      (2)   One detached, new construction, accessory dwelling unit that does
not exceed four-foot rear and interior side setbacks for a lot with a proposed
or existing single-family dwelling, provided the total floor area is not more
than 800 square feet and a height of 16 feet. The accessory dwelling unit may
be combined with a junior accessory dwelling unit described in Paragraph (1) of
this Subdivision.
      (3)   Multiple accessory dwelling units within the portions of existing
multifamily dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, including,
but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics,
basements, or garages, if each unit complies with State building standards for
dwellings. The County shall allow at least one accessory dwelling unit and a
maximum of 25 percent of the existing multifamily dwelling units.
      (4)   Not more than two accessory dwelling units that are located on a
lot that has an existing multifamily dwelling, but are detached from that
multifamily dwelling and are subject to a height limit of 16 feet and four-foot
rear and interior side setback.
(Ord. 4383, passed - -2020; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
CHAPTER 84.02: ADULT BUSINESSES
Section
   
84.02.010   Purpose.
   
84.02.020   Definitions.
   
84.02.030   Location and Buffer Requirements.
   
84.02.040   Establishment of an Adult Business.
   
84.02.050   Operating Standards.
§ 84.02.010 Purpose.
   It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter of the County Code to regulate
the operations of adult businesses, which tend to have judicially recognized
adverse secondary effects on the community, including, but not limited to,
increases in crime in the vicinity of adult businesses; degradation of the
unincorporated County’s commercial and industrial base; increases in vacancies
in residential areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with
residential property owners’ enjoyment of their properties when such properties
are located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in
crime, litter, noise, and vandalism; and the deterioration of neighborhoods.
Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse
secondary effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the
vicinity of adult businesses while at the same time protecting the First
Amendment rights of those individuals who desire to own, operate or patronize
adult businesses.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 84.02.020 Definitions.
   The words and phrases included in this Chapter shall employ the definitions
found in §
810.01.030(l) of the Development Code, entitled “Adult Business” unless
otherwise stated or if it is clearly apparent from the context that another
meaning is intended. In addition to those definitions, the following
definitions shall apply to this Chapter:
   (a)   PARK shall mean a non-commercial publicly owned area of land operated
by San Bernardino County, or a city or special district within the County that
is developed for active or passive recreation, providing features such as open
grassy areas, sports and play fields, courts, gymnasiums, playgrounds, and
picnic areas. Not included are trails, nature preserves, or privately owned
recreation facilities developed to offer recreation to paying customers.
   (b)   SCHOOL shall mean any child or day care facility, or an institution of
learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those
courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained
pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition
includes nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high
school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it
does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education,
including a community or junior college, college, or university.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 84.02.030 Location and Buffer Requirements.
   (a)   Adult businesses shall only be established in the General Commercial
(CG) or Community Industrial (IC) land use zoning districts and shall be
subject to the location and design standards specified by this Chapter, and the
approval of an Adult Business Regulatory Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.21 (Adult Business Regulatory Permit).
   (b)   Required Separation Distance from Other Uses. An adult business shall
not be established or located within:
      (1)   Five hundred feet of the following:
         (A)   Any County or city land use zoning district that contains the
words “Residence” or “Residential” within its title.
         (B)   Any city land use zoning district that permits residential
development (other than caretakers residences) by right, including city pre-
zoning of unincorporated lands for which an annexation has been filed with,
accepted by, and is being actively processed by LAFCO prior to the effective
date of this Chapter.
         (C)   Any place of worship as defined in §
810.01.170.
         (D)   Any school as defined in §
84.02.020.
         (E)   Any park as defined in §
84.02.020.
      (2)   Two hundred fifty feet of the following:
         (A)   Any residential use located within a County land use zoning
district that contains the words “Rural Living.”
         (B)   Any residential use located within the IC land use zoning
district.
   (c)   Separation of Adult Businesses. An adult business shall not be
established or located within 1,000 feet of an existing adult business. If two
or more existing adult businesses are located in closer proximity to each other
than 1,000 feet, then in determining which of the businesses is or are
nonconforming, preference shall be given in the order of the respective lengths
of continuous uninterrupted operation of the businesses.
   (d)   Distance Measurement. For the purposes of this Chapter, distances
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures,
from the nearest point of the parcel on which the adult business is or will be
located to the nearest property line of a land use or land use zoning district
described in Subdivision (a) of this Section, or to the nearest point of the
structure in which an adult business described in Subdivision (b), of this
Section, is located.
(Ord. 4011, passed 2007; Am. Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 84.02.040 Establishment of an Adult Business.
   “Establishment of an adult business” shall mean any of the following:
   (a)   The opening or commencement of any “adult business” as a new business;
   (b)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an “adult
business,” to any “adult business;”
   (c)   The addition of any “adult business” to any other existing “adult
business;”
   (d)   The relocation of any “adult business;” or
   (e)   Physical changes that expand the square footage of an existing “adult
business” by more than ten percent.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 84.02.050 Operating Standards.
   (a)   Hours of Operation. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator,
manager, employee or independent contractor of an adult business to allow such
adult business to remain open for business, or to license any employee to
engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale,
provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:
00 a.m. of any day, excepting here from an “adult hotel/motel.”
   (b)   On-Site Manager. All adult businesses shall have a responsible person
who shall be at least 18 years of age and shall be on the premises to act as
manager at all times during which the business is open. No performer may serve
as the manager. The individual(s) designated as the on-site manager shall
obtain an Adult Business Non-Performer License in compliance with
Chapter 29 of Division 1 of Title 4 of the County Code, shall provide his/her
name to the County Sheriff to receive all complaints and shall be given by the
owner and/or operator the responsibility and duty to address and immediately
resolve all violations taking place on the premises.
   (c)   Regulation of Adult Booth/Individual Viewing Area.
      (1)   No adult booth/individual viewing area shall be occupied by more
than one individual at a time.
      (2)   Each adult booth/individual viewing area within the adult business
shall be visible from a continuous and accessible main aisle in a public
portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door, curtain,
wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing
the entire interior of the adult booth/individual viewing area from the main
aisle. Any adult business may have more than one manager station in order to
ensure compliance with this regulation. At all times, the manager station(s)
shall be maintained to ensure a clear line of sight into the interior of the
adult/booth individual viewing area. Further, no one shall maintain any adult
booth/individual viewing area in any configuration unless the entire interior
wherein the picture or entertainment that is viewed is visible from the manager
station(s). The entire body of any patron in any adult booth/individual viewing
area must be visible from the main aisle and the manager station(s) without the
assistance of mirrors or any other device.
      (3)   No doors are permitted on an adult booth/individual viewing area.
No partially or fully enclosed adult booth/individual viewing areas or
partially or fully concealed adult booth/individual viewing areas shall be
maintained.
      (4)   No holes or other openings shall be permitted between adult booths/
individual viewing areas. Any such hole or opening shall be repaired within 24
hours using “pop” rivets to secure metal plates over the hole or opening to
prevent patrons from removing the metal plates.
      (5)   No beds, couches or chairs with a sitting area greater than 24
inches wide shall be permitted in an adult booth/individual viewing area.
   (d)   Interior of Premises/Screening. No exterior door or window on the
premises of an adult business shall be propped or kept open at any time while
the business is open and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque
coverings at all times.
   (e)   Displays of Adult-Oriented Materials. All signs or structures,
advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials characterized or
distinguished on matters describing or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” as defined in this Code, shall be
completely screened from public view as viewed from adjacent sidewalks or
public rights-of-way.
   (f)   Signs. All adult businesses shall comply with the following sign
requirements, in addition to those provided elsewhere in this Code. Should a
conflict exist between the requirements of other provisions of the Code and
this Subdivision, the more restrictive shall prevail. If an adult business does
not serve alcohol, it shall post a notice prior to entry to the area of public
assembly and within ten feet of every entrance used by customers for access to
the establishment, stating that persons below the age of 18 years of age are
prohibited from entering onto the premises or within the confines of the adult
business. This notice shall be posted on a wall in a place of prominence. The
dimensions of the notice shall be no less than six inches by six inches, with a
minimum typeface of 25 points. If the adult business serves alcohol, it shall
comply with all notice and posting requirements of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Department.
   (g)   Exterior Lighting Requirements. All exterior areas, including parking
lots, of the adult business shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1.50 foot
candle, maintained and evenly distributed at ground level with appropriate
devices to screen, deflect or diffuse the lighting in such manner as to prevent
glare or reflected light from creating adverse impacts on adjoining and nearby
public and private properties and to avoid light pollution. Inoperable and/or
broken lights shall be replaced within 24 hours.
   (h)   Interior Lighting Requirements. All interior areas of the adult
business, excepting therefrom adult hotels/motels, shall be illuminated
according to the standard of the California Building Code, maintained and
evenly distributed at floor level. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be
replaced within 24 hours, excepting here from an “adult hotel/motel.”
   (i)   Regulation of Public Restroom Facilities. All restrooms available for
patron use shall be separated facilities for male and female patrons. The
restrooms shall be free from adult-oriented material. Only one person shall be
allowed in each restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, in
which case the adult business shall employ a restroom attendant of the same sex
as the restroom users who shall be present in the public portion of the
restroom during operating hours. The attendant shall ensure that no person of
the opposite sex is permitted into the restroom, and that not more than one
person is permitted to enter a restroom stall, unless otherwise required by
law, and that the restroom facilities are used only for their intended sanitary
purposes. Access to restrooms for patron use shall not require passage through
an area used as a dressing area by performers.
   (j)   Interior Areas. The surfaces of all interior areas of any adult
business shall be kept free of any bodily fluids or excretion that would aid in
the transmission of any communicable diseases.
   (k)   Trash. All interior trash cans shall be emptied into a single locked
trash bin lined with a plastic bag or with individually bagged trash at least
once a day. At least four times a day, the front and rear exteriors of any
adult business, along with the parking lot, shall be inspected for trash and
debris and any trash and debris found shall be immediately removed and placed
into a single locked trash bin lined with a plastic bag.
   (l)   Adult Business Offering Adult Live Entertainment—Additional Operating
Requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to adult
businesses providing adult live entertainment:
      (1)   No person shall perform adult live entertainment for patrons of an
adult business except upon a permanently fixed stage at least 18 inches above
the level of the floor, and surrounded with a three foot high barrier or by a
fixed rail at least 30 inches in height. No patron shall be permitted on the
stage while the stage is occupied by a performer(s) and/or adult cabaret dancer
(s). This provision shall not apply to an individual viewing area where the
performer is completely separated from the area in which the performer is
viewed by an individual by a permanent, floor to ceiling, solid barrier.
      (2)   No performer or adult cabaret dancer shall be within six feet of a
patron, measured horizontally, while the performer or adult cabaret dancer is
performing adult live entertainment. While on stage, no performer or adult
cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall
have physical contact with any performer or adult cabaret dancer.
      (3)   As to off stage performances, no performer or adult cabaret dancer
shall perform “adult live entertainment” off stage. As to an adult cabaret
dancer performing off stage, a distance of at least six feet shall be
maintained between the adult cabaret dancer and the patron(s) at all times.
During off stage performances, no adult cabaret dancer shall have physical
contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any
adult cabaret dancer.
      (4)   While on the premises, no performer or adult cabaret dancer shall
have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact
with a performer or adult cabaret dancer, which physical contact involves the
touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of
the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of
any other person’s body either before or after any adult live entertainment or
off-stage performances by such performer or adult cabaret dancer. Patrons shall
be advised of the no touching requirements by signs and, if necessary, by
employees of the establishment. This prohibition does not extend to incidental
touching.
      (5)   Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching
requirements by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between
patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less
than one inch in size. If necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the
separation and no touching requirements by employees of the establishment.
      (6)   All employees of the adult facility, except therefrom performers
while performing on the fixed stage, while on or about the premises or tenant
space, shall wear at a minimum an opaque covering which covers their specified
anatomical areas.
      (7)   Patrons shall not throw money to performers, place monies in the
performers’ costumes or otherwise place or throw monies on the stage. If
patrons wish to pay or tip performers, payment or tips may be placed in
containers. Patrons shall be advised of this requirement by signs conspicuously
displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and
utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size. If
necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the tipping and gratuity
requirements by employees of the adult business.
      (8)   The adult business shall provide dressing rooms for performers,
that are separated by gender and exclusively dedicated to the performers' use
and which the performers shall use. Same gender performers may share a dressing
room. Patrons shall not be permitted in dressing rooms.
      (9)   The adult business shall provide an entrance/exit to the
establishment for performers that is separate from the entrance/exit used by
patrons, which the performers shall use at all times.
      (10)   The adult business shall provide access for performers between the
stage and the dressing rooms that is completely separated from the patrons. If
such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall
provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for performers between the
dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier
separating the patrons and the performers capable of (and which actually
results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and performers and
the patrons must also be three feet away from the walk aisle. Nothing in this
section is intended to exempt the adult business from compliance with the
provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining to
handicapped accessibility.
      (11)   All adult businesses featuring live entertainment shall employ
security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon
the following standards:
         (A)   Provide at least one security guard at all times while the
business is open.
         (B)   If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 21
persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty.
         (C)   Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of
law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of these
regulations. Security guard(s) shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be
readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly
licensed and bonded as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of
state law. No security guard required pursuant to this Subdivision shall act as
a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant
of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.
         (D)   Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 30 minutes after the
established closing time of the facility, security guard(s) shall regularly
patrol the parking lot and adjacent outdoor areas of the facility to maintain
order therein and prevent any illicit or nuisance activity.
         (E)   Security guard(s) shall be regularly posted at the doors used by
the performers when said doors are in use.
         (F)   The adult business shall provide a security system that visually
records and monitors all parking lot areas as well as all entrances and exits
to or from the facility. The recordings shall have sufficient definition/
fidelity to allow for identification of persons entering or exiting the
premises. These recordings shall be retained on site for 30 days and shall be
made available within 24 hours if requested by a member of the County Sheriff’s
Department for a legitimate law enforcement purpose.
   (m)   Adult Motion Picture Theater Additional Operating Requirements. The
following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters:
      (1)   If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall
comply with each of the following provisions:
         (A)   Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the
like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or
auditorium area;
         (B)   Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating areas in
order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium area shall be visible
from the aisle at all times; and
         (C)   Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each
entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of
persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not
exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area.
   (n)   Employment of and Services Rendered to Persons under the Age of 18
Years is Prohibited; 21 if Liquor is Served.
      (1)   Employees/Independent Contractors. Employees and independent
contractors of an adult business must be at least 18 years of age. It shall be
unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer,
shareholder with a ten percent or greater interest, employees, or other person
in charge of any adult business to employ, contract with, or otherwise retain
any services in connection with the adult business with or from any person who
is not at least 18 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business,
employees and independent contractors of the adult business must be at least 21
years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, it shall be unlawful
for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with
a ten percent or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any
adult business to employ, contract with, or otherwise retain any services in
connection with the adult business with or from any person who is not at least
21 years of age. And said persons shall exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the true age of persons seeking to contract with, be employed by,
or otherwise service the adult business.
      (2)   Patrons. Patrons of an adult business must be at least 18 years of
age. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director,
officer, shareholder with a ten percent or greater interest, employee,
independent contractor, or other person in charge of any adult business to
permit to enter or remain within the adult business any person who is not at
least 18 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, patrons must
be at least 21 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, it
shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer,
shareholder with a ten percent or greater interest, employee, independent
contractor, or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter
or remain within the adult business any person who is not at least 21 years of
age. And said persons shall exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true
age of persons entering the adult business.
   (o)   X-Rated Movies. The selling, renting and/or displaying of x-rated
movies, videotapes, digital video discs (DVDs), compact discs CDs) and laser
discs shall be restricted to persons over 18 years of age or older. If an
establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to the
establishment to persons under 18 years of age sells, rents, or displays
movies, videos, DVDs, CDs or laser discs that have been rated “X” or rated “NC-
17” by the motion picture rating industry (Motion Picture Association of
America or “MPAA”), or which have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating,
and which consist of images that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, said movies, videos, DVDs, CDs, and laser discs shall be
located in a specific section of the establishment where these items are not
visible to persons under the age of 18 and from which persons under the age of
18 shall be prohibited.
   (p)   Inspections. Each owner, operator, manager, employee or independent
contractor of an adult business or other person in charge of an adult business
shall permit representatives of the County Sheriff, Department of Public
Health, Fire Department, Land Use Services Department, business license
division, and other County departments, to inspect the adult business for the
purpose of insuring compliance with the laws and operating standards applicable
to adult businesses at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such
inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 84.03: AGRITOURISM ENTERPRISES
Section
   
84.03.010   Purpose.
   
84.03.020   Applicability.
   
84.03.030   Permit Requirements and Development Standards.
§ 84.03.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the establishment and operation
of agritourism enterprises in order to maintain and preserve the rural
character, integrity, and property values of surrounding areas in which these
uses are located.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.03.020 Applicability.
   The permit requirements and standards provided in this Chapter apply to
agritourism enterprises where allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.03.030 Permit Requirements and Development Standards.
   The following permit requirements and development standards shall apply to
all agritourism enterprises.
   (a)   Permit Requirements and Development Standards.
      (1)   Scope of Use and Permit Requirements. The allowed scope of use,
minimum lot size, and permit requirements for an agritourism enterprise shall
be as provided in
Table 84-1.
Table 84-1
Permit Requirements and Development Standards for Agritourism Enterprises
Use/Permit Required Scope of Use/Event(4) Minimum Lot Size
Table 84-1
Permit Requirements and Development Standards for Agritourism Enterprises
Use/Permit                                                                              Minimum
Required    Scope of Use/Event(4)                                                       Lot
                                                                                        Size
Produce
Stand                                                                                   10,000
Permitted   Single structure that is 200 sq. ft. or less.                               sq. ft.
(no permit
required)
            All produce shall be grown on site.
            No other produce or merchandise allowed.
Small scale
use         Single structure greater than 200 sq. ft. and less than 3,000 sq. ft.       2 acres
Site Plan
Permit
            Not more than 15 automobiles allowed on site at any one time.(1) (2)
            Bed and breakfast home (up to 5 guest rooms).
            Small incidental food services operations not to include restaurants.
            Operations that do not require a permanent structure (e.g., educational
            tours).(3)
            No use of amplified music, or historical reenactments using gunfire or
            similar loud noise.
Medium
scale use   Single or multiple structures with a total area that is 3,000 sq. ft. or    5 acres
Minor Use   greater and less than 5,000 sq. ft.
Permit
            Not more than 25 automobiles allowed on site at any one time.(1) (2)
            Bed and breakfast inn/lodge (up to 10 guest rooms) [the requirements of §
            84.05.060(a) need not apply].
            No use of amplified music, or historical reenactments using gunfire or
            similar loud noise.
Large scale
use         Single or multiple structures with a total area that is 5,000 sq. ft. or    10
Conditional greater.                                                                    acres
Use Permit
            More than 25 automobiles allowed on site at any one time.(1) (2)
            Lodging having more than 10 guest rooms.
            Restaurants.
Notes:
(1)   This requirement refers only to the parking required and/or provided for the commercial
activities that are accessory to the primary agricultural uses. It shall not apply to the
parking provided for the primary agricultural activities (e.g., u-pick or u-cut operations,
etc.).
(2)   Parking for the commercial activities accessory to the primary agricultural uses shall be
provided in compliance with §
83.11.040 (Number of Parking Spaces Required) and Table 83-15 (Parking Requirements by Land
Use) specified for “General retail.” Parking area improvements shall be in compliance with §
83.11.090 (Parking and Loading Development Standards), or as specified in the approved permit
for the commercial agritourism enterprise.
(3)   If these operations are conducted year round, a Site Plan Permit shall be required. If
the project cannot meet the standards of this Section or any other regulations, the permit may
be elevated to a Minor Use Permit or a Conditional Use Permit. These operations shall have an
Environmental Health Services-approved wastewater disposal system and facilities. If no more
than four events are planned, a Temporary Special Event Permit shall be required.
(4)   The parameters in this column will dictate both the use/permit required and the minimum
lot size. The filing of a higher land use approval application shall not relieve a project of
the minimum lot size.
 
      (2)   Storage Areas. The total area of all storage areas shall not exceed
25 percent of the total floor area of the structures used for the agritourism
enterprise.
      (3)   Setbacks. Structures for agritourism enterprises shall be set back
from lot lines in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) unless a greater
setback is required by the applicable review authority.
   (b)   Operational Standards.
      (1)   Incidental to Primary Agricultural, Horticultural, Animal Husbandry
Use. An agritourism enterprise shall be incidental to the primary associated
agricultural, horticultural, or animal husbandry use being conducted on the
property. For the purposes of this Section, a primary agricultural,
horticultural, or animal husbandry use shall mean that:
         (A)   At least 50 percent of the total gross parcel area shall be
suitable and available for agricultural, horticultural animal husbandry or open
space use; and
         (B)   At least fifty percent of that 50 percent area (i.e., 25 percent
of the total gross parcel area) shall be in actual active agricultural,
horticultural, or animal husbandry use. For operations with a total area
greater than 200 acres, at least 40 acres must be actual active agricultural,
horticultural, or animal husbandry use.
      (2)   Operator. The agritourism enterprise shall be operated or
maintained by the owner, operator, or occupant of the land upon which the
primary associated agriculture, horticulture, or animal husbandry use is being
conducted.
      (3)   Hours of Operation. Hours of operation for outdoor activities shall
be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
      (4)   Private Special Events for Compensation. Private special events
(e.g. weddings, receptions, parties, etc.) or similar activities conducted for
compensation may be held, as follows.
         (A)   Up to five private special events in a 12-month time period
shall require a Site Plan Permit.
         (B)   Six to 12 private special events in a 12-month time period shall
require a Minor Use Permit.
         (C)   Thirteen or more private special events in a 12-month time
period shall require a Conditional Use Permit.
      (5)   Noise/Amplified Sound. All approved projects shall be operated in
compliance with the noise standards provided in §
83.01.080. All amplified sound being considered as part of a Conditional Use
Permit application shall emanate indoors, except as approved through a
Temporary Special Event Permit or when emanating at least 330 feet from the
nearest residence of other sensitive receptor on a neighboring parcel.
   (c)   Existing Structures/Uses. A structure existing before the adoption of
this Chapter may be used for an agritourism enterprise and shall be exempt from
the minimum lot area and floor area requirements specified in this Chapter,
provided that an expansion or enlargement the structure(s) shall not exceed 15
percent of the total floor area existing before adoption of this Chapter unless
a greater expansion is allowed through approval of a Minor Use Permit in
compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit).
   (d)   Additional Licenses and Permits. In addition to required land use
permits, an agritourism enterprise may be required to obtain licenses and
permits from other County Departments (e.g., business licenses from the County
Clerk, food service or sales licenses from the County Department of Public
Health, animal care licenses from the County Department of Public Health,
etc.).
   (e)   Seasonal Operations. Those operations that will be limited to three
months of the year that encompass the harvest season of the agricultural
product to which the tourism activity is an accessory use may be operated with
reduced standards. These shall include the following:
      (1)   Parking Area. The parking area does not need to be surfaced with a
minimum of two inches of asphaltic concrete paving or plant-mix surfacing but
shall be provided with a dust-proofed surface of slag, crushed rock, or an
equivalent measure.
      (2)   Sanitation Facilities. Toilets, potable water, lavatories,
wastewater may be used for seasonal operations in compliance with the
provisions required for a Temporary Special Event.
      (3)   Permit Required. Even though an operation may be seasonal, if a
structure is built, land use approvals shall be required in compliance with
Table 84-1 above.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4162, passed - -2012)
CHAPTER 84.04: ANIMAL KEEPING
Section
   
84.04.010   Purpose.
   
84.04.020   Applicability.
   
84.04.030   General Development Standards.
   
84.04.040   Exotic Animals.
   
84.04.050   Commercial Kennels and/or Catteries.
   
84.04.060   Private Kennels and/or Catteries.
   
84.04.070   Animal Keeping Allowed as Primary Use.
   
84.04.080   Animal Keeping Allowed with Conditional Use Permit.
   
84.04.090   Animal Keeping Allowed as Accessory Use.
§ 84.04.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that the keeping, raising, and
maintenance of animals do not create an adverse impact on adjacent properties
by reason of bright lights, dust, fumes, insect infestations, noise, odor, or
visual blight.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.04.020 Applicability.
   The regulations in this Chapter apply to all animal-keeping uses in the
County, except as otherwise provided in
Chapter 82.07 (Additional Agricultural Overlay).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.04.030 General Development Standards.
   (a)   Applicable Local Health and Animal Control Regulations. The keeping of
animals in all land use zoning districts shall be subject to the conditions of
the County Public Health Department and the regulations of Title 3 (Health and
Sanitation and Animal Regulations) of the County Code.
   (b)   Pre-Existing Uses. A legally established nonconforming animal-keeping
use shall be allowed to continue subject to
Chapter 84.17 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures).
   (c)   Allowed Uses. Animal-keeping uses shall be allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and shall comply
with the permit requirements and standards in this Chapter and other
requirements in this Development Code and the County Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.04.040 Exotic Animals.
   (a)   Accessory Residential Use. The keeping of exotic animals shall be an
accessory use to a single-family dwelling unit.
   (b)   Special Use Permit Requirements. The keeping of exotic animals shall
require a Special Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.14 (Special Use Permits).
      (1)   Before giving notice to adjacent property owners, the review
authority shall request that the County Veterinarian submit a statement
regarding the particular animal’s mature behavior and personality
characteristics. Notice given to adjacent property owners shall include a
description of the type of animal and its behavior characteristics.
      (2)   Approval of a Special Use Permit for an exotic animal shall not be
effective until the Code Enforcement Division receives written evidence that
the applicant has applied for and obtained the following:
         (A)   Permit from the County Public Health Department.
         (B)   Permit from the State Department of Fish and Game.
      (3)   Each Special Use Permit shall specify the periodic renewal period
and inspection requirements in compliance with
Chapter 85.14 (Special Use Permits).
   (c)   Standards. In addition to conditions imposed by the review authority
for the Special Use Permit, the keeping of exotic animals shall comply with the
following standards.
      (1)   The keeping of an exotic animal shall comply with all County Code
requirements, including setbacks from property lines and other dwellings as
identified in §
84.04.090 (b) (Setbacks).
      (2)   The keeping of an exotic animal shall comply with all applicable
Federal and State requirements.
      (3)   No more than two exotic animals over the age of six months shall be
kept as an accessory use to a single dwelling unit, unless a Conditional Use
Permit for a menagerie or zoo has been approved in compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit).
      (4)   Each exotic animal shall have sufficient area to be maintained and
exercised in a normal healthy manner as determined by the County Veterinarian.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.04.050 Commercial Kennels and/or Catteries.
   Commercial kennels and/or catteries, where allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses), shall be subject
to the regulations in this Section.
   (a)   Compliance with Health Regulations. The commercial kennel shall comply
with the provisions of Chapter 3 (Commercial Kennels) in Division 2 (Animals),
Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations), of the County Code. The
commercial cattery shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 12 (Catteries)
in Division 2 (Animals), Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal
Regulations), of the County Code.
   (b)   Permit Requirements. A commercial kennel and/or a cattery shall
require a Special Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.14 (Special Use Permits). If the establishment has both dogs and
cats, only one Special Use Permit shall be required. A Special Use Permit shall
not be effective until the Code Enforcement Division receives written evidence
that the applicant has applied for and obtained required permits from the
County Public Health Department.
   (c)   Minimum Parcel Size.  
Table 84-2 indicates the minimum parcel sizes required for commercial kennels
and/or catteries in the land use zoning districts indicated.
Table 84-2
Minimum Parcel Sizes for Commercial Kennels and/or Catteries
Minimum Parcel Size Land Use Zoning Districts or Overlay
Table 84-2
Minimum Parcel Sizes for Commercial Kennels and/or Catteries
Minimum Parcel Size Land Use Zoning Districts or Overlay
1 acre minimum      RS (Single Residential) in the AA (Additional Agriculture)
                    Overlay
                    Community Industrial (IC) in Phelan Community Planning Area
                    (PH/IC)
2.5 acre minimum    Resource Conservation (RC)
                    Commercial Rural (CR)
                    Rural Living (RL)
                    Agriculture (AG)
                    Service Commercial (CS)
                    Community Industrial (IC)
 
   (d)   Standards and Permit Requirements for Breeding Operations Within RC,
AG or RL Land Use Zoning Districts. In addition to conditions imposed by the
review authority for the Special Use Permit, commercial kennels and catteries
for breeding operations located within a Resource Conservation, Agriculture or
Rural Living Land Use Zoning Districts shall comply with the following
standards and permit requirements:
      (1)   Accessory Residential Use. A commercial kennel and/or cattery that
involves breeding shall be an accessory use to a single-family dwelling unit.
      (2)   Permit Requirements. A commercial kennel and/or cattery for up to
15 animals shall require a Special Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.14 (Special Use Permits). If the establishment has both dogs and
cats, only one Special Use Permit shall be required. A commercial kennel and/or
cattery for more than 15 animals shall require a Special Use Permit in
compliance with
Chapter 85.14 (Special Use Permits) and a Minor Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit).
      (3)   A Special Use Permit shall not be effective until the Code
Enforcement Division receives written evidence that the applicant has applied
for and obtained required permits from the County Public Health Department.
      (4)   Compliance with Health Regulations. The commercial kennel shall
comply with the provisions of Chapter 3 (Commercial Kennels) in Division 2
(Animals), Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations), of the
County Code. The commercial cattery shall comply with the provisions of Chapter
12 (Catteries) in Division 2 (Animals), Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and
Animal Regulations), of the County Code.
      (5)   Compliance with Land Use Zoning District Development Standards. The
keeping of dogs and cats shall comply with all County Code requirements,
including setbacks from property lines and other dwellings as specified in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses). In the event
there is a conflict between a provision in this Section and a provision in
Chapter 3 (Commercial Kennels), in
Division 2, Title 3, of the County Code, the stricter standard shall apply.
      (6)   Minimum Parcel Size. A minimum parcel size of two and one half
acres shall be required.
      (7)   Density of Animals and Maximum Number of Animals. Animal densities
shall be as follows:
 
Acreage                            Number of Animals Additional Animals
0 to less than 2.5 acres           As allowed by §  0
                                   84.04.090
2.5 to less than 5 acres           15                0
5 acres                            16 to 30          0
Each additional acre above 5 acres                   6 per acre
 
         A maximum of 50 dogs and/or cats shall be allowed regardless of the
size of the parcel(s).
      (8)   Setbacks. All animals shall be maintained at least 70 feet,
measured in a straight line, away from any structure or area used for human
habitation or public assembly (e.g. parks, churches, etc.) on adjoining
property. The area of human habitation shall not include cabanas, patios,
attached or detached private garages or storage buildings.
      (9)   Housing. All dogs shall be housed in the indoor portion of the
kennel from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. The kennel shall be a solid, four-walled
structure with a solid roof. Appropriate exercise areas shall be provided and
shall be sheltered from the elements and be secure. Adequate heating, cooling,
lighting, ventilation and bedding must be provided as required to the
individual needs of the animals.
      (10)   Inspections. Commercial kennels and/or catteries shall be
inspected by the County Public Health Department annually. The County Public
Health Department and the Code Enforcement Division shall conduct an inspection
jointly when necessary.
      (11)   Noise. Noise shall be attenuated to 55 dB(A) from the property
line.
      (12)   Light and Glare. Direct and indirect glare from the source shall
not cause glare upon adjacent property owners in compliance with
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
      (13)   Fencing. Fencing shall comply with
Chapter 3 (Commercial Kennels) in
Division 2 (Animals), Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations),
of the County Code.
      (14)   Screening. The Special Use Permit may require the use to be fully
screened from adjacent properties.
      (15)   Sign. One sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in area stating
“Private Kennel” with a 24-hour emergency phone number, shall be posted at all
entries to the parcel.
      (16)   Compliance with State Laws. The commercial kennel and/or cattery
shall comply with the State laws regarding the sale of dogs by breeders.
   (e)   Standards and Permit Requirements for Breeding Operations Within
Commercial or Industrial Districts. In addition to conditions imposed by the
review authority for the Special Use Permit, commercial kennels and catteries
for breeding operations located within commercial or industrial land use zoning
districts shall comply with the following standards and permit requirements:
      (1)   Caretaker’ Residence. If a commercial kennel and/or cattery that
involves breeding is located within a commercial or industrial land use zoning
district, a caretaker’s residence shall be located on-site or the use shall
have employees on-site 24-hour per day.
      (2)   Permit Requirements. A commercial kennel and/or cattery shall
require a Special Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.14 (Special Use Permits) and a Minor Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit).
      (3)   A Special Use Permit shall not be effective until the Code
Enforcement Division receives written evidence that the applicant has applied
for and obtained required permits from the County Public Health Department.
      (4)   Compliance with Health Regulations. The commercial kennel shall
comply with the provisions of
Chapter 3 (Commercial Kennels) in
Division 2 (Animals), Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations),
of the County Code. The commercial cattery shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 12 (Catteries) in
Division 2 (Animals), Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations),
of the County Code.
      (5)   Compliance with Land Use Zoning District Development Standards. The
keeping of dogs and cats shall comply with all County Code requirements,
including setbacks from property lines and other dwellings as specified in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses). In the event
there is a conflict between a provision in this Section and a provision in
Chapter 3 (Commercial Kennels), in
Division 2, Title 3, of the County Code, the stricter standard shall apply.
      (6)   Minimum Parcel Size. A minimum parcel size of two and one half
acres shall be required.
      (7)   Density of Animals and Maximum Number of Animals. Animal densities
shall be as follows:
 
Acreage                            Number of Animals Additional Animals
0 to less than 2.5 acres           As allowed by §  0
                                   84.04.090
2.5 to less than 5 acres           15                0
5 acres                            16 to 30          0
Each additional acre above 5 acres                   6 per acre
 
         A maximum of 200 dogs and/or cats shall be allowed regardless of the
size of the parcel(s).
      (8)   Setbacks. All animals shall be maintained at least 70 feet,
measured in a straight line, away from any structure or area used for human
habitation or public assembly (e.g. parks, churches, etc.) on adjoining
property. The area of human habitation shall not include cabanas, patios,
attached or detached private garages or storage buildings.
      (9)   Housing. All dogs shall be housed in the indoor portion of the
kennel from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. The kennel shall be a solid, four-walled
structure with a solid roof. Appropriate exercise areas shall be provided and
shall be sheltered from the elements and be secure. Adequate heating, cooling,
lighting, ventilation and bedding must be provided as required to the
individual needs of the animals.
      (10)   Inspections. Commercial kennels and/or catteries shall be
inspected by the County Public Health Department annually. The County Public
Health Department and the Code Enforcement Division shall conduct an inspection
jointly when necessary.
      (11)   Noise. Noise shall be attenuated to 55 dB(A) from the property
line.
      (12)   Light and Glare. Direct and indirect glare from the source shall
not cause glare upon adjacent property owners in compliance with
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
      (13)   Fencing. Fencing shall comply with
Chapter 3 (Commercial Kennels) in
Division 2 (Animals), Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations),
of the County Code.
      (14)   Screening. The Special Use Permit may require the use to be fully
screened from adjacent properties.
      (15)   Sign. One sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in area stating
“Private Kennel” with a 24-hour emergency phone number, shall be posted at all
entries to the parcel.
      (16)   Compliance with State laws. The commercial kennel and/or cattery
shall comply with the State laws regarding the sale of dogs by breeders.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.04.060 Private Kennels and/or Catteries. 
   Private kennels and/or catteries shall be subject to the regulations in this
Section.
   (a)   Accessory Residential Use. A private kennel and/or cattery shall be an
accessory use to a single-family dwelling unit.
   (b)   Permit Requirements. A private kennel and/or cattery shall require a
Special Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.14 (Special Use Permits). If the establishment has both dogs and
cats, only one Special Use Permit shall be required. A Special Use Permit shall
not be effective until the Code Enforcement Division receives written evidence
that the applicant has applied for and obtained required permits from the
County Public Health Department.
   (c)   Standards. In addition to conditions imposed by the review authority
for the Special Use Permit, private kennels and catteries shall comply with the
following standards:
      (1)   Compliance with Health Regulations. The private kennel shall comply
with the provisions of
Chapter 3 (Commercial Kennels) in
Division 2 (Animals), Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations),
of the County Code. The commercial cattery shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 12 (Catteries) in Division 2 (Animals), Title 3 (Health and Sanitation
and Animal Regulations), of the County Code.
      (2)   Compliance with Land Use Zoning District Development Standards. The
keeping of dogs and cats shall only be allowed within a Resources Conservation
(RC), Agriculture (AG) or Rural Living (RL) Land Use Zoning District and shall
comply with all County Code requirements, including setbacks from property
lines and other dwellings as specified in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses). In the event
there is a conflict between a provision in this Section and a provision in
Chapter 3 (Commercial Kennels), or
Chapter 12 (Catteries), in
Division 2, Title 3, of the County Code, the stricter standard shall apply.
      (3)   Minimum Parcel Size. A minimum parcel size of two and one half
acres shall be required.
      (4)   Setbacks. All animals shall be maintained at least 70 feet,
measured in a straight line, away from any structure or area used for human
habitation or public assembly (e.g. parks, churches, etc.) on adjoining
property. The area of human habitation shall not include cabanas, patios,
attached or detached private garages or storage buildings.
      (5)   Maximum Number of Animals. A maximum of 15 dogs and/or cats per
parcel shall be allowed.
      (6)   Housing. Unless all dogs or cats are kept in the house or garage at
night, all dogs or cats shall be housed in the indoor portion of the kennel
from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. The kennel shall be a solid, four-walled structure
with a solid roof. Appropriate exercise areas shall be provided and shall be
sheltered from the elements and be secure. Adequate heating, cooling, lighting,
ventilation and bedding must be provided as required to the individual needs of
the animals.
      (7)   Inspections. Private kennels and/or catteries shall be inspected by
the County Public Health Department annually. The County Public Health
Department and the Code Enforcement Division shall conduct an inspection
jointly when necessary.
      (8)   Noise. Noise shall be attenuated to 55 dB(A) from the property
line.
      (9)   Light and Glare. Direct and indirect glare from the source shall
not cause glare upon adjacent property owners in compliance with
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
      (10)   Fencing. Fencing shall comply with
Chapter 3 (Commercial Kennels) in
Division 2 (Animals), Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations),
of the County Code.
      (11)   Screening. The Special Use Permit may require the use to be fully
screened from adjacent properties.
      (12)   Sign. One sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in area stating
“Private Kennel” with a 24-hour emergency phone number, shall be posted at all
entries to the parcel.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.04.070 Animal Keeping Allowed as Primary Use.
   Animal keeping allowed as a primary use shall be subject to the regulations
in this Section.
   (a)   Compliance with Land Use Zoning District Development Standards. The
keeping of animals shall comply with all County Code requirements, including
setbacks from property lines and other dwellings as specified in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
   (b)   Minimum Parcel Size. The following minimum parcel sizes shall be
required for animal keeping as a primary use of the property.
      (1)   Two acres minimum shall be required in the Agricultural (AG),
Special Development (SD), Resource Conservation (RC), and Rural Living (RL)
Land Use Zoning Districts, unless otherwise noted in
Table 84-3 (Animal Keeping Allowed as Primary Use).
      (2)   One-half acre minimum shall be required in the Floodway (FW) Land
Use Zoning District.
   (c)   Parcel Area for Qualifying Number or Density of Animal Type. Parcel
area used to qualify one animal type shall not be reused to qualify another
animal type.
   (d)   Manure Management. Proper manure management shall be carried out in
compliance with Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations) of the
County Code.
   (e)   Standards. The standards in
Table 84-3 (Animal Keeping Allowed as Primary Use) shall apply to all animal
keeping allowed as a primary use. Densities shall be based upon the total area
of the subject property regardless of structures on-site or setback
requirements.
   (f)   Conditional Use Permit Requirement for Different Densities and Animal
Types. Primary animal keeping of densities greater than, or of animal types
different from, those listed in
Table 84-3 (Animal Keeping Allowed as Primary Use) shall be subject to a
Conditional Use Permit.
Table 84-3
Animal Keeping Allowed as Primary Use
Animal Type Animal Density Per Square Foot
            Land Use Zoning Districts and Overlay
            RC FW AG
            RL SD
Table 84-3
Animal Keeping Allowed as Primary Use
Animal Type                                        Animal Density Per Square
                                                   Foot
                                                   Land Use Zoning Districts
                                                   and Overlay
                                                   RC        FW       AG
                                                   RL        SD
                                                   See                See
Animal keeping as accessory use                    Table 84-5         Table 84-
                                                                      5
Aviary, apiary, or similar small animal farms      1/2 acre minimum   1/2 acre
                                                                      minimum
Cattle or buffalo                                  1/10,000           1/6,000
Fish raising                                       1 pond/acre
                                                   Maximum pond size = 1/
                                                   2 surface acre in area
                                                   Maximum 4 ponds per parcel
Horses                                             1/10,000           1/6,000
Hogs (9 maximum)                                   1/20,000           1/12,000
Sheep, female goats, and similar livestock         1/4,000            1/3,000
Male adult goats (4 maximum)
   Parcel less than 10 acres                    1                  1
   10 acres and above                           1/5 acres          1/5 acres
Rabbits and chinchillas (200 maximum)              50/10,000          50/10,000
(Minimum parcel = 1/2 acre)
Poultry
(Minimum parcel = 1/2 acre)
                                                   Less than 25
                                                   1 acre             If parcel
                                                   1 to less          less than
                                                   than 10   99       5 acres,
                                                   acres              then 99.
   Female                                                          If 5
                                                                      acres and
                                                   10 acres  99/10    above,
                                                   and above acres    then 99/
                                                                      5 acres

                                                   Less than 2/genus/ 2/genus/
   Male (9 maximum) (Roosters, drakes, ganders, 10 acres  parcel   parcel
etc.)                                              10 acres  2/genus/ 2/genus/
                                                   and above 5 acres  5 acres
Ostriches and emus                                 1/4,000            1/4,000
Alpacas and llamas                                 1/4,000            1/4,000
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.04.080 Animal Keeping Allowed with Conditional Use Permit.
   Animal keeping allowed with a Conditional Use Permit shall be subject to the
regulations in this Section and conditions imposed by the review authority in
compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Conditional Use Permit).
Table 84-4
Animal Keeping Allowed with Conditional Use Permit
Animal Type Minimum Parcel Size Land Use Zoning Districts and Overlay
Table 84-4
Animal Keeping Allowed with Conditional Use Permit
Animal Type                Minimum Parcel Size Land Use Zoning Districts and
                                               Overlay
Commercial poultry ranches 10 acres            RC
                                               RL
                                               FW
                                               SD
Cow and goat dairies       10 acres            AG
                                               FW
Calf-growing ranches       5 acres             AG
Hog ranches                                    FW
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.04.090 Animal Keeping Allowed as Accessory Use.
   Animal keeping allowed as an accessory use to primary residential uses shall
be subject to the regulations in this Section.
   (a)   Structures for Animal Maintenance and Care. Each animal keeping land
use shall include all structures necessary to maintain and care for the animals
(e.g., barn, coops, corral, pens, stables, etc.). The structures shall comply
with the development standards identified in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and in this
Section.
   (b)   Setbacks.
      (1)   Distance from Structures for Human Habitation or Assembly. All
animals, other than cats, dogs, canaries or birds of the psitacinae family,
shall be maintained at least 70 feet, measured in a straight line, away from
any structure or area used for human habitation or public assembly (e.g. parks,
churches, etc.) on adjoining property. The area of human habitation shall not
include cabanas, patios, attached or detached private garages or storage
buildings.
      (2)   Distance from Property Lines and Rights-of-Way. Animals shall be
maintained at least five feet away from interior side and rear property lines,
and 15 feet away from side street rights-of-way, excepting an alley or bridle
path, unless they comply with the Subdivision (3) (Enclosure), below.
      (3)   Enclosure. Animals may be maintained by a fence at least five feet
high and made of either chain link, wood with horizontal members no less than
six inches apart, solid masonry or other appropriate solid screening and
confining materials.
      (4)   Distance from Water Well. Animals shall be kept at least 100 feet
away from any domestic water well.
   (c)   Newborn Animal Exception. Offspring of animals maintained on the same
property in compliance with applicable laws and regulations that are less than
four months old or that have not been weaned, whichever is longer, shall not be
subject to the maximum density or number limitations established by this
Chapter.
   (d)   Parcel Area for Qualifying Number or Density of Animal Type. Parcel
area used to qualify one animal type shall not be reused to qualify another
animal type.
   (e)   Manure Management. Proper manure management shall be carried out in
compliance with Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations) of the
County Code.
   (f)   Compliance with Health Regulations. Animal keeping land uses shall
comply with public health laws regarding proper care and maximum number of
animals.
   (g)   Conditional Use Permit Requirement for Different Densities and Animal
Types. Accessory animal keeping of densities greater than, or of animal types
different from, those listed in
Table 84-5 (Animal Keeping Allowed as Accessory Use) shall be subject to a
Conditional Use Permit (e.g., educational animal projects, temporary grazing
operations, etc.).
   (h)   Standards. The standards in
Table 84-5 (Animal Keeping Allowed as Accessory Use) shall apply to all animal
keeping allowed as an accessory use. Densities shall be based upon the total
area of the subject property regardless of structures on-site or setback
requirements.
   (i)   Additional Standards for Animal Keeping as Accessory Use to Primary
Single-family Dwelling Unit.  In addition to the requirements in this Section,
the following provisions shall apply for animal keeping as an accessory use to
a primary single-family dwelling unit only:
      (1)   Combinations of Animal Types. Combinations of the animal types
shall be allowed, provided:
         (A)   The total number of animals in each category is not exceeded.
         (B)   Where a density ratio of animals per parcel area is specified,
the parcel area is allocated only once, to either a primary or accessory animal
keeping use. Parcel area used to qualify one animal type shall not be reused to
allow another animal type.
         (C)   Animal types that are limited only by a maximum number per
parcel are allowed in addition to any other accessory or primary animal keeping
use.
         (D)   Parcels with multi-family residential structures shall be
limited to the following animals for lots less than 7,200 square feet in size:
            (I)   Any combination of two dogs, cats, and/or pot-bellied pigs
(under 50 pounds) shall be allowed per unit.
            (II)   Any combination of two chickens (or similar fowl—hens only)
or rabbits or other similar small animals.
      (2)   Confined Animals.
         (A)   Animals that are normally maintained in aquariums, terrariums,
vivariums, birdcages, or similar devices shall be allowed as an accessory
animal keeping use, provided that the structure or device in which animals are
kept shall be:
            (I)   A maximum of 50 cubic feet; and
            (II)   Maintained within an enclosed building.
         (B)   The maximum number or density limitations for these confined
animal types shall comply with public health regulations.
   (j)   Additional Agriculture (AA) Overlay. See
Chapter 82.07 Additional Agriculture (AA) Overlay for additional animal keeping
regulations.
Table 84-5
Animal Keeping Allowed as Accessory Use
Animal Type All single-family dwelling units
Table 84-5
Animal Keeping Allowed as Accessory Use
                           All single-family dwelling units
Animal Type                Minimum Parcel Area (Sq. Maximum Density or Number
                           Ft.)
A combination of dogs and/ Less than 7,200          2/parcel or unit
or cats
                           7,200 - 9,999            3/parcel
                           10,000 - 19,999          4/parcel
                           20,000 or more           5/parcel(1)
Pot bellied pigs (under    Less than 7,200          2/parcel
200 lbs.)
                           7,200 - 9,999            3/parcel
                           10,000 - 19,999          4/parcel
                           20,000 or more           5/parcel(1)
Aviary, apiary, or similar 20,000 or more           Not allowed
small animal farms
Fish raising               20,000 or more           Not allowed
Poultry
   Female               Less than 7,200          2/parcel
                           7,200 - 9,999            3/parcel
                           10,000 - 19,999          4/parcel
                           20,000 or more           1/2,000 sq. ft.
                                                    Maximum 9 of each genus/
                                                    parcel
Poultry
   Male                 1 acre                   Maximum 9 per parcel but no
                                                    more than 2 of any genus
Rabbits and chinchillas    Less than 7,200          2/parcel or unit
                           7,200 - 9,999            3/parcel
                           10,000 - 19,999          4/parcel
                           20,000 or more           1/2,000 sq. ft.
                                                    Maximum 9 of each genus/
                                                    parcel
Sheep, female goats, and
other similar small        Less than 7,200          Not allowed
livestock
                           7,200 - 19,999           1/5,000 sq. ft.
                           20,000 or more           1/5,000 sq. ft.
                                                    Cumulative total of sheep
                                                    and goats = 9 per parcel
Male adult goats           20,000 or more           1 parcel
Cattle, buffalo, or        20,000 sq. ft. with 60
similar large domesticated foot minimum frontage    1/10,000 sq. ft.
animals
                                                    Cumulative total of all
                                                    large domesticated animals
                                                    = 9 per parcel
Horses                     20,000 sq. ft. with 60   1/10,000 sq. ft.
                           foot minimum frontage
                                                    Cumulative total of all
                                                    large domesticated animals
                                                    = 9 per parcel
Hogs                       Not allowed              Not allowed
Emus, Ostriches            1 acre                   1/10,000 sq. ft.
                                                    Maximum of 9 animals
Alpacas, Llamas            Less than 7,200          Not allowed
                           7,200 - 19,999           1/5,000 sq. ft.
                           20,000 or more           1/5,000 sq. ft.
                                                    Cumulative total of alpacas
                                                    and llamas = 9 per parcel
Notes:
(1)   Five or more dogs and/or cats constitute a private kennel or cattery,
which is subject to regulations in §
84.04.060 (Private Kennels and/or Catteries).
(2)   Lot area used to qualify one animal type shall not be reused to allow
another animal type.
(3)   Animal types that are limited only by a maximum number per lot are
allowed in addition to any other accessory or primary animal keeping use.
(4)   For the purposes of this Section, lots with attached multiple residential
structures shall be limited to a combination of dogs and/or cats, pot bellied
pigs, poultry, rabbits and chinchillas.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4341,
passed - -2018)
CHAPTER 84.05: BED AND BREAKFAST USES
Section
   
84.05.010   Purpose.
   
84.05.020   Applicability.
   
84.05.030   Types of Bed and Breakfast Uses.
   
84.05.040   Permit and Tax Requirements.
   
84.05.050   Development Standards.
   
84.05.060   Additional Standards for Bed and Breakfast Inns/Lodges.
§ 84.05.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the establishment and operation
of bed and breakfast facilities in order to maintain and preserve the
residential character, integrity, and property values of surrounding areas
within which these facilities are located and maintained.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.05.020 Applicability.
   The standards of this Chapter apply to bed and breakfast uses where allowed
in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.05.030 Types of Bed and Breakfast Uses.
   (a)   Classification of Types. Bed and breakfast uses shall be classified
into three types.
      (1)   Host Home.
      (2)   Bed and Breakfast Home.
      (3)   Bed and Breakfast Inn/Lodge.
   (b)   Characteristics of Types of Bed and Breakfast Uses. See
Table 84-6 (Standards for Bed and Breakfast Uses) in §
84.05.050(h) (Development Standards-Design standards), below.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.05.040 Permit and Tax Requirements.
   In addition to the land use permit required in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses), the following
shall also be required for bed and breakfast uses:
   (a)   Special Use Permit. A Special Use Permit shall be required in
compliance with
Chapter 85.14 (Special Use Permits) and shall be renewed annually. The review
authority may void a Special Use Permit for a bed and breakfast use for
noncompliance with the conditions outlined in the approved permit and shall
notify the permittee of its action in compliance with
Chapter 86.09 (Enforcement).
   (b)   Health Permit. A Health Permit shall be required in compliance with
Title 3 (Health and Sanitation and Animal Regulations) of the County Code and
shall be renewed annually.
   (c)   Transit Occupancy Tax (Bed Tax) Requirements. Bed and breakfast uses
shall be subject to the Transient Occupancy Tax (“bed tax”) in compliance with
Title 1 (Government and Administration) of the County Code.
   (d)   Certificate of Land Use Compliance. Where deemed appropriate by the
Code Enforcement Division, owners/operators of bed and breakfast uses shall be
required to sign and record a Certificate of Land Use Compliance and abide by
its provisions in compliance with
Chapter 85.05 (Certificates of Land Use Compliance).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.05.050 Development Standards.
   (a)   Land Use Zoning District Requirements. Bed and breakfast uses shall be
subject to the development standards for the land use zoning district in which
they are located as identified in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and the
development standards in this Chapter.
   (b)   Single-Family Dwelling Structure Only. Only a single-family dwelling
structure, including related habitable accessory structures (e.g., guest house,
accessory dwelling unit, etc.) shall be considered for bed and breakfast uses.
   (c)   Accessory to Residential Use. The bed and breakfast use shall be
conducted as an accessory residential use only.
   (d)   Owner Residency Requirement. The residential structure shall serve as
the primary residence of the owner of the bed and breakfast use. If a
corporation is the owner, a majority shareholder of the corporation shall
reside in the residential structure where the bed and breakfast use is
operated.
   (e)   Code and State Law Requirements.
      (1)   Dwelling units proposed for bed and breakfast use shall comply with
standards and specifications of the California Building Code.
      (2)   Each guest room shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher and a
smoke detector that conform to the California Building Code Standards (CBC No.
43-6).
      (3)   An exit/egress map and an emergency evacuation map shall be
displayed in a prominent location in each guest room in compliance with State
law.
   (f)   Access and Driveways. The owner of the bed and breakfast use shall
ensure that required access, driveways, and parking spaces remain clear and
unobstructed and are available and ready for the occupants’ use at all times.
   (g)   Parking. In addition to the required parking standards for residential
uses in
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards), one parking stall measuring 19
feet in length and nine feet in width shall be provided on-site for each guest
room. These additional parking spaces shall comply with the location and design
standards established by the applicable land use zoning district and the
provisions of
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards). Neither on-street parking nor
tandem parking shall be used to satisfy this on-site parking requirement.
Additional parking spaces may be required when deemed necessary by the review
authority.
   (h)   Design Standards.
      (1)   Minimum Number of Rooms and Parcel Size Requirements.  
Table 84-6 (Standards for Bed and Breakfast Uses) identifies the required
number of guest rooms, minimum number of bathrooms, and minimum parcel sizes
applicable to each of the three types of bed and breakfast uses.
Table 84-6
Standards for Bed and Breakfast Uses
Type of Use Number of Guest Rooms Minimum Number of Minimum Parcel Size(1) (Net
                                  Bathrooms         Area)
Table 84-6
Standards for Bed and Breakfast Uses
Type of Use       Number of Guest Minimum Number of     Minimum Parcel Size
                  Rooms           Bathrooms             (1) (Net Area)
Host Home         1               2                     5,000 sq. ft.
                  2               2                     7,200 sq. ft.
Bed and Breakfast 3               3                     8,200 sq. ft.
Home
                  4               3                     9,200 sq. ft.
                  5               3                     10,200 sq. ft.
Bed and Breakfast                 4                     20,000 sq. ft.
Inn/Lodge         6 - 10          Access for physically + 1,000 sq. ft per
                                  disabled required.    every bedroom over 6
                  Over 10         Not allowed
Note:
(1)    A bed and breakfast use shall not be allowed in a dwelling that is
located on a site that has less than the required parcel area specified by
the underlying land use zoning district.
 
      (2)   Alterations and Modifications. Alterations and modifications may be
made to the structures and the site but the alterations shall be compatible
with the character of the neighborhood. The alterations and modifications shall
also comply with applicable provisions, requirements, and standards of the
County Code.
      (3)   Landscaping. Additional landscaping may be required to screen
parked vehicles from direct view of the neighbors, particularly where the
parking is located within the front yard setback.
      (4)   Exterior Lighting. Lights to illuminate the site shall be designed
and oriented to reflect away from adjoining properties and public
thoroughfares.
      (5)   Signs. A non-illuminated identification sign, not to exceed six
square feet in area, shall be allowed. If not attached to the residence, the
sign shall not exceed six feet in height and shall blend with the architectural
style of the structure and the neighborhood.
      (6)   Minimum Separation Requirements. A Bed and Breakfast facility shall
not, at the time the Special Use Permit is issued, be located within 300 feet,
as measured in a straight line from the property line of the parcel on which
the facility is proposed, to the closest property line of any other dwelling
unit permitted as a Bed and Breakfast facility. However, no more than two Bed
and Breakfast facilities shall be located on the same block.
   (i)   Kitchen Facilities and Service of Meals.
      (1)   No cooking facilities shall be allowed in guest rooms.
      (2)   The sale of food or other materials shall be limited to guests who
are currently residing on the premises where the use is located and not to the
general public.
   (j)   Records of Patrons. Records of all guests who patronize the bed and
breakfast establishment shall be preserved for a minimum period of three years
before they are discarded.
   (k)   Pedestrian and Vehicular Traffic. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic
shall be limited to that normally associated with residential land use zoning
districts.
   (l)   Commercial Vehicles. The use shall not involve the use of commercial
vehicles for the delivery of materials to or from the premises beyond those
commercial vehicles normally associated with residential uses.
   (m)   Outdoor Storage. There shall be no outdoor storage of materials or
equipment, nor shall merchandise be visible, from outside the home.
   (n)   Residential Character of Structure. The appearance of the structure
shall not be altered nor the occupation within the residence be conducted in a
manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character
either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the
emission of sounds, noises, and vibrations.
   (o)   Utilities and Community Facilities. The uses of utilities and
community facilities shall be limited to that normally associated with the use
of the property for residential purposes.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - - 2014; Am. Ord. 4341,
passed - -2018)
§ 84.05.060 Additional Standards for Bed and Breakfast Inns/Lodges.
   (a)   Structures of Historical, Architectural, and Cultural Significance.
      (1)   Only the following residential structures shall be allowed to be
used as a Bed and Breakfast Inn/Lodge:
         (A)   A residential structure that the Commission has determined to be
of historical, architectural, or cultural significance; or
         (B)   A property that is listed in the State Register or the National
Register of Historic Places.
      (2)   The Commission may establish Historic and Scenic Preservation
Standards and shall review the proposal for a determination of historical,
architectural, or cultural significance. In making its determination, the
Commission shall consider the:
         (A)   Architecture of the structure noting the history, uniqueness,
and style of the design.
         (B)   Historical and/or cultural value(s) of the property and/or the
site.
         (C)   Age of the structure and its physical and structural condition.
      (3)   After a determination, the structure shall be listed:
         (A)   As a State Landmark or Point of Historical Interest; or
         (B)   On the National Register of Historic Places.
      (4)   If a Bed and Breakfast Inn/Lodge is associated with an agritourism
use, these requirements shall not apply.
   (b)   Preservation and Maintenance of Significant Features. The Commission
may require the preservation and maintenance of significant permanent
landscaping features and significant historical, architectural, and/or cultural
features of the structure and/or property.
   (c)   Pre-Alteration Inspection by Building Official. A residential
structure that has been declared a historical structure shall be subject to
pre-alteration inspection by the Building Official. A copy of the inspection
report shall accompany the application for a Special Use Permit for a bed and
breakfast use.
   (d)   Compliance with Building Code Standards. Historical structures
proposed for bed and breakfast uses shall comply with current applicable
California Building Code standards, including the State Historical Building
Code, and those pertaining to the physical and structural conditions of the
structure and the site.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.06: CEMETERIES
Section
   
84.06.010   Purpose.
   
84.06.020   Applicability.
   
84.06.030   Permit Requirements.
   
84.06.040   Development Standards.
§ 84.06.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards for publicly and
privately owned and operated cemeteries.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.06.020 Applicability.
   The standards in this Chapter shall apply to cemeteries where allowed in
compliance with the provisions of
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.06.030 Permit Requirements.
   (a)   Establishment or Expansion of Boundaries. A Conditional Use Permit
issued in compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit) shall be required for
the establishment of boundaries or a revised Conditional Use Permit shall be
required for the expansion of previously approved boundaries. The permit
applications and approvals shall identify proposed structures and major grading
activities.
   (b)   Development of Gravesites Exempt. A Conditional Use Permit shall not
be required for normal on-site development of gravesites within previously
approved or established cemeteries that have recorded a map in compliance with
Chapter 87.02 (Tentative Map Filing and Processing).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.06.040 Development Standards.
   (a)   Screening. In addition to conditions necessary to ensure protection of
public health, safety, and general welfare, the review authority may require
adequate screening or fencing of the property reserved for cemetery purposes in
order to clarify the ultimate boundaries of the cemetery.
   (b)   Compliance with State Health Law. The proposed cemetery or expansion
shall comply with Health and Safety Code §§ 8100 et seq. (Cemeteries).
   (c)   Final Map. A Final Map shall be submitted to the County Surveyor for
review and recordation in compliance with
Chapter 87.02 (Tentative Map Filing and Processing).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.07: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL TRANSITIONAL USES
Section
   
84.07.010   Purpose.
   
84.07.020   Applicability.
   
84.07.030   Development Standards.
§ 84.07.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards for the location and
operation of commercial and industrial uses that are located adjacent to
residential uses. These standards are intended to protect the use and enjoyment
of the residential uses and to minimize potential adverse visual and aesthetic
effects.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.07.020 Applicability.
   The standards in this Chapter shall apply to commercial or industrial uses
located on property zoned for commercial or industrial uses and abutting
property zoned for residential use.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.07.030 Development Standards.
   (a)   Setbacks. A setback of 15 feet or the distance required within the
land use zoning district where the commercial or industrial use is located,
whichever is greater, shall be maintained between the different land uses.
   (b)   Screening and Buffering. Loading docks, roof- or ground-mounted
mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioning, heating ventilation ducts and
exhaust, etc.), utility services, and outside storage shall be enclosed by man-
made or natural barrier(s) sufficient to screen them from public view from
abutting public streets and rights-of-way and abutting areas zoned for
residential or open space uses. The screening method shall be architecturally
compatible with other site development in terms of colors, materials, and
architectural style. In addition, the screening method shall be sufficient to
attenuate noise levels to 65 dB(A) Ldn at the property line of the noise
source.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.08: REPEALED BY ORD. 4341, PASSED - -2018
CHAPTER 84.09: FIREWOOD STORAGE
Section
   
84.09.010   Purpose.
   
84.09.020   Applicability.
   
84.09.030   Development Standards - Nonresidential Land Use Zoning Districts.
   
84.09.040   Development Standards - Residential Land Use Zoning Districts.
§ 84.09.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards for the outdoor storage
of firewood. These standards are intended to reduce fire hazards in order to
protect lives and property and to avoid unnecessary burdens on the resources of
local fire and rescue services.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.09.020 Applicability.
   The standards in this Chapter shall apply to the storage of firewood in
nonresidential land use zoning districts, where allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses), and the storage
of firewood in residential land use zoning districts, which is an allowed
accessory use.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.09.030 Development Standards - Nonresidential Land Use Zoning Districts.
   (a)   Local Fire Authority Declaration. When submitting a Site Plan Permit
application, the firewood contractor shall provide a letter from the Local Fire
Authority declaring the allowed amount of firewood storage.
   (b)   Maximum Amount of Firewood Storage. The outdoor storage of firewood by
a firewood contractor shall not exceed 60 cords of wood.
   (c)   Access. Fire Department access shall be continually maintained.
   (d)   Activities. Activities associated with firewood storage and sales
shall be limited to stacking, bundling, loading, and unloading of the firewood.
   (e)   Hours of Operation. The hours of operation shall be limited to between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
   (f)   Maintenance. The operation shall be:
      (1)   Maintained free of rodents, insects, and other pests and in
compliance with §
88.01.090 (Tree Protection from Insects and Disease);
      (2)   In compliance with County Fire Department Guidelines for
Interpretations for Firewood Contractors and Wood Storage Yards; and
      (3)   Continually kept clean and free of excessive bark, wood chips,
sawdust, and wood scraps.
   (g)   Paving. Before the initiation of the wood storage and sales use, a
circulation aisle shall be paved to minimum County standards.
   (h)   Screening. Before initiation of the wood storage and sales use, the
area shall be screened from view to a height of six feet by a chain link fence
with slats, solid wood fence, or masonry wall.
   (i)   Separation. Where bulk timber and firewood is piled next to a property
line on which a structure has been erected, the distance from the pile to
property line shall be not less than one-half the height of the pile and in no
case less than five feet. In the FS (Fire Safety) overlay, all areas used for
the storage of firewood shall either be at least 30 feet away from all
structures or wholly enclosed within a structure.
   (j)   Stacking. The wood shall be neatly stacked. Bulk timber and firewood
shall be piled with due regard to stability of piles and in no case higher than
20 feet.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.09.040 Development Standards - Residential Land Use Zoning Districts.
   (a)   Maximum Amount of Firewood. In residential land use zoning districts,
outdoor storage of firewood shall be allowed as an accessory use. Stored
firewood shall not to exceed four cords (i.e., a total of 512 cubic feet, where
a cord equals 128 cubic feet) in the RS (Single Residential) and RM (Multiple
Residential) land use zoning districts.
   (b)   Separation. Where firewood is piled next to a property line on which a
structure has been erected, the distance from the pile to property line shall
be not less than five feet. In the Fire Safety Overlay, all areas used for the
storage of firewood shall either be at least 30 feet away from all structures
or wholly enclosed within a structure.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.10: GARAGE SALES
Section
   
84.10.010   Purpose.
   
84.10.020   Applicability.
   
84.10.030   Standards.
§ 84.10.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Section is to provide locational and operational
standards for the conduct of garage and private yard sales. These standards are
intended to allow residents the opportunity to sell unwanted household goods
and items while preserving the residential nature of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.10.020 Applicability.
   The standards in this Chapter shall apply to the conduct of garage and
private yard sales.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.10.030 Standards.
   (a)   Activity Prohibited in Public Right-of-way. Garage sale activity may
not be conducted in the public right-of-way, including streets, sidewalks,
parkways, or alleys.
   (b)   Items for Sale. Items sold at garage sales shall be used goods, wares,
or merchandise of a household nature, and shall not have been acquired
elsewhere for resale.
   (c)   Maximum Number of Sales per Year.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings shall be allowed a maximum of four garage
sales per calendar year at the same address.
      (2)   Multi-family dwellings shall be allowed a maximum of two garage
sales per calendar year per legal dwelling unit.
   (d)   Maximum Number of Consecutive Days. A garage sale may not last longer
than three consecutive days.
   (e)   Residents Only. Only the residents of a property may conduct a garage
sale.
   (f)   Sale Hours. Garage sale activity shall be limited to the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
   (g)   Signs. Garage sale advertising signs shall not be posted on telephone
poles, streetlights, traffic signs, or any other structure or location within
the public right-of-way. Garage sale signs may not be posted earlier than one
day before the first day of the garage sale nor more than one day after the
last date of the garage sale.
   (h)   Permit Requirements. Garage sales that exceed the standards provided
in this Chapter shall be considered temporary uses requiring compliance with
Chapter 84.25 (Temporary Structures and Uses) and issuance of a Temporary Use
Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.15 (Temporary Use Permits).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.11: HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES
Section
   
84.11.010   Purpose.
   
84.11.020   Applicability.
   
84.11.030   Permit Requirements.
§ 84.11.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides guidelines for the regulation of hazardous materials
for the protection of health, safety, and welfare of persons, resources, and
property.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.11.020 Applicability.
   The provisions in this Chapter apply to hazardous waste facilities where
allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.11.030 Permit Requirements.
   (a)   Special Use Permit Required. An approved Special Use Permit shall be
required for the establishment of a hazardous waste facility.
   (b)   Purpose of Special Use Permit. The purpose of the Special Use Permit
shall be to:
      (1)   Evaluate the operation and monitoring plan of the facility.
      (2)   Ensure the facility has adequate measures for monitoring on-going
impacts to air quality, groundwater, and environmentally sensitive resources.
      (3)   Evaluate the types and quantities of wastes that will be treated or
disposed of at the facility.
      (4)   Require periodic inspections of the facility to ensure conditions
of approval are implemented and monitored.
   (c)   Disclosure Statement. A copy of the disclosure statement required by
Health and Safety Code § 25200.4 shall accompany the application for a Special
Use Permit for a specified hazardous waste facility.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.12: HOME OCCUPATIONS
Section
   
84.12.010   Purpose.
   
84.12.020   Applicability.
   
84.12.030   Classes of Home Occupations Described.
   
84.12.040   Allowed Land Use Zoning Districts and Permit Requirements.
   
84.12.050   Prohibited Home Occupations.
   
84.12.060   Allowed Home Occupations in Desert Region.
   
84.12.070   Development Standards Applicable to all Classes.
   
84.12.080   Class I Home Occupation Standards.
   
84.12.090   Class II Home Occupation Standards.
   
84.12.100   Class III Home Occupation Standards.
   
84.12.110   Other Restrictions on Home Occupations.
   
84.12.120   Nonconforming Home Occupations.
§ 84.12.010 Purpose.
   This purpose of this Chapter is to provide locational and operational
standards to ensure that home occupations cause minimal impact(s) on
neighboring parcels.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.12.020 Applicability.
   This Chapter shall apply to all residential dwelling units in the County,
including legal nonconforming residential dwelling units. However, this Chapter
shall not apply to a childcare institution, child day care facility, group
home, adult day care facility or any other social care facility that is
licensed by the appropriate Federal, State, or local agency. Refer to
Chapter 84.23 (Licensed Residential Care Facilities) for provisions governing
those types of uses.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.12.030 Classes of Home Occupations Described.
   Home occupations are commercial uses that are accessory and incidental to a
residential land use and that clearly do not alter the character or the
appearance of the residential environment. Home occupations shall be separated
into the following three classes of operations.
   (a)   Class I Home Occupation. Class I Home Occupations shall have no impact
on the neighborhood in which they are located. Work is performed exclusively by
phone and mail, or over the Internet; or the work is the activity of creative
artists, music teachers, academic tutors, or similar educational instructors,
and the activity is limited so that there are no impacts on the neighborhood.
Typical activities shall include artist, writer, composer, teleworker, network
marketer, music teacher, etc.
   (b)   Class II Home Occupation. Class II Home Occupations shall have a
limited impact on the neighborhood in which they are located. Generally, only
one nonresident employee shall be allowed and only a limited number of
customers or clientele may visit the site. In the Mountain and Desert Regions,
up to two nonresident employees may be permitted subject to the approval of the
Director. Typical activities shall include pet groomer, hair stylist (one work
station), tax consultant, yard maintenance, etc.
   (c)   Class III Home Occupation. Class III Home Occupations shall have a
limited impact on the neighborhood in which they are located but also are
slightly more intense than Class II in that they may involve the direct sales
of products or merchandise to the public. Subject to specific standards in §
84.12.100 (Class III Home Occupation Standards), up to five nonresident
employees shall be allowed. Typical activities shall include an activity that
has direct sales of products or merchandise or requires more than two
nonresident employees. Certain allowed activities may also include those listed
in
84.12.060 (Allowed Home Occupations in Desert Region).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.12.040 Allowed Land Use Zoning Districts and Permit Requirements.
   
Table 84-7 (Allowed Land Uses Zoning Districts and Permit Requirements for Home
Occupations) indicates the regions in which home occupations shall be allowed
and the permit requirements for each class of home occupation.
Table 84-7
Allowed Land Use Zoning Districts and Permit Requirements for Home
Occupations
Class of Home Occupation Where Allowed Permit Requirements
Table 84-7
Allowed Land Use Zoning Districts and Permit Requirements for Home Occupations
Class of Home Occupation  Where Allowed               Permit Requirements
                          Residential land use zoning
Class I Home Occupation   districts in Desert,        None required(1)
                          Mountain, and Valley
                          Regions
                          Residential land use zoning
Class II Home Occupation  districts in Desert,        Special Use Permit
                          Mountain, and Valley        renewable every 24 months
                          Regions
                          Residential land use zoning Special Use Permit
Class III Home Occupation districts in Desert Region  renewable every 24 months
                          only
Notes:
(1)   If the operator needs documentation that his or her business is legal, a
Home Occupation Permit may be issued for the home occupation operations using
the procedures for a Class II Home Occupation Permit.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.12.050 Prohibited Home Occupations.
   Except as provided in §
84.12.060 (Allowed Home Occupations in Desert Region), the following uses are
not incidental to or compatible with residential activities and shall not be
allowed as home occupations:
   (a)   Animal hospitals.
   (b)   Motor vehicle and other vehicle repair (body or mechanical) to include
the repair of engine, muffler or drive train components of the vehicle;
upholstery; painting or storage.
   (c)   Carpentry and cabinet making, not to include woodworking that results
in the creation of small wood products or single pieces of furniture.
   (d)   Kennels or catteries.
   (e)   Massage parlors.
   (f)   Medical and dental offices, clinics, and medical laboratories.
   (g)   Repair shops or service establishments, except repair of small
electrical appliances, cameras, or other similar items.
   (h)   Riding stables.
   (i)   Large scale upholstering service, not to include the reupholstering of
separate, individual pieces of furniture or other objects.
   (j)   Welding and machining.
   (k)   Vermicomposting.
   (l)   Any other use determined by the Director that is not incidental to
and/or compatible with residential activities.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014)
§ 84.12.060 Allowed Home Occupations in Desert Region.
   In the Desert Region only, the uses listed in §
84.12.050 (Prohibited Home Occupations) may be allowed as a home occupation on
parcels greater than two and one-half acres if approved by the Director.
Applications for approval of Home Occupation Permits for the listed uses that
are normally prohibited shall be considered by the Director on a case-by-case
basis in the Desert Region.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.12.070 Development Standards Applicable to all Classes.
   The operators of home occupations shall make every attempt to be a “good
neighbor” and respect the rights of their neighbors. All classes of home
occupations shall adhere to the following standards:
   (a)   Accessory to Residential Land Use. Home occupations shall only be
allowed as an accessory use to a legal residential land use.
   (c)   Activities Limited to Enclosed Structure. The home occupation shall be
confined to an enclosed structure, either the residence itself or an authorized
accessory structure as described in §
84.01.050 (Residential Accessory Structures and Uses).
   (d)   Advertising Materials. Public advertising (e.g., handbills) shall only
list: phone number, home occupation operator’s name, post office box, and
description of business. Location information shall be limited to community
name only. The business address or location shall not be included in any public
advertising, with the exception of a telephone directory (i.e., white pages)
and business cards.
   (e)   Commercial Delivery Vehicles. The home occupation shall not involve
the use of commercial vehicles for the delivery of materials to or from the
premises beyond those commercial vehicles normally associated with residential
uses.
   (f)   External Appearance. The appearance of the structure shall not be
altered nor shall the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner
that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either
by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or signs.
   (g)   Hazardous Materials. Chemicals, solvents, mixtures or materials that
are corrosive, toxic, flammable, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, or other
similar materials used in a home occupation shall be used and stored in
compliance with regulations of the Fire Department.
   (h)   Light and Glare. Direct or indirect light from a home occupation
activity shall not cause glare onto an adjacent parcel in compliance with
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
   (i)   Noise. Noise emanations shall not exceed 55 dB(A) as measured at the
property lines at all times.
   (j)   Parking. Parking shall comply with the parking requirements outlined
in
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards). Additional on-site parking
beyond that required in
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards) shall be provided for additional
vehicles used in connection with the home occupation. One additional parking
space shall be provided for each non-resident employee. Additional parking
spaces shall be easily accessible (including accommodation for winter
conditions in the mountains).
   (k)   Pedestrian and Vehicular Traffic. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic
shall be limited to that normally associated with residential land use zoning
districts.
   (l)   Property Owner’s Permission for Tenant Operation. If a tenant of the
property is to operate the home occupation, notarized written permission from
the property owner for the use of the property for the home occupation shall be
submitted.
   (m)   Odors and Vibrations. No equipment or processes used on the subject
property shall create smoke, fumes, odors, or vibrations that are disruptive to
surrounding properties.
   (n)   Other Required Permits. Permits required from other agencies and
departments shall be submitted with the Home Occupation Permit application.
   (o)   Outdoor Activity Time Limits. No process, operation, or activity shall
result in the appearance of parts, equipment, materials, tools, or supplies
outside a structure for the purpose of the process, operation, or activity so
that they can be observed for time periods of 30 or more consecutive minutes
from a position of driving or walking on the public streets.
   (p)   Outdoor Storage. No outdoor storage of equipment, materials or
supplies or display of goods or products shall be allowed. In the Desert
Region, if the subject property is at least five acres in area, outdoor storage
shall be allowed if properly screened from view.
   (q)   Street Address. The street address shall be prominently posted on the
property so that it is easily visible from the street.
   (r)   Utilities and Community Facilities. The uses of utilities and
community facilities shall be limited to that normally associated with the use
of property for residential purposes.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4341, passed - -2018)
§ 84.12.080 Class I Home Occupation Standards.
   (a)   Work Activities. All work shall be performed exclusively by phone and
mail, or over the Internet, or shall be the activity of creative artists.
   (b)   Sales. No sales of products on the premises, except produce (fruit and
vegetables) grown on the subject property, shall be allowed.
   (c)   Number of Customers. The only customers or clientele who may visit the
residence shall be those identified in Subdivision (b) (Sales), above, and the
students of music teachers, academic tutors, and similar instructors. The
instruction of the students shall be provided on an individual basis and by
appointment only. More than one student from the same family shall be
considered as being on an individual basis.
   (d)   Residency Requirements. Employees, partners, or operators of the home
occupation shall be members of the resident family and shall reside on the
premises.
   (e)   Storage Area. Up to 25 percent or 250 square feet, whichever is
greater, of the total floor area of the dwelling unit and related accessory
structures, may be used for storage of materials and supplies related to the
home occupation.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.12.090 Class II Home Occupation Standards.
   (a)   Sales. No sales of products on the premises, except produce (fruit and
vegetables) grown on the subject property, shall be allowed.
   (b)   Number of Customers and Monthly Average Trip Count. Except as provided
in Subdivision (a) (Sales), above, only a limited number of customers or
clientele shall visit the residence. Each visit shall be only by appointment.
This is restricted to a single appointment at a time. The monthly average of
the total trip count for personal and business activities shall not exceed 12
trips per day.
   (c)   Residency Requirements. All employees, partners, or operators of the
home occupation, except one, shall be members of the resident family and shall
reside on the premises provided all the required standards are met. In the
Mountain Region and Desert Region, the Director may authorize a second
nonresident employee, provided all required standards can be met. For purposes
of this Section, business employees shall not include childcare or domestic
help.
   (d)   Parking Requirements. The applicant shall demonstrate that the parcel
can accommodate the parking of all personal and employee vehicles on-site.
   (e)   Storage Area. Up to 25 percent or 250 square feet, whichever is
greater, of the total floor area of the dwelling unit and related accessory
structures, may be used for storage of materials and supplies related to the
home occupation.
   (f)   Operating Hours. Operating hours of a home occupation shall be between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.12.100 Class III Home Occupation Standards.
   (a)   Minimum Parcel Size. The parcel shall be at least one acre in area.
   (b)   Sales. Direct sales of products or merchandise to the public shall be
allowed.
   (c)   Number of Customers and Monthly Average Trip Count. Only a limited
number of customers or clientele shall visit the residence and then only by
appointment. This is restricted to a single appointment at a time. The monthly
average of the total trip count for personal and business activities shall not
exceed 20 trips per day.
   (d)   Residency Requirements. All employees, partners, or operators of the
home occupation, except two, shall be members of the resident family and shall
reside on the premises provided that all the required standards can be met. If
the subject property is at least five acres in area, a total of five non-
resident employees shall be allowed. For the purposes of this Section, business
employees shall not include childcare or domestic help.
   (e)   Parking. The applicant shall demonstrate that the parcel can
accommodate the parking of all personal and employee vehicles on-site.
   (f)   Signs. A non-illuminated identification sign, not to exceed 12 square
feet in area and stating the business name and telephone number, shall be
allowed. If not attached to the residence, a sign shall not exceed six feet in
height and shall blend with the architectural style of the structure and the
neighborhood. The sign shall only be allowed in a land use zoning district
other than RS (Single-Family Residential) or RM (Multi-Family Residential).
   (g)   Storage Area. Up to 35 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling
unit and related accessory structures or 500 square feet, whichever is greater,
may be used for storage of materials, supplies, and equipment related to the
use.
   (h)   Operating Hours. Operating hours of a home occupation shall be between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.12.110 Other Restrictions on Home Occupations.
   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a homeowner’s association or a
landlord from adopting a rule, regulation, or by-law prohibiting home
occupations on the premises under their respective jurisdictions. The rule,
regulation, or by-law applicable to a property shall supersede the provisions
of this Chapter. In addition, nothing in this Chapter shall preclude,
invalidate, or override an existing covenant, by-law, rule, or regulation of a
common interest community, housing cooperative, or landlord that prohibits home
occupations or that more strictly restricts or regulates home occupations than
as provided in this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.12.120 Nonconforming Home Occupations.
   If a property owner has received an approved Home Occupation Permit and
continues to operate the business in compliance with that permit, but no longer
meets the standards established for the permit, the operator may apply for
renewals of the permit every 24 months as long as the business remains in
continuous operation. The operations shall be considered as a legal,
nonconforming use. If the use is discontinued for 180 days or longer, it shall
be deemed terminated and the permit shall not be renewed.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.13: MASSAGE SERVICES
Section
   
84.13.010   Purpose.
   
84.13.020   Applicability.
   
84.13.030   Development Standards.
§ 84.13.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide development standards for
establishments providing massage services.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.13.020 Applicability.
   The development standards provided in this Chapter shall apply to massage
services where allowed in compliance with the provisions of
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.13.030 Development Standards.
   A business providing massage services shall be located at least 750 feet
from another business providing massage services or from any adult oriented
business.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.14: MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
   
84.14.010   Purpose.
   
84.14.020   Applicability.
   
84.14.030   Enforcement Authority.
   
84.14.040   Definitions.
   
84.14.050   Development Standards.
   
84.14.060   (Reserved)
   
84.14.070   Bonds to Guarantee Improvements.
   
84.14.080   Mobile Home Park Subdivisions.
§ 84.14.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides for the establishment, location, design, and
improvement of mobile home parks.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.14.020 Applicability.
   (a)   Where Allowed. The development standards provided in this Chapter
shall apply to the establishment or enlargement of mobile home parks in land
use zoning districts where allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
   (b)   State Law. The requirements of this Chapter shall include the
provisions of the Mobile Home Parks Act (Health and Safety Code §§ 18200 et
seq.) and the applicable Mobile Home Parks Regulations adopted by the State
Department of Housing and Community Development Code of Regulations, Title 25,
Division 1, Chapter 2, §§ 1000 et seq.) The requirements of this Chapter are
intended to equal or exceed the requirements of the Mobile Home Parks Act and
the Mobile Home Regulations. The requirements of the Mobile Home Parks
Regulations shall be incorporated as part of this Chapter and compliance with
the regulations shall be required.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.14.030 Enforcement Authority.
   The California Department of Housing and Community Development shall enforce
State law and regulations that apply to the maintenance, use, occupancy,
sanitation, and safety of mobile home parks or that apply to permits to operate
them.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4085,
passed - -2009)
§ 84.14.040 Definitions.
   Terms used in this Chapter are as defined in the Mobile Home Parks Act
(Health and Safety Code §§ 18200 et seq.), unless as expressly provided
otherwise in
Division 10 (Definitions) or unless the context clearly shows that a different
meaning is intended.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.14.050 Development Standards.
   (a)   Locations. Mobile home parks/manufactured home land-lease communities
shall be located where allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and in compliance
with State law.
   (b)   Parcel Size and Density. The minimum parcel sizes and density
standards for mobile home parks shall be as indicated in
Table 84-8 (Parcel Size and Density Standards for Mobile Home Parks).
 
Table 84-8
Parcel Size and Density Standards for Mobile Home Parks
Development Standards Land Use Zoning District
                      RL       RS       RM
Minimum parcel size   20 acres 10 acres 10 acres
Maximum density       Determined by the density of the land use zoning district
                      in which it is located
 
   (c)   Drainage and Flood Hazard. A mobile home park shall be located on a
well-drained site, properly graded to provide for adequate disposition of water
runoff. The area shall be free of flood hazard from external sources. The
review authority may require dedications and improvements that will ensure
proper protection of a mobile home park.
   (d)   Streets and Highways. The review authority may require additional
dedication and improvements on streets and highways abutting the proposed
mobile home park in compliance with the Circulation Element of the General Plan
and established widths of local and collector streets.
   (e)   Parcel Areas and Dimensions. A parcel in a mobile home park shall
contain a minimum area of 1,200 square feet with a minimum width of 30 feet
fronting on a driveway, provided that:
      (1)   Parcels larger than the above minimum sizes may be required where
it is determined that the larger parcel size will be:
         (A)   Consistent with the general pattern established by mobile home
parks in the vicinity; or
         (B)   Necessary to accommodate manufactured home sizes as stated in
the Mobile Home Park Report submitted by the applicant.
      (2)   Parcels on curved driveways or cul-de-sacs where lot lines are
either converging or diverging from the front to the rear of the parcel shall
have an average width of at least 30 feet with a minimum 25-foot driveway
frontage.
   (f)   Required Separation Distances. Mobile homes shall be located so they
are at least ten feet apart from side to side, eight feet apart from side to
rear, six feet apart from rear to rear, and ten feet from a structure, except
for accessory structures used as private toilets or baths for exclusive use of
the occupant of the mobile home site. Mobile home hitches shall face the access
driveway.
   (g)   Minimum Side and Rear Setbacks. The combined side setbacks of a mobile
home parcel shall total a minimum of ten feet; provided, however, that a mobile
home shall not be closer than three feet to a side or rear parcel line. Where
mobile home lots abut side or rear setbacks as defined in Subdivision (i)
(Perimeter setbacks), below, setback areas may be included as a part of the
perimeter setback.
   (h)   Maximum Occupied Site Area. The occupied area of a mobile home parcel
shall not exceed 75 percent of the total area of the parcel. An occupied area
shall mean an area that is covered or occupied by a trailer coach, cabana,
vehicle, ramada, awning, closet, cupboard, or other structure.
   (i)   Perimeter Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to the
perimeters of a mobile home park:
      (1)   Front setback of at least 25 feet along the public street upon
which the mobile home park fronts. This setback shall extend across the entire
width of the park.
      (2)   Side setbacks of not less than five feet along each side boundary
line of the mobile home park.
      (3)   A rear setback of not less than ten feet along the rear boundary
line of the mobile home park.
      (4)   Greater setbacks may be required where, in the opinion of the
Director, greater setbacks are necessary due to topographic conditions,
grading, drainage, or protection of adjacent property.
      (5)   No part of a mobile home shall be located within a required
perimeter setback area.
   (j)   Circulation. Roads within mobile home parks shall be designed to
provide reasonable and convenient traffic circulation and shall meet the
following standards:
      (1)   A road shall not be less than 33 feet in width if car parking is
allowed on one side of the road and not less than 41 feet in width if parking
is allowed on both sides.
      (2)   Road widths to provide for parking on one side shall be deemed
necessary when parcels abut the road on one side only. Road widths to provide
for parking on both sides shall be necessary when parcels abut the roads on
both sides.
      (3)   The entire width of the roads within mobile home parks shall be
surfaced with a minimum of two-inch thick asphalt, concrete, plant mix, or
other approved material.
   (k)   Parking. Two parking spaces shall be provided on each mobile home
parcel. A parking area for use by guests and visitors shall also be established
and maintained. There shall be one guest parking space for every ten mobile
home parcels, or fraction of ten, within the mobile home park. Each parking
space shall be ten by 20 feet in size plus the additional area for adequate
ingress and egress.
   (l)   Walkways. Walkways shall be provided to allow reasonably direct access
to all parcels, service structures, and other areas or structures used by
occupants of the mobile homes. Collector walkways serving utility structures,
playgrounds and other general areas shall be at least four feet in width and
individual entrance walks to each mobile home site shall be at least two feet
in width. Walkways shall be constructed of asphalt, concrete, plant mix, or
other approved materials that will allow all-weather pedestrian movement.
   (m)   Walls or Fences. A wall or fence six feet in height shall be erected
and maintained along each side and rear boundary of a mobile home park except
along the portion of the side or rear boundary line that either abuts a public
street or is within a front or side setback adjacent to the street, in which
case, a wall or fence may be required. A wall or fence shall be solid and of
concrete, brick, or other masonry construction or of chain link metal
construction or rod iron with an evergreen hedge planted on the side facing the
mobile home park. Where, in the opinion of the review authority, it is
unreasonable to require the construction of a fence or wall, the review
authority may waive or modify the requirements as specified in this
Subdivision.
   (n)   Screening of Service Areas. The Review Authority may require fencing
or screen planting around areas containing garbage, rubbish, or waste disposal,
or ground service, or recreational areas as a condition of approval of a mobile
home park.
   (o)   Storage Areas.
      (1)   Common storage areas shall be provided with an enclosed fenced area
for the residents of the mobile home park for the storage of recreational
vehicles, trailers, travel trailers, and other licensed or unlicensed vehicles.
The storage area shall contain a minimum of 50 square feet for each mobile home
parcel in the mobile home park.
      (2)   Storage on a mobile home parcel shall comply with the provisions of
the Code of Regulations Title 25, Division 1.
   (p)   Public Address Systems. Public address systems or loudspeakers shall
not be allowed if audible outside the boundaries of the mobile home park.
   (q)   Modifications in Design. Where a mobile home park application is
submitted for approval that, although not in compliance with the design
requirements in this Chapter, are consistent with the general purpose and
intent of this Chapter, the review authority may approve the park with
conditions and restrictions that ensure that the general purposes are
satisfied.
      (1)   Park designs utilizing duplex or cell-type groupings of mobile home
parcels or other modified designs may be approved under the provisions of this
Section.
      (2)   Modifications of the above standards of design may be approved
under the provisions of this Section for mobile home parks, travel trailer
parks, recreational trailer parks, temporary trailer parks, and tent camps.
However, in no case shall the modifications conflict with minimum requirements
of the Mobile Home Parks Act (Health and Safety Code §§ 18200 et seq.) and the
applicable Mobile Home Parks Regulations adopted by the State Department of
Housing and Community Development (Code of Regulations §§ 1000 et seq.).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009)
§ 84.14.060 (RESERVED)
§ 84.14.070 Bonds to Guarantee Improvements.
   If all improvements required as a condition of approval of a mobile home
park are not satisfactorily completed at the time a Certificate of Occupancy is
requested, the owner or owners of the mobile home park shall, before the
issuance of the permit, enter as contractor into an agreement with the County
guaranteeing that the required work will be accomplished. The form and amount
of security shall be determined by the Director.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.14.080 Mobile Home Park Subdivisions.
   Mobile home park subdivisions shall be conditioned to require reservation
and maintenance of common areas and enjoyment of the residents of the mobile
home subdivision. Mobile home subdivisions shall comply with appropriate design
standards established by this Chapter,
Division 9 (Subdivisions), and applicable State subdivision requirements.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.15: RESERVED
CHAPTER 84.16: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Section
   
84.16.010   Purpose.
   
84.16.020   Applicability.
   
84.16.030   Processing.
   
84.16.040   Development Standards Applicable to All Multi-Family Projects.
   
84.16.050   Development Standards for Multi-Family Projects - Four To 19 Units.
   
84.16.060   Development Standards for Multi-Family Projects - 20 or More Units.
   
84.16.070   Common Amenities and Facilities - Four or More Units.
   
84.16.080   Design Guidelines for Multi-Family Projects - 20 or More Units.
§ 84.16.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide development standards for the
establishment of new multi-family residential projects. The standards are
intended to:
   (a)   Enhance the quality of housing for County residents by regulating a
residential environment within a high-density context;
   (b)   Protect surrounding properties and their values by requiring proper
design and maintenance of the multi-family project; and
   (c)   Ensure compatibility with other development in the immediate area
through the use of complementary building arrangements, buffers, and avoidance
of overwhelming building scale and visual obstructions.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.16.020 Applicability.
   The development standards in this Chapter shall apply to multi-family
residential projects in land use zoning districts where they are allowed in
compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses). Multi-family
residential projects shall include projects in which two or more attached or
detached dwelling units are located. Multi-family residential projects may
include apartments or condominiums. The road dedication and street improvement
standards provided in this Chapter do not apply to: (1) the alteration or
enlargement of an existing building or structure on a lot or parcel of land if
the total square footage of such alteration or enlargement, and all other
alterations or enlargements completed three years prior to the date of the
application for a permit for such alteration or enlargement, does not exceed
one-half of the original square footage of all buildings and structures on such
lot or parcel of land, or (2) the erection of one or more accessory structures
(not including accessory dwellings) as defined in §
810.01.030(g) of the County Code. For purposes of this section, “original
square footage” means the square footage of all buildings and structures that
existed on such lot or parcel of land three years prior to the date of the
application for such permit.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4181, passed - -2012)
§ 84.16.030 Processing.
   (a)   Multi-Family Projects - 19 Units or Fewer. A building permit for a
proposed multi-family development of 19 units or fewer shall be issued by the
Building Official with an approved building plan if the project complies with
the requirements in this Chapter. Upon receipt of an application for a proposed
multi-family development of 19 units or fewer, the Building Official may refer
the application to the Director for review. If referred, the Director shall
review each application to verify compliance with the applicable standards in
this Chapter.
   (b)   Multi-Family Projects - 20 to 49 Units. An application for a minor use
permit for a multi-family development of 20 to 49 units may be approved in
compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit) in the following
instances:
      (1)   If a finding can be made that the proposed development complies
with the standards in this Chapter; or
      (2)   If a variance has been approved in compliance with
Chapter 85.17 (Variances).
   (c)   Multi-Family Projects - 50 Units or More. An application for a
Conditional Use Permit for a multi-family development of 50 units or more may
be approved in compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit) in the following
instances:
      (1)   If a finding can be made that the proposed development complies
with the standards in this Chapter; or
      (2)   If a variance has been approved in compliance with
Chapter 85.17 (Variances).
   (d)   Pre-Application Conference. An applicant may request a pre-application
conference with the Director to determine the consistency of a proposed multi-
family project with the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.16.040 Development Standards Applicable to All Multi-Family Projects.
   The standards in this Section shall apply to all multi-family development
projects.
   (a)   Site Planning Standards.
      (1)   Location of Structures. All multi-family structures shall be
oriented so that:
         (A)   The structure and open space areas take advantage of the site’s
topography and natural features.
         (B)   Natural amenities (e.g., views, mature trees, creeks, riparian
corridors, etc.) are preserved.
      (2)   Location of Accessory Structures. Accessory structures or uses
(e.g., swimming pools, improved recreational/open spaces, storage structures,
etc.) shall not be located between an adjacent public right-of-way and a multi-
family structure, or between a property line abutting a single-family land use
zone and a multi-family structure. The accessory structures and uses shall be
located within the interior of the site, screened from view by the multi-family
structure(s), unless adjacent to parcels zoned for multi-family or non-
residential uses.
      (3)   Minimum Separation Between Structures. The separation distances
identified in
Table 84-9 (Minimum Separation Between Multi-Family Structures) shall apply to
parcels containing two or more dwelling units that are in separate detached
structures. The separation shall be between opposite exterior walls. Walls
shall be considered opposite if a perpendicular line drawn in a horizontal
plane from one structure intersects another structure’s wall. The front side of
a unit is the side containing the primary entrance to the dwelling unit. See
Figure 84-2 (Minimum Separation Between Multi-Family Structures).
Table 84-9
Minimum Separation Between Multi-Family Structures
Structure Orientation Minimum Separation (ft.) Figure Symbol
Table 84-9
Minimum Separation Between Multi-Family Structures
Structure   Minimum
Orientation Separation Figure Symbol
            (ft.)
Side-to-    10          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
Side                   IMAGES/0-0-0-11097.jpg]
Rear-to-    15         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
Rear                   IMAGES/0-0-0-11099.jpg]
Front-to-   20          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
Rear                   IMAGES/0-0-0-11102.jpg]
Front-to-
Front or    25         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
Interior               IMAGES/0-0-0-11104.jpg]
Court Space
All Others  20         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
                       IMAGES/0-0-0-11106.jpg]
 
Figure 84-2 Minimum Separation Between Multi-Family Structures
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11065.jpg]
 
      (4)   Setbacks. Setbacks shall be as provided in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses), except as
modified by the minimum setback standards in
Table 84-10 (Minimum Setbacks for Multi-Family Structures):
 
Table 84-10
Minimum Setbacks for Multi-Family Structures
Location of Multi-Family Structure      Minimum Side and Rear Setback of Multi-
                                        Family Structure
Adjacent to parcel in single-family     One foot setback for each one foot of
land use zoning district                multi-family structure height
Adjacent to a IR (Regional Industrial)
land use zoning district, AG            75 foot setback
(Agriculture) land use zoning district,
or mining operations
 
   (b)   Design.
      (1)   Entries. Building entrances and individual dwelling unit entries
shall be accentuated by architectural elements, lighting, and/or landscaping to
further emphasize their private nature.
      (2)   Disabled Accessibility. Where appropriate, handicapped
accessibility shall be integrated into the design concept.
      (3)   Length/Width of Structure. A multi-family structure shall not
exceed 100 feet in length/width.
      (4)   Visibility. Open spaces, courtyards, circulation corridors, and
individual dwelling unit entrances shall be visible from as many dwelling units
as possible.
   (c)   Typical Dwelling Unit Sizes. Dwelling units shall be the minimum sizes
indicated in
Table 84-11 (Minimum Dwelling Unit Sizes in Multi-Family Development):
Table 84-11
Minimum Dwelling Unit Sizes in Multi-Family Development
Dwelling Unit Type Minimum Size
                   Gross Floor Area in Square Feet
Efficiency         450
1 bedroom          650
2 bedroom          850
3 bedroom          1050
4+ bedroom         1200
 
   (d)   Density and Unit Type Mix. A variety of unit types is encouraged
(i.e., efficiency, one-bedroom, two bedroom, etc.) to provide a range of
options for owners or renters in different income, age, and family structure
categories.
   (e)   Fencing. A solid six-foot high fence of wood and/or masonry shall be
installed along the property lines but shall not encroach into the front or
street side setbacks. Additional fencing in compliance with
Chapter 83.06 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls) may be installed.
   (f)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards). In addition, the property owner shall
maintain all landscaping in a sustained healthy condition.
   (g)   Lighting. Lighting shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
   (h)   Parking. Parking areas, parking stalls, and driveways shall comply
with the provisions of
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards). Storage of boats, campers,
trailers and other recreational vehicles shall be prohibited on-site unless
oversize parking areas are provided and designated. These areas shall be
screened from adjacent streets and residences. Recreational vehicle parking may
not be used to meet the standard parking requirements.
    (i)   Infrastructure Requirements. A building permit shall not be issued
for the construction of multi-family residential dwelling(s) unless all of the
following infrastructure requirements are satisfied for an existing lot of
record:
      (1)   Proof of legal and physical access.
      (2)   Infrastructure as determined by the Land Development Division of
the Land Use Services Department depending on the location of the parcel to be
developed. This may include, but not limited to, any of the following: paved
access, curbs and gutters, sidewalk, streetlights, and/or appropriate drainage
improvements. These requirements may be waived or modified by the Director if
at least 70 percent of the parcels in the same block have been developed
without full street improvements.
      (3)   Water.
         (A)   Water Purveyor. Required when in the service area of a water
purveyor and the purveyor can supply the water.
         (B)   Substantiated Well Water. If the subject parcel is not within
the service area of a water purveyor, well water may be allowed if all required
setbacks are met.
      (4)   Sanitation.
         (A)   Sewer. Required when in the service area of a sewer provider and
the subject parcel is within 200 feet of the sewer line.
         (B)   Septic Systems/Holding Tanks. Allowed in compliance with the
local Regional Water Quality Control Board regulations.
      (5)   Fireflow. Adequate fireflow in compliance the Uniform Fire Code and
with § 23.0108 (Amendments to the Uniform Fire Code) of the County Code.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4334, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4360,
passed - -2019)
§ 84.16.050 Development Standards Applicable for Multi-Family Projects - Four
to 19 Units.
   The standards in this Section apply to all multi-family development projects
that contain between four and 19 dwelling units. The units may be either
attached or detached. These standards are in addition to the standards in §
84.16.040 (Development Standards Applicable to All Multi-Family Projects) and §
84.16.070 (Common Amenities and Facilities - Four or More Units), below.
   (a)   Location of Structures. All multi-family structures shall be oriented
so that:
      (1)   The front facade is generally parallel to the street with varying
setbacks to provide visual interest and varying shadow patterns. On corner
parcels, both street-facing facades are generally parallel to the intersecting
streets. See
Figure 84-1 (Siting of Multi-Family Structure(s) Parallel to Public Right-of-
Way). On curvilinear streets, the front facade of a structure is generally
parallel to the tangent of the midpoint of the arc of the street.
      (2)   Living spaces do not face the living spaces of another multi-family
structure.
      (3)   Courtyards and open space areas are immediately adjacent to all the
surrounding units.
      (4)   Sight lines from windows and entries maximize natural surveillance
of the site and the parking areas.
Figure 84-1 Siting of Multi-Family Structure(s) Parallel to Public Right-of-Way
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11063.jpg]
 
   (b)   Hierarchy of Space. Development design shall use a “hierarchy of
space” to define territory for public space (e.g., streets), community space
(e.g., common open space, play areas, communal laundry, community center,
etc.), and private space (e.g., individual units and private open space). The
use of design elements to define the public/private edge (e.g., special paving,
change in building materials, grade separations, etc.) or physical barriers
(e.g., landscaping, fences, low retaining walls, walls, screens, building
enclosures, etc.) are encouraged. See
Figure 84-3 (Design Elements Establish Hierarchy of Space).
Figure 84-3 Design Elements Establish Hierarchy of Space
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11067.jpg]
 
   (c)   Lighting. Lighting shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
      (1)   Security. Lighting levels shall vary depending on the specific use
and conditions, but the overall consideration shall be to provide lighting
levels sufficient that intruders cannot lurk in shadows, steps and other grade
changes are apparent, residents can easily unlock their door or identify
visitors on their doorstep, and opportunities for theft and vandalism are
reduced or eliminated.
      (2)   Street Lighting. Street lighting shall be installed along the
internal circulation streets. Lighting shall be designed to shine downward and
eliminate skyward glare in compliance with
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting). Light standards shall be
residential/pedestrian in scale and be spaced appropriately for the fixture,
type of illumination, and pole height.
      (3)   Parking Area Lighting. Lighting in parking areas shall be arranged
to prevent direct glare into adjacent dwelling units and onto neighboring uses/
properties in compliance with
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
      (4)   Pedestrian Lighting. Pedestrian-scaled lighting shall be located
along all walkways within the development. Light standards shall be a maximum
of 12 feet in height to allow proper illumination, discourage vandalism, and
have a pedestrian scale.
      (5)   Site Lighting. Site lighting may be located on a multi-family
structure to illuminate site areas not covered by individual light standards.
   (d)   Parking.
      (1)   Parking Standards. Parking areas, parking stalls, and driveways
shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards).
      (2)   Distance Between Parking Area and Dwelling Units. Parking areas
shall be located no further than 200 feet from the dwelling units to be served
as measured from the midpoint of the parking areas to the closest entrance
doors of the dwelling unit to be served.
      (3)   Pedestrian Accessway. Parking areas shall be designed so that an
unobstructed pedestrian accessway at least four feet in width is provided
between the public right-of-way and the parking area.
      (4)   Carports And/or Garages. At least one of the parking spaces
required for each dwelling unit in Table 83-15 (Parking Required by Land Use)
shall be covered (i.e., carport or garage)
         (A)   Design.
            (I)   Detached carports and garages shall be designed to reflect
the architecture of the dwelling units by using similar forms, scale, colors,
materials, and roof pitches.
            (II)   Roofs composed of rock material shall be prohibited.
            (III)   The side of a detached garage that faces a street shall
have a pitched roof with windows or other architectural details that mimic the
features of the multi-family structure(s).
         (B)   Distribution and Location.
            (I)   Carports and/or garages shall be distributed evenly
throughout the project in groupings of no more than six covered spaces.
            (II)   Carport and garage entries shall not be located between a
multi-family structure and a required street frontage, but shall instead be
located in groups on the interior of a parcel so that they are not visible from
adjacent streets.
            (III)   No more than six garage doors shall appear on any elevation
of a multi-family structure. The plane of each garage door shall be offset at
least two feet from the plane of the garage door adjacent to it.
         (C)   Storage. Carports and garages shall be utilized for vehicle
parking and not for household storage. Storage shall be provided as required by
Subdivision (g) (Storage), below.
   (e)   Security.
      (1)   Doors to Community Facilities. Doors to community facilities (e.g.,
communal laundry, community center, etc.) shall contain some transparency and
be key-controlled by residents. Courtyard gates and shared building entrances
that access individual units shall automatically lock when closed.
      (2)   Doors for Dwelling Units. Front doors for individual dwelling units
shall have a peephole or other feature to allow residents to see who is at the
door before opening it. To prevent break-ins, doorknobs shall be at least 40
inches from any windowpane. Single cylinder dead bolt locks shall be installed
on the exterior doors of all individual dwelling units. Sliding glass doors
shall have one permanent door on the outside and the inside moving door shall
have a locking device and a pin.
   (f)   Solid Waste/Recyclable Material Storage Areas. Solid waste/recyclable
material storage areas shall be clearly designated on the plot plan. The areas
shall be clearly accessible for pickup and shall be effectively screened from
public view in compliance with
Chapter 84.24 (Solid Waste/Recyclable Materials Storage). Waste disposal pickup
bins (dumpsters) shall not occupy required parking spaces nor intrude into
required access driveways.
   (g)   Storage.
      (1)   Private Storage Space. Each dwelling unit shall be provided a
minimum of 150 cubic feet of private enclosed storage space in addition to the
parking area located within the garage, if provided, or immediately adjacent to
the dwelling unit. Private enclosed storage space shall be prohibited in
carports.
      (2)   Bicycle/Motorcycle Storage Area. All multi-family projects shall
provide covered, enclosed, and secure storage areas for bicycles and
motorcycles. Motorcycle spaces shall be at least four feet by eight feet.
      (3)   Design. Storage and other accessory structures shall be designed
with materials and/or architectural elements that are similar to the multi-
family structure(s).
   (h)   Open Space - Common.
      (1)   Minimum Size and Dimensions. A minimum 900 square feet of usable
common open space shall be provided for active or passive outdoor activity. For
every dwelling unit above nine, an additional 100 square feet of usable common
open space shall be provided. Usable common open space is defined as an open
area or recreational amenity or facility that is designed and intended to be
used for outdoor living and/or recreation. Usable open space shall have a
minimum dimension of 30 feet in any direction. A multi-family development shall
not be located adjacent to an IR (Regional Industrial) land use zoning
district, AG (Agriculture) land use zoning district, or mining operations
unless the common open space constitutes 60 percent or more of the parcel and
is designed to buffer the industrial, agricultural or mining uses.
      (2)   Calculation of Area. Required front, rear, and side setback areas
along streets, driveways, parking areas, and walkways shall not be used to
satisfy any part of the common open space requirement.
      (3)   Amenities. The common open space area shall include amenities
indicated in §
84.16.050 (Common Amenities and Facilities).
   (i)   Open Space - Private. A minimum of 100 square feet of private open
space (e.g., patios, balcony, decks, etc.), a minimum of six feet in width,
shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Required private open space areas
shall not be used to satisfy any part of the common open space requirement.
Enclosure of private open space shall not prevent common open space
surveillance by the residents.
   (j)   On-Site Manager. A full-time resident manager shall be required for
multi-family projects with 15 or more dwelling units.
   (k)   Common Amenities and Facilities. Common open space amenities and
laundry facilities shall be provided in compliance with §
84.16.070 (Common Amenities and Facilities).
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010)
§ 84.16.060 Development Standards for Multi-Family Projects - 20 or More Units.
   The standards in this Section apply to multi-family development projects
that contain 20 or more dwelling units. These standards are in addition to the
standards in §
84.16.040 (Development Standards Applicable to All Multi-Family Projects) and
the guidelines in §
84.16.080 (Design Guidelines for Multi-Family Projects - 20 or More Units).
   (a)   Open Space - Common.
      (1)   Minimum Size and Dimensions. In lieu of the provisions of §
84.16.050(h)(1), the following shall apply for common open space for multi-
family projects with 20 or more units: A minimum 900 square feet of usable
common open space shall be provided for active or passive outdoor activity. For
every dwelling unit above seven, an additional 125 square feet of usable common
open space shall be provided. Usable common open space is defined as an open
area or recreational amenity or facility that is designed and intended to be
used for outdoor living and/or recreation. Usable open space shall have a
minimum dimension of 30 feet in any direction. A multi-family development shall
not be located adjacent to an IR (Regional Industrial) land use zoning
district, AG (Agriculture) land use zoning district, or mining operations
unless the common open space constitutes 60 percent or more of the parcel and
is designed to buffer the industrial, agricultural or mining uses.
      (2)   Calculation of area. Required front, rear, and side setback areas
along streets, driveways, parking areas, and walkways shall not be used to
satisfy any part of the common open space requirement.
      (3)   Amenities. The common open space area shall include amenities
indicated in §
84.16.050 (Common Amenities and Facilities).
   (b)   Open Space - Private. A minimum of 125 square feet of private open
space (e.g., patios, balcony, decks, etc.), a minimum of six feet in width,
shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Required private open space areas
shall not be used to satisfy any part of the common open space requirement.
Enclosure of private open space shall not prevent common open space
surveillance by the residents.
   (c)   On-site Manager. A full-time resident manager shall be required for
all multi-family projects with 20 or more dwelling units.
   (d)   Management Office. A separate management office shall be required for
all multi-family projects of 20 or more dwelling units. If applicable, the
management office shall be located in a central, visible location. See
Figure 84-5 (Management Office in Central Location.).
Figure 84-5 Management Office in Central Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11071.jpg]
 
   (e)   Signs.
      (1)   Clear legible entry signs shall be provided to identify the
development. Internal circulation signs and visitor parking areas shall also be
clearly indicated. A directory that shows the location of structures and
individual dwelling units within the development shall be provided.
Professionally designed, creative signs are strongly encouraged
       (2)   Structure numbers and individual unit numbers shall be readily
visible, in a consistent location, well lit at night, and compatible with the
overall design of the residential project.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.16.070 Common Amenities and Facilities - Four or More Units.
   (a)   Types of Required Amenities. All multi-family projects shall provide
the amenities indicated in
Table 84-12 (On-Site Recreation Amenities for Multi-Family Projects). The
developer shall select the amenities to be provided. Recreational amenities
shall be designed to serve the anticipated inhabitants of the residential
project.
   (b)   Minimum Type/Number of Amenities. The required minimum type and/or
number of recreational amenities shall be based on the total number of dwelling
units within a multi-family project as follows and in compliance with
Table 84-12 (Minimum On-Site Recreation Amenities for Multi-Family Projects):
      (1)   Five to nine units: A minimum of two amenity points from any
category.
      (2)   Ten to 19 dwelling units: A minimum of three amenity points from
any category, with a maximum of one amenity allowed from the one-point
category.
      (3)   Twenty to 49 dwelling units: A minimum of five amenity points from
any category, with a maximum of one amenity allowed from the one-point
category.
      (4)   Fifty to 99 dwelling units: A minimum of seven amenity points,
including at least one amenity from the four-point category.
      (5)   One hundred or more dwelling units: A minimum of ten amenity
points, including at least two amenities from the four-point category, plus one
additional amenity from the two-point, three-point, or four-point categories
for each 50 dwelling units beyond 100.
Table 84-12
Minimum On-Site Recreation Amenities for Multi-Family Projects
Amenity Point Category Type of Amenity
Table 84-12
Minimum On-Site Recreation Amenities for Multi-Family Projects
Amenity
Point      Type of Amenity
Category
One-Point  Bowling green
Amenities
           Cabana or Shade trellis area
           Open space turf areas
           Passive water feature (e.g. fountain)
           Picnic/barbeque area
           Shuffleboard
           Tot lots (2-5 year olds; 1 or 2 activities minimum)
           Tree Grove
           Passive recreation area and/or gardens
Two-Point  Bridle paths
Amenities
           Children’s playground (Combined for age group 2-5 and age group 5-
           12)
           1/2 court basketball (one hoop)**
           Community garden plots with water service
           Outdoor racquetball/handball tilt-up wall
           Putting Green
           Sauna
           Volleyball court
           Water feature (pond, creek area)
Three-
Point      1/2 scale Soccer Field
Amenities
           Basketball Court (2 hoops)**
           Child wading pool
           Restroom area
           Sports Court
           Tot lots (age appropriate play equipment/3 activities minimum)
Four-Point Child care facility
Amenities
           Exercise room
           Indoor racquet sports court
           Par 3 course and/or pitch and putt golf course
           Recreation hall/club house
           Softball Field
           Swimming pool
           Tennis court**
** Solid impervious surface shall be required.
 
   (c)   Thresholds for Allowable Densities. The maximum density of a multi-
family project shall be calculated based upon the total number of points
accumulated for the amenities provided as indicated in
Table 84-13 (On-Site Recreational Amenities - Thresholds for Allowable
Densities).
 
Table 84-13
On-Site Recreational Amenities  Thresholds for Allowable Densities
Total Amenity Points (Based on  Percent of Maximum Allowed Density (Based on 20
Table 84-12, above)             dwelling units/acre)
2 points                        75 percent
4 points                        85 percent
8 points                        100 percent
 
   (d)   Location of Amenities. Common open space amenities shall be provided
immediately adjacent to the dwelling units for purposes of enjoyment and
security.
   (e)   Community Room or Structure. A multi-family project shall provide a
community room or structure in compliance with Table 84-14 (Minimum Size of
Community Room or Structure).
 
Table 84-14
Minimum Size of Community Room or Structure
Number of Dwelling Units Minimum Size (Sq. Ft.)
2 to 12                  None required
13 to 19                 800
20 to 29                 1,200
50+                      1,500
 
   (f)   Similar Amenities. The applicable review authority (i.e., Building
Official or Commission, as applicable) may approve a proposed amenity not
listed in
Table 84-12 (Minimum On-Site Recreation Amenities for Multi-Family Projects) if
the proposed amenity meets the needs of the project residents at a similar
level.
   (g)   Common Laundry Room Facilities.
      (1)   Laundry Room Facility Required. All multi-family projects shall
provide a common laundry room facility equipped with washers and dryers at the
ratio of one washer and one dryer for every five dwelling units. The
fractional/decimal results of calculations of the required number of washers
and dryers shall be rounded up to the next highest whole number.
      (2)   Reduction in Number of Required Washers and Dryers. If a multi-
family project provides washer and dryer hook-ups within one or more dwelling
units, the total number of required washers and dryers in a common laundry
facility shall be reduced. The amount of the reduction shall be calculated at
the ratio of one washer and one dryer for every five dwelling units that are
equipped with their own washer and dryer hook-ups.
      (3)   Location and Features. A common laundry room facility shall be
located adjacent to a children’s play area to facilitate supervision. Doors and
walls shall have windows to allow natural surveillance both into the laundry
room and outside to the surrounding area. See
Figure 84-4 (Laundry Room Location and Features).
Figure 84-4 Laundry Room Location and Features
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11069.jpg]
 
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.16.080 Design Guidelines for Multi-Family Projects - 20 or More Units.
   (a)   Purpose. Appropriate design of multi-family residential structures and
outdoor spaces can contribute to a dynamic, visually rich environment that
promotes social interaction, fosters community pride, and instills feelings of
safety and security. These design guidelines are intended to achieve the
following objectives:
      (1)   Establish multi-family residential architectural designs that
complement various neighborhood characteristics and that support high quality
development.
      (2)   Identify landscape materials and designs that enhance the
appearance of multi-family residential developments and contribute to the
overall quality of the community.
      (3)   Provide for amenities appropriate to the demographics of multi-
family residential projects within an area.
      (4)   Apply the principles of Crime Prevention Through Environmental
Design (CPTED) to enhance safety and security within multi-family residential
development projects.
      (5)   Establish criteria to ensure quality property management.
   (b)   Site Planning.
      (1)   Context. Multi-family residential development successfully
contributes to the overall community when relationships with the existing and
planned land uses, development patterns, and context are considered.
         (A)   New multi-family projects should respect the context of the
existing neighborhood, reflect its best design features, and generally be
compatible with the character of existing high quality development while still
fulfilling the intent of the standards identified within this Chapter.
         (B)   Existing site amenities (e.g., views, mature trees, and similar
natural features unique to the site) should be preserved and incorporated into
residential projects whenever possible.
         (C)   New multi-family residential projects should be compatible with
residential development in the immediate area through the use of complementary
structure arrangements, buffers, and avoidance of overwhelming structure scale
and visual obstructions.
         (D)   Where appropriate, new landscaping should complement existing
landscape materials, location, and massing on adjacent developments.
         (E)   Developments should relate directly to the adjacent street,
present an attractive and interesting facade to passersby, and appear inviting.
Developments that ignore the street and create an isolated enclave are strongly
discouraged. See
Figure 84-6 (Dwelling Unit Oriented to Street).
Figure 84-6 Dwelling Unit Oriented to Street
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11073.jpg]
 
      (2)   Siting. Appropriate structure siting can reduce the perceived
density of multi-family projects, maximize open space areas, provide “eyes on
the street” surveillance, and enhance neighborliness by creating community
gathering spaces.
         (A)   A multi-family structure should be oriented to a street in
compliance with §
84.16.060(a)(1)(A) (Site planning standards).
         (B)   In addition to a street orientation, the clustering of multi-
family dwelling units should be a consistent site planning element of the plan.
Whenever possible, structures should be configured around courtyards, gathering
areas, and open spaces. See
Figure 84-7 (Clustering of Multi-Family Dwelling Units).
Figure 84-7 Clustering of Multi-Family Dwelling Units
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11075.jpg]
 
         (C)   Portions of the project that are not oriented to the street
should be well integrated into the project’s overall site design. As with the
street-oriented area of the project, the same design considerations should be
given to siting, appearance, circulation, landscaping, and safety issues.
         (D)   Structures should be oriented to provide some privacy yet still
relate to the street and the existing community. Doors should be visible from
the street and windows should allow residents to have “eyes on the street” for
natural surveillance. See
Figure 84-8 (“Eyes on the Street”).
Figure 84-8 “Eyes on the Street”
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11077.jpg]
 
         (E)   Energy efficiency and energy conservation should be considered
in structure siting. Structures should be oriented to take advantage of
prevailing breezes for cross ventilation of individual dwelling units, reduce
the need for mechanical air conditioning, and to enhance the functionality of
ceiling fans.
      (3)   Open Space.
         (A)   Residents should have access to useable open space for
recreation and social activities. Open spaces should be conveniently located.
See
Figure 84-9 (“Access to Open Space”)
Figure 84-9 Access to Open Space
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11079.jpg]
 
         (B)   Open space areas should be sheltered from the noise and traffic
of adjacent streets or other incompatible uses. Open space siting should take
advantage of prevailing breezes and sun orientation in order to provide a
comfortable environment.
         (C)   Open space areas should have well-defined edges (e.g., walkways,
structures, or landscaping).
         (D)   A series of connected open space areas of varying shape,
appearance, and usage are encouraged. Smaller areas may directly relate to a
cluster of units, while the larger areas may serve several clusters as common
open space. See
Figure 84-10 (Connected Open Spaces).
Figure 84-10 Connected Open Spaces
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11081.jpg]
 
      (4)   Outdoor Play Areas.
         (A)   Hard surface areas for activities (e.g., bicycle riding,
skating, rope jumping, hopscotch, etc.) should be provided. These active play
areas should be safely separated from vehicular use areas.
         (B)   The physical capabilities and play behavior of various age
groups (i.e., tots, older children, and teens) are different. In large
developments, separate, but not necessarily segregated, play areas or informal
outdoor spaces should be provided for each group for safety reasons. Small
developments may combine these play areas (i.e., tot lot incorporated into the
larger activity area for older children). See
Figure 84-11 (Play Areas for Different Ages).
Figure 84-11 Play Areas for Different Ages
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11083.jpg]
 
         (C)   Seating areas should be provided where adults can supervise
children’s play and also where school-age children can sit. Seating location
should consider comfort factors (e.g., sun orientation, shade, wind, etc.).
   (c)   Architecture.
      (1)   Overall Character.
         (A)   Where the neighborhood has a recognizable architectural theme,
style, or character, it should be considered for incorporation into the
project’s design.
         (B)   To create a unified appearance, all support structures in the
project (e.g., laundry facilities, recreation structures, carports, garages,
and the management office) should be compatible in architectural design with
the rest of the development.
      (2)   Structure Scale and Height.
         (A)   Structures should incorporate smaller-scale architectural forms
(e.g., bays, recessed or projecting balconies, and dormers) in order to
visually reduce the height and scale of the structure and emphasize the
definition of individual units. Architectural elements (e.g., bay windows,
porches, projecting eaves, awnings, and similar elements) that add visual
interest to the development are strongly encouraged.
         (B)   In order to “scale down” facades that face the street, common
open space, and adjacent residential structures, it may be desirable to set
back portions of the upper floors of new multi-family residential structures.
         (C)   Varied structure heights are encouraged, both to provide visual
interest and give the appearance of a collection of smaller structures.
Structure heights at the development’s edge should be considered within the
context of the project’s surroundings, the adjacent uses, and the distance from
adjacent structures. The development’s structure height should create a
transition from the heights of adjacent existing residential development,
rather than form abrupt height changes. See
Figure 84-12 (Height Transition).
Figure 84-12 Height Transition
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11085.jpg]
 
      (3)   Facade Modulation. Boxy and monotonous facades that lack human
scale dimensions and have large expanses of flat wall planes should be
prohibited. Architectural treatments (e.g., recessed windows, moldings,
decorative trim, and wood frames) should be used to add visual interest to the
facade. Windows of varied shape, size, and placement are strongly encouraged.
See
Figure 84-13 (Examples of Window Styles).
Figure 84-13 Examples of Window Styles
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11087.jpg]
 
      (4)   Roofs.
         (A)   Roof pitches and materials should appear residential in
character and should consider the prevailing roof types in the neighborhood
(e.g., hipped roofs, gabled roofs, mansard roofs etc.). The roof pitch for a
porch may be slightly lower than the roof pitch of the main structure. See
Figure 84-14 (Typical Roof Types).
         (B)   Roof lines should be broken up and varied within the overall
horizontal plane. Combinations of roof heights that create variation and visual
interest are strongly encouraged.
         (C)   Carport roofs visible from structures should incorporate the
roof pitch and materials of adjacent structures.
Figure 84-14 Typical Roof Types
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11089.jpg]
 
      (5)   Mechanical Equipment and Vents.
         (A)   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment visible from structures or a
public street should be screened in a manner consistent with the appearance of
the structure, including materials and color.
         (B)   Mechanical equipment on the ground should be screened from view.
Utility meters and equipment should be placed in locations that are not exposed
to view from the street or they should be suitably screened, including the use
of landscape materials. Screening devices should be compatible with the
architecture and color of the adjacent structures.
         (C)   Roof flashing and vents exposed to public view should be painted
to match adjacent surfaces or concealed in a manner consistent with the
structure’s appearance.
         (D)   Screening of mechanical equipment should comply with §
83.02.060 (Screening and Buffering).
   (d)   Site Elements.
      (1)   Site Furniture.
         (A)   The design, selection, and placement of site furnishings (e.g.,
tables, benches, and solid waste receptacles) should be compatible with the
overall site design and architectural character of the residential project.
         (B)   Seating opportunities should be provided in both sunny and
shaded areas. Seating in areas that offer opportunities for social interaction
and informal surveillance (e.g., a bench near the mail box area or benches near
tot lot areas and laundry rooms) are strongly encouraged. A variety of sitting
area designs, from formal arrangements (e.g., benches) to informal arrangements
(e.g., low walls or steps) is strongly encouraged. In general, benches should
be located in areas that have some provision for shade.
      (2)   Mailboxes.
         (A)   Mailboxes should be located in highly visible, heavy use areas
for convenience, to allow for casual social interaction, and to promote safety.
A bench or seating area in close proximity to the mailbox location is strongly
encouraged, and a solid waste receptacle(s) should be located adjacent to the
mailboxes. See
Figure 84-15 (Mailboxes).
         (B)   Incorporation of design features (e.g., built frame consistent
with the project’s architectural style) is strongly encouraged.
Figure 84-15 Mailboxes
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11091.jpg]
 
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
CHAPTER 84.17: NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Section
   
84.17.010   Purpose.
   
84.17.020   Applicability.
   
84.17.030   Continuation of Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
   
84.17.040   Termination of Nonconforming Use.
   
84.17.050   Removal or Alterations of Nonconforming Uses.
   
84.17.060   Nonconforming Commercial Chicken Ranch.
   
84.17.070   Other Nonconforming Uses.
   
84.17.080   Alteration of Nonconforming Uses.
   
84.17.090   Conversion of Nonconforming Retail Land Use to Nonconforming
Restaurant Land Use in the Mountain Region Only.
§ 84.17.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Regulation of Legal Conformities. This Chapter establishes uniform
provisions for the regulation of legal nonconforming land uses, structures, and
parcels. Within the land use zoning districts established by this Development
Code, there exist land uses, structures, and parcels that were lawfully in
existence before the adoption, or amendment of this Development Code, but which
would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the terms of
this Development Code, as amended. This Chapter provides for their eventual
elimination, but allows them to exist under the limited conditions identified
in this Chapter.
   (b)   Intent. It is the intent of this Development Code to discourage the
long-term continuance of these nonconformities in order to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare and to bring the uses and structures into
conformity with the goals and policies of the General Plan and any applicable
Specific Plan or community plan area.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.17.020 Applicability.
   The provisions in this Chapter apply to existing legal nonconforming
structures, uses, and parcels.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.17.030 Continuation of Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
   (a)   Structural Alterations. A nonconforming structure may be continued
provided there are no structural alterations except as provided in this Chapter
   (b)   Enlargements. A nonconforming use may be continued provided that the
use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered, except as provided
in this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.17.040 Termination of Nonconforming Use.
   (a)   Termination by Change of Use. A part of a structure or parcel occupied
by a nonconforming use that is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to
this Development Code shall only be used or occupied by a conforming use
afterwards.
   (b)   Discontinued Structures or Land Use. If a part of a structure or
parcel occupied by a nonconforming use is discontinued for 180 days or more,
its status as a legal nonconforming use shall cease and thereafter it shall
only be used or occupied in compliance with this Development Code.
   (c)   Reconstruction, Repairing, or Rebuilding and Continued Use. The
provisions of this Section shall not prevent the reconstruction, repairing, or
rebuilding and continued use of nonconforming structures or structures damaged
by a natural or man-made catastrophe after the effective date of this
Development Code, provided the cost of the reconstruction, repairing, or
rebuilding does not exceed 75 percent of the replacement value of the structure
or structures constituting a single enterprise at the time the damage occurred.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.17.050 Removal or Alterations of Nonconforming Uses.
   (a)   Time Period for Removal or Alteration. A legal nonconforming use, that
was designated or intended for a use not presently allowed in the land use
zoning district where it is located, shall be completely removed or altered to
comply with the requirements for the uses allowed in the land use zoning
district within a time period fixed by the Department. The time for removal or
alteration may not be fixed for a date before the expiration of the normal life
of a structure as determined by the Director. The determination of the normal
life of a nonconforming structure and the fixing of time for its removal or
alteration may only be made after notice to the owner.
   (b)   Order for Removal or Alteration. An order for removal or alteration
shall require the action on a date no less than five years from the time the
order is made. The Department shall give the owner of the affected use or
structure written notice of removal or alteration immediately upon the order
becoming final and again not less than 60 or more than 180 days before the date
the removal or alteration is required to be completed. If the Department fails
to give this second notice within the required time period, the owner shall be
given 60 days from the notice’s actual postmark date.
   (c)   Exempt Residential Structures. A residential structure that complied
with applicable development standards at the time of its construction and that
is utilized for residential purposes in a land use zoning district that allows
residential uses is not subject to provisions of this Chapter even though the
structure does not comply with the residential development standards
established for residential land use zoning districts in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses), including the
Alternate Housing Standards (AH) Overlay.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.17.060 Nonconforming Commercial Chicken Ranch.
   (a)   Continuation of Ranch after Change to Residential Land Use Zoning
District. A commercial chicken ranch legally existing at the time of a zone
change to a residential land use zoning district may continue to operate to the
full limit and extent of chicken houses, cages, brooders, and similar accessory
structures existing on the premises at the time of the zone change, provided
that a Certificate of Land Use Compliance is recorded in compliance with
Chapter 85.05 (Certificate of Land Use Compliance) before the effective date of
the zone change.
   (b)   Conditional Use Permit Required for Expansion of Use. In the event a
commercial chicken ranch desires the addition of chicken houses, cages,
brooders, or similar accessory structures beyond those existing at the time of
the zone change, an approved Conditional Use Permit shall be required in
compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit), including findings for
alteration of a nonconforming use in §
84.17.080 (Alteration to Nonconforming Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.17.070 Other Nonconforming Uses.
   (a)   Nonconforming Use of Land with No Structures. The legal nonconforming
use of land, where structure(s) do not exist on the effective date of this
Development Code, may continue for a period of not more than ten years,
provided:
      (1)   The nonconforming use of land shall not in any way be expanded or
extended, either on the same or adjoining property.
      (2)   The nonconforming use of land existed on the effective date of this
Development Code. If the nonconforming use is subsequently discontinued or
changed, it shall not be reestablished and any future use of the land shall
comply with the provisions of this Development Code.
   (b)   On-Site and Off-Site Signs. Legal nonconforming commercial on-site or
off-site signs existing on the effective date of this Development Code may be
continued, although the use does not conform with the provisions of this
Development Code; provided, however, that the nonconforming signs and their
supporting members shall be completely removed by their owners no later than
five years from the effective date of this Development Code.
   (c)   Reclassification of Land Use Zoning Districts. The provisions in this
Section shall also apply to structures and land and uses that become
nonconforming due to a reclassification of land use zoning districts under this
Development Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.17.080 Alteration of Nonconforming Uses.
   (a)   Conditional Use Permit Requirement. A legal nonconforming use shall
only be altered after review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit in
compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit), including the findings
for alteration of a nonconforming use in §
85.06.080 (Alteration to Nonconforming Uses).
   (b)   Exempt Governmental or Court Actions. Alterations required by
governmental or court action shall be exempt from these conditions.
   (c)   Ownership Changes. Restrictions and conditions affecting a
nonconforming use shall apply to the existing use, land, and structures and
shall not be affected by ownership changes.
   (d)   Additions Within Setback Areas. In addition to the provisions
regarding Conditional Use Permits or Variances, the Building Official may allow
the construction of an additional modification to a legally existing structure
within a current setback area, as established by an applicable residential land
use zoning district, when the legally existing structure is within the setback
area, and provided the additional modification does not exceed the projection
of the existing structure into the current setback area and does not come
closer than three feet to a property line. In the Fire Safety Overlay, the
additional modification shall not come closer than five feet to any property
line.
   (e)   Exemptions from Conditional Use Permit Requirements.
      (1)   Nonconforming Residential Uses. The requirement for a Conditional
Use Permit shall not apply to nonconforming residential uses, where the uses
are being modified or expanded up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet of floor
space or by no more than 25 percent of the floor space or ground area existing
at the time the use became a nonconforming use, whichever is greater.
      (2)   Bringing Structure or Use into Compliance. The requirement for a
Conditional Use Permit shall not apply to a nonconforming use or structure that
is being expanded, altered, or modified to more closely approximate or exceed
the standards of this Development Code with which it does not currently
conform.
      (3)   Routine Maintenance. Routine maintenance and repair of the non-
conforming structure.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.17.090 Conversion of Nonconforming Retail Land Use to Nonconforming
Restaurant Land Use in the Mountain Region Only.
   A legal nonconforming retail land use may be converted to a legal
nonconforming restaurant land use, as defined in this Code, and shall be
considered a continuation of the legal nonconforming retail land use, provided
that:
   (a)   Prior to such conversion, the square footage or footprint of the
existing retail space is not expanded for purposes of the proposed restaurant.
   (b)   The restaurant cannot expand its square footage or footprint. The
restaurant may use any patio or other outside area previously used in the
course of conducting the legal non-conforming retail use.
   (c)   The square footage of the restaurant use shall in no event exceed
5,000 square feet.
   (d)   The restaurant use shall not permit entertainment.
   (e)   The restaurant use shall not serve alcoholic beverages, except with a
meal.
(Ord. 4161, passed - -2011)
CHAPTER 84.18: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Section
   
84.18.010   Purpose.
   
84.18.020   Applicability.
   
84.18.030   Development Standards.
   
84.18.040   Design Standards.
§ 84.18.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards for applicants that
desire to develop under the provisions of Planned Development Permits (
Chapter 85.10). The standards in this Chapter are intended to promote a more
efficient use of the land and to create a more desirable and affordable living
environment by providing greater design flexibility than would be possible
through the strict application of standard development regulations required by
a land use zoning district.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.18.020 Applicability.
   (a)   Compliance with the General Plan. The provisions in this Chapter apply
to development in any land use zoning district in compliance with the
application requirements identified in
Chapter 85.10 (Planned Development Permit). Strict compliance with the purpose
and intent of the General Plan shall be required. Only uses allowed in the land
use zoning district for which the planned development is proposed shall be
allowed.
   (b)   Authority of the Commission to Recommend Alteration to Standards. The
Planning Commission may recommend alteration of adopted standards in the
Preliminary Development Plan, for approval by the Board of Supervisors.
   (c)   Authority of the Board to Alter Standards. Unless specifically changed
within this Chapter, adopted County ordinances, standards and policies shall
apply to a planned development project, including those identified in this
Development Code and the General Plan. The Board of Supervisors may alter
adopted standards in the Preliminary Development Plan, where the Board finds
that the altered standards would more adequately serve the purpose and intent
of the planned development provisions of the Development Code. Any alterations
to these standards must be made consistent with the findings required in §
85.10.050(b).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4205, passed - -2013)
§ 84.18.030 Development Standards.
   (a)   Size. A minimum site of five acres shall be required for a
residential, commercial, industrial, and/or mixed-use development.
   (b)   Density. Unless modified by the Board as described in §
84.18.020(c), the total density of a planned development shall be determined by
the land use zoning district applicable to the subject property. Increased
densities may be granted by the review authority through the bonus density or
transfer of density authorized by the General Plan and implemented by this
Development Code under the Housing Incentives Plan in
Chapter 83.03 (Affordable Housing Incentives - Density Bonus), or a Specific
Plan. However, density increases shall not be granted for that portion of a
planned development for which only a Preliminary Development Plan has been
approved. Parcel sizes smaller than those required by the land use zoning
district may be approved for a Planned Development provided the overall parcel
density is not exceeded, except as otherwise allowed by this Development Code
and/or the General Plan. The maximum unit allowable dwelling densities shall be
as follows:
 
Maximum Unit Allowable Dwelling Density* Average Slope
4.0 Dwelling Units/Acre                  0 percent - less than 15 percent
2.0 Dwelling Units/Acre                  15 percent - less than 30 percent
1.0 Dwelling Units/3 Acres               30 percent - less than 40 percent
1.0 Dwelling Units/10 Acres              40 percent or greater
*The density shall not be more than the maximum allowed by the land use zoning
district.
 
      (1)   Transfer of Density. A 100 percent transfer of the density
indicated on the General Plan official land use zoning district shall be
allowed within a planned development project, provided all other performance
criteria are met. The maximum allowable density transfers shall be determined
by the table above. This transfer of density may include a transfer of density
from adjacent property for which development restrictions in favor of the
planned development project have been obtained.
         (A)   To be eligible for density transfer, adjacent private lands
shall meet the following criteria:
            (I)   Private lands from which the density is being transferred
shall be free of hazards or other physical constraints that prohibit the
construction of residential dwellings.
            (II)   Private lands from which the density is being transferred
shall be shown on the General Plan as developable for residential dwellings.
         (B)   Open space within the project that has been created as a result
of a density transfer shall be common open space. However, in those
circumstances when it is infeasible or impracticable for a private organization
to adequately maintain and preserve the land as open space, the land may be
dedicated to the public for open space purposes.
         (C)   Transferable density on slopes within a Fire Safety Overlay
shall be determined by the formulas in §
82.13.050 (General Development Standards).
      (2)   Bonus Density.
         (A)   An additional bonus in dwelling-unit density, up to 10 percent
above that indicated in the General Plan Land Use Zoning District for the area,
may be granted by the review authority provided one of the following criteria
is met:
            (I)   A publicly valuable resource is provided, preserved, or
enhanced that would otherwise require the expenditure of public monies.
            (II)   A public or quasi-public feature is provided above and
beyond the normal expectations.
            (III)   An amenity, convenience, or excellence in design is
provided above and beyond normal expectations.
         (B)   The granting of density bonuses shall further the purpose and
intent of the planned development provisions of this Development Code and the
General Plan.
   (c)   Accessory Uses in Planned Residential Developments (PRD’s).
      (1)   Accessory uses allowed in the RS (Single-Family Residential) land
use zoning district shall be allowed in a planned residential development,
provided that the accessory uses are compatible with the approved PRD
development plan.
      (2)   When the underlying land use zoning district allows the keeping of
horses, and where the density of a planned residential development project does
not exceed four dwelling units per acre, horses shall be allowed in a PRD
project as follows:
         (A)   On parcels 20,000 square feet or greater subject to the
regulations of the RS (Single-Family Residential) land use zoning district.
         (B)   Where parcels are less than 20,000 square feet, horses shall be
allowed subject to the following conditions:
            (I)   Horses shall be clustered onto common parcels.
            (II)   The maximum density of horses shall not exceed four horses
per gross acre of common parcel area.
            (III)   Standards and regulations of the Environmental Health
Services Division shall apply.
            (IV)   Maintenance and management of the clustered facilities shall
be provided by the property owners’ association.
   (d)   Phased Development. In a phased development, safeguards shall be
required in the form of easements or bonds or other commitments for open space
requirements that will protect the integrity of the total project.
   (e)   Subdivision. When a tentative subdivision map is filed with a planned
development project, before recordation of the final subdivision map, the
following items shall be filed with the appropriate agency:
      (1)   Documentation of easements, covenants, deeds, and Property Owner
Association by-laws, restrictions, and articles of incorporation.
      (2)   Sureties and performance bonds covering open space areas, dedicated
public improvements, and other items as determined by the review authority. The
amount of the performance bonds shall be reviewed annually by the appropriate
agency.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4205,
passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4334, passed - -2017)
§ 84.18.040 Design Standards.
   (a)   Circulation and Parking.
      (1)   Vehicular Circulation Pattern. The vehicular circulation pattern
shall be designed to:
         (A)   Provide adequate vehicular access to and within the project, in
compliance with adopted County standards.
         (B)   Coordinate with external transportation networks in terms of
location and loads.
         (C)   Integrate with the natural landscape and, where possible,
parallel the natural drainage system.
         (D)   Comply with the noise level standards outlined in §
83.01.080 (Noise).
         (E)   Have two points of vehicular ingress and egress from surrounding
streets, one of which may be emergency only for the planned development
project, and each phase of the project. Where the applicant can show that this
is a physical impossibility, the appropriate fire authority may modify this
requirement.
         (F)   Allow private streets as acceptable if they are built to County
standards and are inspected by the County. However, rights-of-way shall not be
accepted by the County nor shall private streets be accepted as part of the
County maintained road system.
      (2)   Pedestrian Circulation Pattern. The pedestrian circulation pattern
shall be designed so that:
         (A)   It is separated from vehicular traffic where possible and it
discourages pedestrian crossing of the vehicular network, except at controlled
points that are designed for pedestrian safety.
         (B)   Hard-surfaced, safely lighted pedestrian access to common open
space, recreational areas, community facilities, and other logical terminal
points shall be provided.
      (3)   Common Off-Street Parking Areas. Common off-street parking areas
shall be designed so that:
         (A)   They provide adequate, convenient, well-marked, and safely-
lighted parking.
         (B)   With the exception of enclosed parking structures, they shall
contain appropriate landscaping to minimize the effect of large areas of
asphalt or concrete.
      (4)   Parking Spaces Required per Unit. Two parking spaces per dwelling
unit shall be provided. Tandem parking shall not be allowed except in mountain
areas. Guest parking, either on-street or in common parking areas, shall be
provided at a ratio of one space per two dwelling units.
   (b)   Open Space.
      (1)   Open Space Defined. For the purposes of this Chapter, open space
within a planned development shall be the total area of land or water within
the boundaries of a planned development, designed and intended for use and
enjoyment as open space areas.
         (A)   Open space within a planned development shall include the
following:
            (I)   Area of the site not covered by structures, paved areas or
accessory structures, except recreational structures.
            (II)   Land that is accessible and available to all occupants of
the development for which the space is intended.
         (B)   Open space within a planned development shall not include:
            (I)   Proposed and existing street rights-of-way and private
streets.
            (II)   Open parking areas, driveways.
            (III)   School sites.
            (IV)   Commercial, industrial, or office areas, and their
structures, accessory structures, parking, and loading facilities.
      (2)   Minimum Open Space Required for Planned Development. A residential
planned development project shall have a minimum of 40 percent private and
common open space, not including balcony area.
      (3)   Minimum Open Space Required for each Dwelling Unit. Each dwelling
unit shall have a minimum contiguous private open space area as follows:
         (A)   Ground Floor. 225 square feet.
         (B)   Upper-Story Dwelling without Ground Floor. 60 square feet.
      (4)   Management of Common Facilities. Provisions for the maintenance and
management of the common open space and common facilities shall be reviewed and
approved by the Commission. The approval shall be based on the following
criteria:
         (A)   The applicant shall establish a property owners' association
before the selling of a parcel or the occupancy of a dwelling unit.
         (B)   The property owners’ association by-laws, restrictions, and
articles of incorporation shall include the necessary regulations required by
the Federal Housing Administration. Other standards shall be approved by the
reviewing County Housing Authority.
   (c)   Site Resource Utilization.
      (1)   The planned development shall be designed and developed to minimize
the cutting of trees, disturbance of ground cover, cut and fill work, drainage
alteration, and hillside development. Removal of trees shall be in compliance
with County permit procedures.
      (2)   New earthwork and exposed slopes shall be suitably stabilized in
compliance with
Chapter 83.08 (Hillside Grading). Scarred and erosion-prone areas shall be
stabilized with appropriate planting.
   (d)   Site and Structure Relationship.
      (1)   The spacing of structures shall be governed by the requirements for
adequate light and air, proper access, fire regulations, and the need for
visual and auditory privacy.
      (2)   Whenever possible, dwelling units shall be arranged to take
advantage of views and vistas with consideration given to “micro” (subsections
of the planned development) elements (e.g., climate control, pleasing
relationships of structure, mass, etc.).
      (3)   The planned development shall be designed to minimize the
likelihood of criminal activity by:
         (A)   Minimizing those areas that are neither clearly private nor
public.
         (B)   Planting landscaping to ensure that maximum observation is
obtained while providing the desired degree of aesthetics.
      (4)   Structure height, bulk, and “micro” coverage are regulated only to
the extent that ensures that they meet the performance criteria identified in
this Subdivision (e).
      (5)   Structures for human habitation shall not be placed in an
environmentally hazardous, fragile, or unique area.
   (e)   Perimeter.
      (1)   Adjacent properties to the planned development shall be protected
from adverse influences of traffic, land use, structure scale, and density by
the combined use of screening, setbacks, and land use location.
      (2)   Perimeter planning and coordination are required to ensure
continuity in the community facilities and services. The applicant shall
demonstrate that the development proposal can be adequately served by community
facilities and services without undue public expenditure.
      (3)   Planned development projects that are within Fire Safety (FS)
Overlay shall develop perimeter areas in compliance with §
82.13.060 (FS1, FS2, and FS3 Development Standards).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4205, passed - -2013)
CHAPTER 84.19: RECYCLING FACILITIES
Section
   
84.19.010   Purpose.
   
84.19.020   Applicability.
   
84.19.030   Modification of Standards.
   
84.19.040   Permit Requirements.
   
84.19.050   Site Clean-Up Required.
   
84.19.060   Standards for Small Collection Facilities.
   
84.19.070   Standards for Large Collection Facilities.
   
84.19.080   Light Processing Facilities.
   
84.19.090   Heavy Processing Facilities.
§ 84.19.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes standards and procedures for the siting and
operation of various types and sizes of commercial recycling facilities.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.19.020 Applicability.
   The standards and procedures in this Chapter shall apply to recycling
facilities where allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.19.030 Modification of Standards.
   Recycling facilities shall meet the applicable criteria and standards listed
in this Chapter, provided that the Director, Chief of the County Fire
Department, Commission, or Board may relax the standards or impose stricter
standards at their discretion upon a finding that modifications are reasonably
necessary in order to implement the general intent of this Chapter and the
purposes of this Development Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.19.040 Permit Requirements.
   In addition to the permit requirements in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses), recycling
facilities may require a Health Permit in compliance with Title 3 (Health and
Sanitation and Animal Regulations) of the County Code. Reverse vending machines
shall only be allowed as an accessory use.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010)
§ 84.19.050 Site Clean-Up Required.
   The operator and host business of any recycling collection or processing
facility shall, on a daily basis, remove any and all recyclable materials or
solid wastes that have accumulated or are deposited outside the containers,
bins, or enclosures intended as receptacles for these materials. Upon the
failure to remove these materials, the County may deem them to be abandoned and
may enter the site to remove the materials. The property owner(s) of the
premises and the operator of the facility shall be liable for the full cost of
clean up work done by the County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.19.060 Standards for Small Collection Facilities.
   The standards in this Section shall apply to small collection facilities.
   (a)   Accessory Use. A small collection facility shall be established as an
accessory use to a primary commercial, industrial, or institutional use that is
in compliance with this Development Code, the California Building Code, and the
Uniform Fire Code.
   (b)   Maximum floor space. A small collection facility shall not occupy more
than 500 square feet of floor space.
   (c)   Containers.
      (1)   Containers shall be constructed and maintained with durable,
waterproof, and rustproof material and shall be covered.
      (2)   Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the:
         (A)   Type(s) of recyclable(s) that may be deposited.
         (B)   Name and telephone number of the facility operator.
   (d)   Daily Cleaning and Maintenance. The site shall be swept and maintained
in a dust-free, litter-free condition on a daily basis.
   (e)   Setback. The small collection facility shall be set back at least ten
feet from any street right-of-way and shall not obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular circulation.
   (f)   Landscaping. The small collection facility shall not impair the
landscaping required by this Development Code for a concurrent use nor conflict
with a permit issued in compliance with this Development Code.
   (g)   Noise. Noise level shall not at any time exceed 65 dB(A) as measured
at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property; and shall not
exceed 70 dB(A) at any point.
   (h)   Prohibited Equipment. Small collection facilities shall not include
power-driven sorting and/or consolidation equipment (e.g., crushers, bailers,
etc.) except reverse vending machines.
   (i)   Signs. In addition to the signs and certificates issued by the
Department of Conservation and Division of Recycling, which shall be displayed
by the operator/processor, and the informational signs required by this
Chapter, signs may be provided as follows:
      (1)   An unattended container not over 50 cubic feet in bulk and not over
nine feet in height may have a maximum sign area of four square feet;
      (2)   Other containers or units may have one flat-mounted sign per side
of container or wall of enclosure of 20 percent of the surface of the side up
to a maximum of 16 square feet.
   (l)   Prohibited Materials. Use of the small collection facility for
collection of solid wastes or hazardous wastes (as defined under “Hazardous
Waste” in
Division 10) shall be prohibited.
   (m)   Removal after Permit Expiration. If the Special Use Permit expires
without renewal, the small collection facility shall be removed from the site
on the day following permit expiration.
   (n)   Location and Hours of Operation. Attended facilities located within
100 feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall be in
operation during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., and otherwise
during the hours of operation of the host business. Containers for the 24-hour
donation of materials shall be at least 30 feet from any property zoned or
occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor and
acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use.
   (o)   Applicable Development Standards. The small collection facility shall
conform to the development standards for the land use zoning district in which
it is located.
   (p)   Parking.
      (1)   Occupation of parking spaces by the small collection facility and
by the attendant shall not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum
number required for the primary host use in
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards) unless all of the following
conditions exist:
         (A)   The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential
convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation in
compliance with the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter
Reduction Act (Public Resources Code §§ 14500 et seq.)
         (B)   A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not
already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the
site.
         (C)   The Special Use Permit shall be reconsidered at the end of 12
months. Parking credits in an established parking facility may then be granted
as follows:
 
Host Use                Number of Available Parking Maximum Reduction
                        Spaces
Commercial host use     0-25                        0
                        26-35                       2
                        36-49                       3
                        50-99                       4
                        100+                        5
Community facility host A maximum five spaces reduction will be allowed when
use                     not in conflict with parking needs of the host use.
 
      (2)   Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to
prohibit other vehicular parking during the hours when the mobile unit is
scheduled to be present.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.19.070 Standards for Large Collection Facilities.
   The standards in this Section shall apply to large collection facilities.
   (a)   Size and Location. A large collection facility:
      (1)   Shall be larger than 500 square feet or shall be located on a
separate property not related to a host use; and
      (2)   May have a permanent structure.
   (b)   Setback from Residential Use. A large collection facility shall be
located at least 150 feet from the property line of any residential use or land
use zoning district that allows residential land uses.
   (c)   Screening. A large collection facility shall be screened from the
public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or within an area
enclosed by an opaque fence at least six feet in height with landscaping.
   (d)   Setbacks and Landscaping Requirements. Setbacks and landscape
requirements shall be those provided for the land use zoning district in which
the facility is located.
   (e)   Outdoor Storage. Exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy
containers that are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition, or may
be baled or placed on pallets. Storage containers for flammable material shall
be constructed of non-flammable material. Oil storage shall be in containers
approved by the County Fire Department. No storage, excluding truck trailers
and overseas containers, shall be visible above the height of the fencing,
screening, or landscaping.
   (f)   Daily Cleaning and Maintenance. The site shall be maintained free of
litter, dust, flies, and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned
of loose debris on a daily basis.
   (g)   Parking.
      (1)   Space shall be provided on site for six vehicles or the anticipated
peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable
materials, except where the review authority determines that allowing overflow
traffic above six vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public
safety.
      (2)   One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle
operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements for customers shall be
as provided for in the land use zoning district in which the facility is
located, except that parking requirements for employees may be reduced when it
can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary such as when employees are
transported in a company vehicle to a work facility.
   (h)   Noise. Noise levels shall not exceed 65 dB(A) as measured at the
property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, and shall not exceed
70 dB(A) at any point.
   (i)   Hours of Operation. If the facility is located within 500 feet of
property zoned, planned, or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in
operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (j)   Containers for After-hours Donations. Containers or enclosures
provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be:
      (1)   Located at least 50 feet from any property zoned, planned, or
occupied for residential use.
      (2)   Constructed of sturdy, rustproof material.
      (3)   Of sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected.
      (4)   Secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials.
   (k)   Donation Areas. Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any
other undesirable material and the containers shall be clearly marked to
identify the type of material that may be deposited. A large collection
facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside
the recycling containers.
   (l)   Signs. A large collection facility shall be clearly marked with the
name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation.
Identification and informational signs shall meet the standards of the land use
zoning district in which the facility is located. Directional signs may be
installed with the approval of the Director, if necessary, to facilitate
traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-
way.
   (m)   Power-Driven Processing. Power-driven processing (e.g., aluminum foil
and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, light processing activities
necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, etc.) may
be approved at the discretion of the Commission if noise restrictions and other
conditions are met.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.19.080 Light Processing Facilities.
   (a)   Maximum Size. A light processing facility shall be no larger than
45,000 square feet.
   (b)   Truck Traffic. No more than an average of two outbound truck shipments
of material per day shall be allowed.
   (c)   Allowed Materials. A light processing facility may not shred, compact,
or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.
   (d)   Compliance with Other Standards. A light processing facility shall
comply with the standards in §
84.19.090 (Heavy Processing Facilities).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.19.090 Heavy Processing Facilities.
   The standards in this Section shall apply to heavy recyclable materials
processing facilities.
   (a)   Setback from Residential Use. A processing facility shall be located
at least 150 feet from property planned, zoned, or occupied for residential use
and operations shall take place within a fully enclosed building or within an
area enclosed by a solid wood or masonry fence at least six feet in height.
   (b)   Setbacks and Landscaping. Setbacks from property lines shall be those
provided for the land use zoning district in which the facility is located. If
the setback is less than 25 feet, the facility shall be buffered by a landscape
strip at least ten feet wide along each property line.
   (c)   Hours of Operation. If the processing facility is located within 500
feet of property zoned, planned, or occupied for residential use, it shall not
operate between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (d)   On-Site Personnel. On-site personnel shall administer the processing
facility during the hours the facility is open.
   (e)   Noise. Noise level shall not exceed 65 dB(A), as measured at the
property line of an existing residence or land use zoning district allowing
residential land uses, and shall not exceed 70 dB(A) at any point.
   (f)   Signs. Sign criteria shall be those specified in
Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations). In addition, the facility shall be clearly
marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of
operation.
   (g)   Containers for After-Hours Donations. Containers or enclosures
provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be:
      (1)   Located at least 50 feet from any property zoned, planned, or
occupied for residential use.
      (2)   Constructed of sturdy, rustproof material.
      (3)   Of sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected.
      (4)   Secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials.
   (h)   Donation Areas. Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any
other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify
the type of material that may be deposited. A processing facility shall display
a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling
containers.
   (i)   Dust. No dust, fumes, odor, smoke, or vibration above ambient level
shall be detectable on neighboring properties.
   (j)   Power-Driven Processing. Power-driven processing shall be allowed,
provided noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities shall be
limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and
sorting of source-separated recyclable materials, and repairing of reusable
materials.
   (k)   Used Motor Oil. A processing facility may accept used motor oil for
recycling from the generator in compliance with Health and Safety Code §
25250.11 (Management of Used Oil).
   (l)   Outdoor Storage. Exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy
containers or enclosures that are covered, secured, and maintained in good
condition or may be baled or placed on pallets. Storage containers for
flammable material shall be constructed of non-flammable material. Oil storage
shall be in containers approved by the Chief of the County Fire Department. No
storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, shall be visible
above the height of the fencing, screening or landscaping.
   (m)   Daily Cleaning and Maintenance. The site shall be maintained free of
litter and any other undesirable materials and shall be cleaned of loose debris
on a daily basis.
   (n)   Site security. The site shall be secured from unauthorized entry and
removal of materials when attendants are not present.
   (o)   Parking.
      (1)   Space shall be provided on-site for the anticipated peak load of
customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. A minimum of six
parking spaces or on-site drive-through stacking capacity for ten vehicles
shall be provided.
      (2)   One parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle
operated by the processing center. Parking requirements shall otherwise be as
mandated by the land use zoning district in which the facility is located.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.20: SERVICE STATIONS
Section
   
84.20.010   Purpose.
   
84.20.020   Applicability.
   
84.20.030   Development Standards.
§ 84.20.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides site planning and development standards for service
stations.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.20.020 Applicability.
   The development standards provided in this Chapter shall apply to service
stations where allowed in compliance with the provisions of
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.20.030 Development Standards.
   (a)   Canopies. Protective pump island canopies shall maintain a setback of
five feet from the right-of-way shown on the adopted Master Plan of Highways.
   (b)   Pump Islands.
      (1)   Pump islands, when designed parallel or up to an angle of 30
degrees to the nearest right-of-way, shall maintain a setback of 15 feet from
the nearest right-of-way shown on the Circulation Element of the General Plan,
adopted Specific Plan, or community plan area.
      (2)   Pump islands, when designed at an angle of 31 degrees or more to
the nearest right-of-way, shall maintain a setback of 25 feet from the right-
of-way shown on the Circulation Element of the General Plan, specific plan, or
community plan area.
   (c)   Lighting Standards. Light standards shall maintain a setback of one
foot from the right-of-way shown on the Circulation Element of the General
Plan.
   (d)   Other Structures. Other structures over four feet in height shall
maintain setbacks as required for the land use zoning district in which they
are located or as required by the applicable Specific Plan or community plan
area.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.21: SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS
Section
   
84.21.010   Purpose.
   
84.21.020   Applicability.
   
84.21.030   Minimum Residential Construction Standards.
§ 84.21.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards for the installation of
single-family dwellings.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.21.020 Applicability.
   The standards in this Chapter apply to the construction or installation of
detached single-family residential structures where allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses). However, nothing
in this Chapter shall be construed to allow housing designs or construction
standards that do not meet the standards of a historic district or of a
historic landmark. The road dedication and street improvement standards
provided in this Chapter do not apply to: (1) the alteration or enlargement of
an existing building or structure on a lot or parcel of land if the total
square footage of such alteration or enlargement, and all other alterations or
enlargements completed three years prior to the date of the application for a
permit for such alteration or enlargement, does not exceed one-half of the
original square footage of all buildings and structures on such lot or parcel
of land, or (2) the erection of one or more accessory structures (not including
accessory dwellings) as defined in §
810.01.030(g) of the County Code. For purposes of this section, “original
square footage” means the square footage of all buildings and structures that
existed on such lot or parcel of land three years prior to the date of the
application for such permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4181, passed - -2012)
§ 84.21.030 Minimum Residential Construction Standards.
   (a)   Manufactured Home Foundation Systems. Manufactured home foundation
systems shall comply with either Health and Safety Code § 18551 or the Code of
Regulations §§ 1333 and 1334, and shall include tie down, clip, or anchoring
systems approved by an engineer to resist lateral forces for the subject
manufactured home.
   (b)   Siding. Siding material shall consist of stucco, wood, brick, stone,
or decorative concrete block. Synthetic products of a similar appearance and
equivalent durability shall be allowed. Metal siding, if utilized, shall be
nonreflective. The exterior covering material shall extend to a point at or
near grade, except if an approved solid wood, metal, concrete, or masonry
perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend
below the top of the foundation.
   (c)   Roofing Material. The roofing material shall be tile, composite
shingles, wood shakes, and shingles (if allowed by the Fire Safety (FS) overlay
or other applicable overlay(s), or other material customarily used in the
surrounding community.
   (d)   Entries and Exits. Entries and exits shall be completed in compliance
with the Building Code Chapter 10.
   (e)   Parcels Greater than 30 Feet in Width and 5,000 Square Feet in Area.
Residential structures located on parcels greater than 30 feet in width and
greater than 5,000 square feet in area shall comply with the provisions in
Subdivisions (a) through (d), above, and the following:
      (1)   Comply with minimum standards of the California Residential Code or
standards for manufactured homes specified below.
      (2)   A “Tiny Home” may be permitted, provided that it complies with the
minimum standards of the California Residential Code or standards for
manufactured homes specified below. Recreational vehicles (defined in
California Health and Safety Code § 18010) will not be approved for occupancy
as a dwelling.
      (3)   In the Valley Region and Desert Region, residential structures
located in a Single Residential (RS) land use zoning district shall have an
enclosed garage or carport with minimum interior dimensions of ten feet by 20
feet constructed in compliance with the California Building Code. In compliance
with §
83.11.040 (Number of Parking Spaces Required), a second parking space shall be
provided that may be uncovered and with the minimum dimensions of nine by 19
feet.
      (4)   Utility hookups and an area suitable to accommodate the
installation of a clothes washer and dryer shall be provided within the primary
structure or within an enclosed accessory structure.
   (f)   Parcels Less than 30 Feet in Width or 5,000 Square Feet in Area.
Residential structures located on parcels of 30 feet or less in width or 5,000
square feet or less in area shall comply with the provisions as specified in
Subdivisions (a) through (d), above, and the following:
      (1)   Comply with minimum standards of the California Residential Code or
standards for manufactured homes specified below.
      (2)   A “Tiny Home” may be permitted, provided that it complies with the
minimum standards of the California Residential Code or standards for
manufactured homes specified below. Recreational vehicles (defined in
California Health and Safety Code § 18010) will not be approved for occupancy
as a dwelling.
   (g)   Reserved.
   (h)   Where Manufactured Homes Allowed. Manufactured homes installed or
constructed in compliance with this Section shall be allowed in land use zoning
districts where detached single-family residential structures are allowed.
   (i)   Certification Tag or Label Required. A permit from the Building and
Safety Division for the installation of a manufactured home not within an
approved and properly licensed mobile home park shall not be issued, if more
than ten years have elapsed between the date of manufacture and the date of the
application for the issuance of the permit to install such manufactured home
except as provided below. Also, the manufacturer shall permanently affixed a
label or tag to the manufactured home certifying that the manufactured home
complies with the applicable federal construction and safety standards (42
U.S.C. § 5415) of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et. seq.).
      The ten-year standard provided above shall apply to all manufactured
homes except when the following findings can be made:
      (1)   The site for the proposed location of the manufactured home is
adequate in terms of shape and size to accommodate the use and all parking
areas, setbacks, structure coverage, yards, and other applicable requirements
of this Development Code;
      (2)   The California Department of Housing and Community Development has
determined and certified that the manufactured home proposed for installation
substantially conforms to the construction standards regarding health,
accessibility, life and fire safety and structural requirements applicable to
manufactured homes less than ten years old; and
      (3)   The appearance of the manufactured home and the method of siting
are compatible with the appearance of any primary structure and the structures
in the surrounding neighborhood.
   (j)   Infrastructure Requirements. A building permit shall not be issued for
the construction of single-family residential dwelling unless all of the
following infrastructure requirements are satisfied for an existing lot of
record:
      (1)   Proof of Legal and Physical Access to a County-maintained Road.
         (A)   Physical access is a route which is traversable in a standard
(two-wheel drive) sedan. Proof shall consist of an Engineer or Surveyor's
signed and sealed letter, certifying that physical access has been completed.
         (B)   Legal access is:
            (I)   A dedicated right-of-way;
            (II)   A dedication to the County of San Bernardino and to the
public in general, an easement for public road, County highway and public
utility purposes of a width as established by the Circulation Element of the
General Plan. The easement or road constructed on the dedicated land shall not
become a County highway until and unless the Board of Supervisors, by
appropriate resolution, has caused the road to be accepted into the County-
maintained road system.
            (III)   An existing traveled way that is substantially in
compliance with County road standards, where a prescriptive right by the user
has been established for the public use by court decree.
            (IV)    Private road easement.
         (C)   When legal access cannot be established as set forth above, the
lot is an existing legally created parcel, and the property owner has physical
access, the property owner shall enter into an agreement with the County. The
agreement shall be in the form required by the County which includes the
property owner's: (1) representation that the owner has physical access; (2)
acknowledgment that proof of legal access has not been provided to the County's
satisfaction; and, (3) agreement to disclose to any subsequent owners that
legal access has not been established to the satisfaction of the County.
Notation of said agreement shall also be included on the building permit.
      (2)   Infrastructure as Determined by the Land Development Division of
the Land Use Service Department Depending on the Location of the Parcel to Be
Developed. This may include, but not limited to, any of the following: paved
access, curbs and gutters, sidewalk, and/or appropriate drainage improvements.
These requirements may be waived or modified by the Director if at least 70
percent of the parcels in the same block have been developed without full
street improvements.
      (3)   Water.
         (A)   Water Purveyor. Required when in the service area of a water
purveyor and the purveyor can supply the water.
         (B)   Substantiated Well Water. If the subject parcel is not within
the service area of a water purveyor, well water may be allowed if all required
setbacks are met.
         (C)   Hauled Water. No hauled water will be allowed without approval
from the Division of Environmental Health Services.
      (4)   Sanitation.
         (A)   Sewer. Required when in the service area of a sewer provider and
the subject parcel is within 200 feet of the sewer line.
         (B)   Septic Systems/Holding Tanks. Allowed in compliance with the
local Regional Water Quality Control Board regulations.
      (5)   Fireflow. Adequate fireflow in compliance the Uniform Fire Code and
with § 23.0108 (Amendments to the Uniform Fire Code) of the County Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4334, passed - -2017;
Am. Ord. 4341, passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4360, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4393,
passed - -2020)
CHAPTER 84.22: SMALL LOT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
84.22.010   Purpose.
   
84.22.020   Applicability.
   
84.22.030   Development Requirements.
§ 84.22.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide development standards for
residential development on small lots in order to minimize adverse impacts on
County water, sewage treatment, road, and fire protection resources.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.22.020 Applicability.
   The standards in this Chapter shall apply to parcels that are 5,000 square
feet or less in area or that are less than 30 feet in width. This Chapter shall
not apply to parcels that are a part of an approved subdivision recorded after
July 1, 1984 or an approved Planned Development.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4341, passed - -2018)
§ 84.22.030 Development Requirements.
   New dwellings and accessory structures on small lots shall be subject to the
following requirements.
   (a)   Parcel Merger Requirements and Exemption. An application for a
development permit for a dwelling or accessory structure on a small lot shall
be accompanied by one of the following:
      (1)   A recorded Notice of Merger of the subject parcel with an abutting
parcel in common contiguous ownership; or
      (2)   Documentation showing the record ownership of the subject parcel,
and all parcels sharing a common side lot line with the subject parcel. If
adjoining parcels are under the same ownership, the parcels shall be merged to
bring them closer to, or fully into, conformance with minimum parcel sizes,
thus enhancing the public health and safety of the area. If the Record of
Ownership shows that adjoining parcels are not under the same ownership, merger
of the parcels shall not be required.
   (b)   Dedication Requirement. An offer of dedication or grant of road
easement shall be required before the issuance of a development permit. The
offer of dedication or grant of road easement shall provide a minimum 40-foot
right-of-way width on all roads or streets or other width as deemed necessary
by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
   (c)   Setback Requirements.
      (1)   The front setback of a small lot may be reduced to no less than 15
feet.
      (2)   Each interior side setback of each small lot may be reduced to no
less than five feet provided there is at least ten feet between structures.
   (d)   Water Requirement.
      (1)   A form provided by the Environmental Health Services Division and
signed by the water-serving entity, or a letter from the water-serving entity,
shall be submitted to the Building Official. The form or letter shall certify
that adequate line and storage capacity exists or will exist to serve the
proposed dwelling and that arrangements have been made to serve each dwelling
with a potable water system at the time of occupancy or final building
inspection. This requires that the water main will be in place to serve the
property or that financial arrangements have been made with the water-serving
entity for installation of the water main.
      (2)   In the absence of a water serving entity, an approved domestic
water system under pressure shall be installed to serve each proposed dwelling.
The Environmental Health Services Division shall certify the domestic water
system, and a copy of the certification shall be submitted to the Building
Official.
   (e)   Sewer Requirement.
      (1)   A form provided by the Environmental Health Services Division and
signed by the sewer-serving entity, or a letter from the sewer-serving entity,
shall be submitted to the Building Official. The form or letter shall certify
that an adequate collection system and treatment plant capacity exists or will
exist to serve the proposed dwelling, and that sewage hookup arrangements have
been made to serve each dwelling at the time of occupancy or final building
inspection.
      (2)   In the absence of a sewer-serving entity, a letter from the
Environmental Health Services Division, indicating that an individual sewage
system with subsurface disposal is allowed, shall be submitted to the Building
Official.
   (f)   Survey Requirement. Evidence shall be submitted to and approved by the
County Surveyor that each parcel has been surveyed and staked in compliance
with the provisions of the Professional Land Surveyors’ Act (Business and
Professions Code §§ 8700 et seq.) by a registered civil engineer or licensed
land surveyor, or evidence of a past survey shall be submitted to and approved
by the County Surveyor as being in conformance with the Professional Land
Surveyors’ Act.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.23: LICENSED RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES
Section
   
84.23.010   Purpose.
   
84.23.020   Applicability.
   
84.23.030   Development Standards.
§ 84.23.010 Purpose.
   The State of California has enacted laws and regulations to provide for the
care of children as well as mentally and physically disabled persons in a
residential environment. The purpose of this Chapter is to implement the
applicable State laws in a manner that preserves the peace, quiet, and quality
of life intended for residential neighborhoods. This Chapter provides standards
for the establishment and operation of licensed residential care facilities.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.23.020 Applicability.
   The standards in this Chapter apply to sociallicensed residential care
facilities where allowed in compliance with Division 2 (Land Use Zoning
Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.23.030 Development Standards.
   (a)   Licensed Residential Care Facilities Serving Six or Fewer Persons.
Each licensed residential care facility shall conform to the property
development standards for the land use zoning district in which it is located.
   (b)   Licensed Residential Care Facilities Serving Seven or More Persons.
      (1)   Applicable Land Use Zoning District Development Standards. Each
licensed residential care facility shall conform to the property development
standards for the land use zoning district in which it is located.
      (2)   Minimization of Overconcentration. The separation of licensed
residential care facilities shall be as provided by State law.
      (3)   Walls. Licensed residential care facilities shall provide a six-
foot high solid decorative block wall along all property lines, except in the
front yard. Walls shall provide for safety with controlled points of entry and
shall incorporate decorative materials and features.
      (4)   Landscaping. On-site landscaping shall comply with
Chapter 83.10 (Landscaping Standards) and shall be regularly maintained,
including providing irrigation.
      (5)   Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting shall comply with
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
      (6)   Signs. No signs shall be allowed within a residential land use
zoning district. Signs for licensed residential care facilities within
nonresidential land use zoning districts shall comply with
Chapter 83.13 (Signs).
      (7)   Fire Department Requirements. Each licensed residential care
facility shall provide fire extinguishers and smoke detector devices and shall
meet all standards established by the Fire Chief.
      (8)   Noise. Outdoor activities shall be conducted only between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
      (9)   Applicable Health and Safety Regulations. Licensed residential care
facilities shall be operated in compliance with applicable State and local
health and safety regulations.
      (10)   Required Permits and Licenses. Licensed residential care
facilities shall be located where allowed in compliance with Division 2 (Land
Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and in conformance with the
California Building Code. A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the
Building and Safety Division before occupancy of licensed residential care
facilities.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4230,
passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 84.24: SOLID WASTE/RECYCLABLE MATERIALS STORAGE
Section
   
84.24.010   Purpose.
   
84.24.020   Applicability.
   
84.24.030   Storage Areas for Multi-Family Uses.
   
84.24.040   Storage Areas for Nonresidential Uses.
   
84.24.050   Location Standards.
   
84.24.060   Design and Construction Standards.
§ 84.24.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides standards for the provision of solid waste (refuse)
and recyclable material storage areas in compliance with State law.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.24.020 Applicability.
   The standards in this Chapter apply to residential multi-family uses and
nonresidential uses where allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.24.030 Storage Areas for Multi-Family Uses.
   (a)   Multi-Family Uses.  
Table 84-15 indicates the minimum requirements for common refuse and recyclable
material storage areas for multi-family developments with five or more units.
Storage areas may be located indoors or outdoors as long as they are readily
accessible to residents. Areas are measured in square feet.
Table 84-15
Multi-Family Development
Minimum Common Storage Areas Required (Sq. Ft.)
Dwellings Refuse Recycling Total Area
Table 84-15
Multi-Family Development
Minimum Common Storage Areas Required (Sq. Ft.)
Dwellings Refuse Recycling Total Area
4 or more 12     12        24
10 - 15   24     24        48
16 - 25   48     48        96
26 - 50   96     96        192
51 - 75   144    144       288
76 - 100  192    192       384
101 - 125 240    240       480
126 - 150 288    288       576
151 - 175 316    316       672
176 - 200 384    384       768
201+      Every additional 25 dwellings shall require an additional 100 sq. ft.
          for solid waste and 100 sq. ft. for recyclables.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.24.040 Storage Areas for Nonresidential Uses.
   Nonresidential uses shall provide refuse and recyclable material storage
areas in compliance with the following requirements. Requirements apply to each
individual structure. Areas are measured in square feet.
Table 84-16
Nonresidential Structures
Minimum Storage Areas Required (Sq. Ft)
Building Floor Area Refuse Recycling Total Area*
Table 84-16
Nonresidential Structures
Minimum Storage Areas Required (Sq. Ft)
Building Floor Area Refuse Recycling Total Area*
Up to 5,000         12     12        24
5,001 - 10,000      24     24        48
10,001 - 25,000     48     48        96
25,001 - 50,000     96     96        192
50,001 - 75,000     144    144       288
75,001 - 100,000    192    192       384
100,001+            Every additional 25,000 sq. ft. shall require an additional
                    48 sq. ft. for solid waste and 48 sq. ft. for recyclables.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.24.050 Location Standards.
   (a)   Adjacent/Combined Areas. Refuse and recyclable materials storage areas
shall be adjacent/combined with one another.
   (b)   Accessibility. Refuse and recyclable materials storage areas shall be
accessible to residents, employees, and haulers at all times. Storage areas
within multi-family residential developments shall be located within 150 feet
of an access doorway to the dwellings that they are intended to serve.
   (c)   Distance from Doors and Windows. Refuse and recyclable materials
storage areas shall not be closer than 20 feet from doors or operable windows
of adjoining structures.
   (d)   Exterior Storage Space. Exterior storage area(s) shall not be located
in a required front yard, street side yard, parking space, landscaped, or open
space area, and any other area required to be maintained unencumbered in
compliance with fire and other applicable building and public safety codes.
   (e)   Driveways or Aisles. Driveways or aisles shall provide unobstructed
access for collection vehicles and personnel and provide at least the minimum
clearance required by the collection methods and vehicles utilized by the
designated collector.
   (f)   Alley. In cases where a parcel is served by an alley, all storage
areas shall be directly accessible to the alley.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.24.060 Design and Construction Standards.
   The design and construction of the storage areas shall be in compliance with
current County standards and the following:
   (a)   Architectural Compatibility. If the storage area is located outside or
on the exterior of a structure, it shall be architecturally compatible with the
materials and colors of other structures on the property.
   (b)   Architectural Features. Exterior storage areas shall be enclosed by
six-foot high masonry walls with steel gates. A concrete apron equal to the
width of the gate and outward from the enclosure a minimum of six feet shall be
provided. The Director may require the provision of a roof structure over the
enclosure to obstruct visibility of the enclosure from above.
   (c)   Landscaping. The exterior perimeter of the storage areas shall be
planted, if feasible, with drought resistant landscaping, including a
combination of shrubs and/or climbing evergreen vines.
   (d)   Lighting. The storage areas shall be well lit with a minimum one foot-
candle.
   (e)   Signs. Signs shall be conspicuously posted on each storage area giving
instructions on the use of the recycling bins and containers. Each sign shall
not exceed four square feet in area and shall be posted on the exterior of the
storage area, adjacent to the access point.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.25: TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
Section
   
84.25.010   Purpose.
   
84.25.020   Applicability.
   
84.25.030   Exempt Temporary Structures and Uses.
   
84.25.040   Structures and Uses Allowed with Temporary Use Permit.
   
84.25.050   Additional Development Standards.
   
84.25.060   Interim Operation of Activities Requiring a Conditional Use Permit.
   
84.25.070   Camping or Occupancy of Temporary Structure Prohibited.
§ 84.25.010 Purpose.
   This purpose of this Chapter is to provide development and use standards for
temporary structures and uses that might not meet the normal development or use
standards of the applicable land use zoning district, but may otherwise be
acceptable because of their temporary nature, and to prohibit the use of
vehicles as substitutes for structures unless otherwise allowed, permitted, or
exempted. The intent of these standards is to minimize the potential
incompatibility of a temporary structure or use or use of a vehicle in lieu of
such structures and to regulate the location, operation, and/or duration to
protect the public convenience, health, interest, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 84.25.020 Applicability. 
   This Chapter provides development and use standards for structures and uses
that fall within the categories in §
85.15.020 (Types of Temporary Use Permits and Review Authorities). Regulations
for temporary special events are provided in
Chapter 84.25 (Temporary Structures and Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.25.030 Exempt Temporary Structures and Uses.
   The temporary structures and uses listed in this Section shall be exempt
from obtaining a Temporary Use Permit. Temporary structures and uses that do
not fall within the following categories shall comply with §
85.15.020 (Types of Temporary Use Permits and Review Authorities).
   (a)   Construction Yards - On-Site. On-site contractors’ construction yards,
for an approved construction project. The construction yard shall be removed
immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of
the Building Permit authorizing the construction project, whichever first
occurs.
   (b)   Emergency Facilities. Emergency public health and safety needs/land
use activities, as determined by the Board.
   (c)   Events on Sites Approved for Public Assembly. An event on the site of,
or within, a golf course, meeting hall, religious facility, school, theater, or
other similar facility designed, and approved by the County for public
assembly.
   (d)   Fund-Raising Car Washes.
      (1)   Car washes on property within a commercial, industrial, or
institutional land use zoning district, limited to a maximum of two days per
month for each sponsoring organization.
      (2)   Sponsorship shall be limited to educational, fraternal, religious,
or service organizations directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts, or to
tax exempt organizations in compliance with § 501(c) of the Federal Revenue and
Taxation Code.
      (3)   Even though fund-raising car washes are exempt from obtaining a
Temporary Use Permit, they shall still be conducted in compliance with
applicable stormwater regulations to minimize potential water quality impacts.
   (e)   Garage Sales. Garage sales, not to exceed four per year, each of which
may not exceed three consecutive days. For multi-family dwellings, a maximum of
two garage sales per calendar year per legal dwelling unit shall be allowed.
All other provisions of
Chapter 84.10 shall apply.
   (f)   Location Filming. The temporary use of a specific site for the
location filming of commercials, movies, videos, etc., for the time specified
by the Director. Even though this use is exempt from a Temporary Use Permit, it
does require a Film Permit issued by the Inland Empire Film Commission and
processed in compliance with County Code §§
41.2201 et seq. (Issuance of Filming Permits and Fees).
   (g)   Public Property or Public Right-of-Way. Construction and maintenance
activities conducted on public properties that are authorized by an
Encroachment Permit issued by the Department of Public Works.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.25.040 Structures and Uses Allowed with Temporary Use Permit.
   The temporary structures and uses identified in this Section shall be
allowed in any land use zoning district subject to the standards in this
Section and a Temporary Use Permit issued in compliance with
Chapter 85.15 (Temporary Use Permits).
   (a)   Batch Plants. Batch plants necessary for the construction of major
public infrastructure improvements provided proper review in compliance with
the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) is completed.
   (b)   Construction Yards - Off-Site. Off-site contractors’ construction
yards, for an approved construction project. The construction yard shall be
removed immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the
expiration of the Building Permit authorizing the construction project,
whichever first occurs.
   (c)   Events. Art and craft exhibits, auctions, carnivals, circuses,
concerts, fairs, farmer’s markets, festivals, flea markets, food events, open-
air theaters, outdoor entertainment/sporting events, religious revivals,
rummage sales, second hand sales, swap meets, and other special events for up
to five days, or four two-day weekends, within a 12-month period, allowed only
on nonresidential properties. Refer to
Chapter 85.16 (Temporary Special Event Permits) for specific requirements for a
Temporary Special Event Permit.
   (d)   Seasonal Holiday Sales Facilities. Seasonal holiday sales activities
(e.g., Christmas, Halloween, Thanksgiving, etc.) including temporary residence/
security trailers, on nonresidential properties, for up to 45 days.
      (1)   Date of Opening. A Christmas tree sales facility shall not be open
for business during any calendar day before Thanksgiving. Other holiday sales
facilities shall not be open more than 30 days before the holiday.
      (2)   Additional Permits. The applicant shall secure an electrical permit
if the facility is to be energized and the proper permits from the Building
Division for any temporary structure or shelter.
      (3)   Fire Prevention. Each Christmas tree/holiday sales facility shall
comply with fire prevention standards as approved and enforced by the Fire
Chief, including any burning or open fires or flocking or painting.
      (4)   Maintenance. Seasonal holiday sales facilities shall be kept clean
and free of debris at all times during use of the property.
      (5)   Merchandise. A seasonal holiday sales facility shall not engage in
the sale of any merchandise not directly associated with the holiday identified
by the applicant as the basis for the seasonal holiday facility.
      (6)   Off-Street Parking. Public Works shall approve all public access
and surfacing of the parking area.
      (7)   Removal of Facility. The seasonal holiday facility shall be removed
within 14 days after Christmas or other holiday.
   (e)   Temporary Occupancy. A temporary occupancy use shall be located on the
same parcel or on a contiguous parcel under the same ownership or control as
the primary construction project, property being protected, or other primary
use for which the Temporary Use Permit was requested and approved.
      (1)   During Construction.
         (A)   Major Development Projects. Temporary structures and property
may be used during the construction phase of an approved major development
project (e.g., residential projects with five or more dwelling units or any
commercial or industrial project). The structures or property may be used as
offices or for the storage of equipment and/or tools.
         (B)   Minor Development Projects. An existing dwelling unit or a
temporary structure and property may be used during the construction phase of
an approved minor development project (e.g., residential projects with four or
fewer dwelling units). The structure or property may be used as a temporary
residence, an office, or for the storage of equipment and/or tools.
         (C)   Appropriate Conditions. The permit shall contain reasonable and
necessary conditions regarding the following matters:
            (I)   Provisions for adequate ingress and egress.
            (II)   Provisions for the work to be performed on-site.
            (III)   Provisions for the storage of asphalt, concrete, and dirt
at designated sites within the subject property; provided, the applicant
furnishes a schedule, acceptable to the Director, for the periodic disposal or
recycling of these materials.
            (IV)   Provisions designed to minimize potential conflicts between
the work to be performed on-site and the ordinary business and uses conducted
within the County.
         (D)   Length of Permit. The permit may be approved for up to 12 months
following the issuance of the companion Building Permit, or upon completion of
the subject development project, whichever first occurs.
         (E)   Extension of Permit. The permit may be extended by the Director
if a written request for extension is submitted at least 14 days before
expiration of the permit and reasonable reasons are provided by the applicant
to justify the requested extension (e.g., the delay was caused by reasons
beyond the control of the applicant). The permit may be extended for up to an
additional 12 months.
         (F)   Validity of Permit. A Temporary Use Permit issued in conjunction
with a construction project shall become invalid upon the occurrence of one of
the following:
            (I)   Cancellation of the Building Permit for the approved
temporary structure or use; or
            (II)   Completion of the Building Permit for the approved temporary
structure or use; or
            (III)   Expiration of the time for which the approval has been
granted.
         (G)   Condition of Site Following Completion. All temporary structures
and related improvements shall be completely removed from the subject site
following expiration of the Temporary Use Permit or within 30 days of
completion of the development project, whichever first occurs.
      (2)   Property Protection by Security Personnel.
         (A)   Temporary residential structures shall be allowed for security
personnel engaged in the short-term protection of:
            (I)   Legally established and permitted commercial, commercial
agricultural, industrial or institutional uses; or
            (II)   Construction projects that have current and valid permits
issued by the Building and Safety Division.
         (B)   A Temporary Use Permit for a temporary residential structure for
security personnel shall not be granted or extended for a period of time to
exceed five years after the date the Temporary Use Permit was first issued. If
a structure is needed for a longer term than three years, a caretaker’s
residence shall be established in compliance with the applicable land use
zoning district and §
84.01.040 (Commercial and Industrial Accessory Structures and Uses).
   (f)   Temporary Outdoor Storage or Sales. Interim operation of an exterior
storage area or short-term exterior sales display area. Provisions regulating
seasonal sales lots are in §
84.25.040(d) (Seasonal Sales Lots.)
   (g)   Temporary Sale Offices/Model Homes.
      (1)   Model Homes. A model home or model home complex may be authorized
before the completion of subdivision improvements in compliance with the
following standards.
         (A)   The sales office and any off-street parking shall be converted
back to residential use and/or removed before the issuance of the Final
Occupancy Permit or within 14 days from the close of escrow of the last parcel
in the subdivision, whichever first occurs.
         (B)   The model home complex shall be used to sell only units within
the development within which the complex is located.
         (C)   Model home permits and model home sign permits will be finaled
and the model homes will be allowed to be open to the public only after all
required bonding has been accomplished and accepted by the County and a
Temporary Use Permit has been issued.
         (D)   At least one model home shall be fully landscaped with drought
tolerant xeriscape materials.
         (E)   The review authority may require other conditions of approval
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
persons residing or working in the neighborhood.
      (2)   Real Estate Sales Offices. A temporary real estate sales office
(modular structure) may be established within the area of an approved
subdivision, solely for the first sale of homes. An application for a temporary
real estate office may be approved for a maximum of 12 months from the date of
approval.
      (3)   Temporary On-Your-Lot Builder Model Home/Sales Office. Single-
family dwelling unit when used as a temporary sales office and model home for
the sale of construction services to build single-family residential units on
vacant lots, subject to the following:
         (A)   Activities Restricted to Construction Services and Related Sales
of Vacant Lots. The on-your-lot builder model home/sales office shall be used
only for the sale of construction services to build single-family residential
dwelling units on vacant lots and related real estate sales. Real estate sales
shall be limited to the sale of vacant lots in conjunction with the sale
construction services for the same lot. Real estate sales shall be an accessory
and subordinate use to the primary use of construction service or sales.
         (B)   Inspection Annually by Fire Department. An annual inspection
shall be made by the Fire Department in order to ensure compliance with
conditions of approval of the Temporary Use Permit.
         (C)   Location of Structure. The on-your-lot builder model home/sales
office structure shall be located fronting on a roadway designated by the
General Plan in the Circulation and Infrastructure Element as one of the
following:
            (I)   Major Arterial Highway.
            (II)   Major Divided Highway.
            (III)   Major Highway.
            (IV)   Secondary Highway.
            (V)   Mountain Major.
            (VI)   Mountain Secondary.
         (D)   Parking. A minimum of two paved and two other alternate parking
spaces shall be provided. The Fire Chief shall approve alternate parking spaces
subject to surfacing requirements and possible alternate locations (e.g., on-
street parking) where it is deemed necessary and appropriate.
         (E)   Pennants, Flags, and Signs.
            (I)   Freestanding or Monument Sign. Only one accessory
freestanding or monument sign shall be allowed and it shall neither exceed 32
square feet nor 12 feet in height. The sign shall only be allowed on the same
lot as the model home/sales office and shall be kept in good repair. A
freestanding sign shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet between the
bottom edge of the sign and the ground. The leading edge of a freestanding sign
shall be no closer than one foot from the planned right-of-way. Signs shall
comply with the provisions of
Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations) that are not in conflict with this
Subdivision.
            (II)   Open House Sign and Pennants. One “open house sign” no
larger than 24 inches by 18 inches on poles no higher than four feet may be
displayed. No more than two pennants shall be displayed. Pennants shall be no
greater than two feet by three feet and shall be mounted on poles no higher
than four feet. Hours of open house sign and pennant flag displays shall be no
earlier than sunrise and no later than sunset.
            (III)   Flags. Also, each site shall be allowed to have a maximum
of four flags that are each a maximum 12 square feet in area and a maximum 12
feet in height. Flags shall be maintained in good repair. For the purpose of
this Section, this shall mean no weathered, faded or tattered flags are
allowed.
            (IV)   Prohibited Signs. Other than as allowed by this Section,
moveable or portable signs, off-site directional signs, plastic banners,
balloons, streamers, propellers, or other similar apparatus that are primarily
placed and intended to attract the attention of the general public shall not be
allowed.
         (F)   Performance Bond. A bond shall be required to ensure removal of
any signs or flags and to reconvert, where necessary, any garage conversion.
         (G)   Xeriscape. The model home shall be fully landscaped with
drought-tolerant xeriscape materials.
         (H)   Transfer of Permit. A Temporary Use Permit for an on-your-lot
builder model home/sales office may be transferred to another party. A transfer
shall not entitle the new owner to use the Temporary Use Permit for a longer
time period than five years from the issuance of the original permit. The Code
Enforcement Division shall be notified of any transfer of ownership.
         (I)   Agreement to Terminate a Temporary Use. Before the issuance of
the Temporary Use Permit for the first year and as a condition of the permit
approval, the permittee shall enter into an agreement with the County, which
shall be recorded in the Official Records of the County by the County Recorder.
The agreement shall establish the responsibility of the permittee to comply
with the provisions of this Chapter. This will include acknowledgement that the
permittee shall terminate the model home/sales office no later than five years
from the date of the initial permit and shall restore the structure to a use
allowed by the current land use zoning district in which the subject property
is located.
   (h)   Temporary Nonresidential Structures. A temporary structure, including
a manufactured or mobile unit, used to provide temporary office, retail,
meeting, assembly, wholesale, manufacturing and/or storage space, may be
approved for a maximum of 12 months from the date of approval, as an accessory
use for commercial, commercial agricultural, industrial, or institutional uses
or as the first phase of a development project.
      (1)   The Building Official shall determine that the proposed use
complies with the development standards in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and
Division 3 (Countywide Development Standards) including:
         (A)   Adequate access, circulation, and parking.
         (B)   Appropriate buffering from abutting uses.
         (C)   Fencing.
         (D)   Landscaping.
         (E)   Lighting.
         (F)   Signage.
      (2)   Under exceptional or extraordinary circumstances, a Temporary Use
Permit for temporary nonresidential structures may be extended beyond the five-
year limitation at the discretion of the review authority.
   (i)   Temporary Work Trailers. A trailer or mobile home used as a temporary
work site for employees of a business; provided, that:
      (1)   The use is authorized by a Building Permit for the trailer or
mobile home, and the Building Permit for the permanent structure;
      (2)   The use is appropriate because:
         (A)   The trailer or mobile home will be in place during construction
or remodeling of a permanent commercial or manufacturing structure for a
maximum of 12 months, or upon expiration of the Building Permit for the
permanent structure, whichever first occurs; or
         (B)   The applicant has demonstrated that the temporary work site is a
short-term necessity for a maximum of 12 months, while a permanent work site is
being obtained; and
      (3)   The trailer or mobile home is removed before final building
inspection or the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the permanent
structure.
      (4)   A Temporary Use Permit issued in conjunction with a construction
project shall become invalid upon:
         (A)   Cancellation of the Building Permit for the approved temporary
structure or use; or
         (B)   Completion of the Building Permit for the approved temporary
structure or use; or
         (C)   Expiration of the time for which the approval has been granted.
   (j)   Temporary Signs. See §
83.13.070 (Temporary Signs).
   (k)   Temporary Transportable Treatment Units (TTTU). Temporary
Transportable Treatment Units (TTTU) used for treating hazardous waste or
groundwater contamination.
      (1)   Temporary transportable treatment units shall only be allowed in
either of the following instances:
         (A)   The site where a TTTU will be located and operated complies with
the siting criteria and procedures identified in the San Bernardino County
Hazardous Waste Management Plan; or
         (B)   The Chief of Environmental Health Services Division determines
that the proposed TTTU use does not create additional health risks as
demonstrated by a site-specific health risk assessment and a Certificate of
Land Use Compliance is issued and recorded in compliance with
Chapter 85.05 (Certificate of Land Use Compliance).
      (2)   A Temporary Use Permit issued in conjunction with a TTTU shall
become invalid upon the occurrence of one of the following:
         (A)   Violation of a permitting requirement; or
         (B)   Completion of the project; or
         (C)   Expiration of the time for which the approval has been granted.
      (3)   The Environmental Health Services Division shall conduct an annual
inspection in order to ensure compliance with any conditions of approval.
      (4)   A Temporary Use Permit for a temporary transportable treatment unit
shall not be granted or extended for a period of time to exceed five years
after the date the Temporary Use Permit was first issued.
   (l)   Accessory Storage Structures. A detached, accessory storage structure,
where the primary use does not yet exist, shall only be allowed with
appropriate bonding to remove the accessory structure if the primary use is not
completed within two years.
   (m)   Similar Temporary Activities. A temporary activity that the Director
determines is similar to the other activities listed in this Section and
compatible with the applicable land use zoning district and surrounding land
uses.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4098,
passed - -2010)
§ 84.25.050 Additional Development Standards.
   (a)   Additional Standards. In addition to the standards in §
85.15.020 (Types of Temporary Use Permits and Review Authority), above, the
Director shall establish the following additional standards for a proposed
temporary structure or use, using the requirements of the applicable land use
zoning district,
Division 3 (Countywide Development Standards), and
Division 4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities) for guidance:
      (1)   Structure and Property Development Improvements. Access, floor
areas, heights, landscaping, off-street parking, setbacks, signs, utilities,
and other structure and property development improvements and features;
      (2)   Removal of the Activity and Site Restoration. Measures for removal
of the activity and site restoration, to ensure that no changes to the site
would limit the range of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this
Development Code. Performance security may be required before installation of
the temporary structure or initiation of the temporary use to ensure cleanup
after the structure is removed or the use is finished in compliance with §
86.06.050 (Performance Guarantees); and
      (3)   Time Limitation. Limitation on the duration of an approved
“temporary structure,” to a maximum of 12 months, so that it shall not become a
permanent or long-term structure.
   (b)   Display of Permit and Approvals. A valid Temporary Use Permit shall be
prominently displayed so that it is visible at all times from the exterior of
the permitted structure or use and available for inspection. A permitted
temporary structure shall provide evidence of approval by the State Department
of Housing and Community Development as required by the Health and Safety Code
or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, where applicable.
   (c)   Other Regulations. Installation of a permitted structure or use shall
comply with the requirements and regulations of the Department and the
following:
      (1)   Development Code.
      (2)   Building and Safety Division.
      (3)   Fire Department.
      (4)   Environmental Health Services Division.
      (5)   Applicable State and Federal regulations.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.25.060 Interim Operation of Activities Requiring a Conditional Use Permit.
   (a)   Interim Operation of Activities Requiring a Conditional Use Permit. A
Temporary Use Permit may be issued for the interim operation of any use
requiring a Conditional Use Permit for a period of time not to exceed 12
months, provided the Temporary Use Permit does not authorize the construction
or establishment of new permanent structures and the review authority makes the
findings required for approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit).
   (b)   Concurrent Application Filing. The Temporary Use Permit application
shall be filed concurrently with an application for Conditional Use Permit,
where appropriate.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.25.070 Camping or Occupancy of Temporary Structure Prohibited.
   (a)   Prohibited Use.  
      (1)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to place, install, build,
maintain, use, or occupy any temporary structure on any parcel of real property
subject to the provisions of this Development Code for the purpose of camping,
dwelling, maintaining or establishing temporary or permanent residency unless
such placement, installation, construction, maintenance, use, or occupancy is
first authorized by a Temporary Use Permit, Special Event Permit, or other land
use approval required by this Development Code or as otherwise made an
exception herein.
      (2)   Exception. With no required permit, a property owner(s) shall be
allowed to place, maintain, use and/or occupy any existing recreational cabin
for no more than 14 consecutive days in a 30-day period, or any temporary
structure for no more than four consecutive days in a 30-day period, when used
for recreational camping on a property of five acres or larger in the RC
(Resource Conservation), AG (Agriculture) or RL (Rural Living) land use zoning
districts.
   (b)   Applicability. This Section shall apply to the following temporary
structure:
      (1)   Any tent, lean-to, box, or other make-shift building or enclosure
constructed of any material for which no building permit has been issued and no
Temporary Use Permit, Special Use Permit, or other land use approval has been
granted;
      (2)   Any vacant building, temporary or permanent, deemed substandard
pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 17920.3 and §§ 63.0603 or 63.0604 of Title
6 of the San Bernardino County Code; and
      (3)   Any building under construction and unfinished, regardless of
whether or not building, (plumbing, etc.) permits have been issued.
   (c)   Camping in Vehicle Prohibited.  
      (1)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to place, maintain, use, or
occupy any vehicle on any parcel of real property for the purpose of camping,
dwelling, or maintaining, or establishing a temporary or permanent residency
unless such placement, maintenance, use, or occupancy is authorized pursuant to
this Chapter.
      (2)   Exception. With no required permit, a property owner(s) shall be
allowed to place, maintain, use and/or occupy any temporary structure on their
own property of five acres or larger for no more than a total of four days in a
30-day period when used for recreational camping in the RC (Resource
Conservation), AG (Agriculture) or RL (Rural Living) land use zoning districts.
This exception shall also apply when such vehicles are lawfully used as
seasonal labor quarters upon the issuance of the Site Plan Permit and Special
Use Permit pursuant to §§
84.01.030 and
84.01.040.
   (d)   Vehicle Applicability. This Subdivision shall apply to the following
vehicle types:
      (1)   All recreational motor vehicles;
      (2)   Recreational towed vehicles;
      (3)   Mobile homes;
      (4)   Commercial coaches;
      (5)   Office trailers;
      (6)   Park trailers;
      (7)   Passenger vehicles;
      (8)   Trailers;
      (9)   Campers; and
      (10)   Commercial vehicles.
   (e)   Notice to Abate.
      (1)   The Director may issue to any person occupying any structure or
vehicle prohibited in violation of this Section a notice, including an order to
vacate the structure or vehicle after 30 days of the date of the notice.
      (2)   If deemed necessary by the Director to prevent or remedy an
immediate threat to health and safety of the public or occupants of the
structure, the Director may issue any person occupying any structure or vehicle
prohibited in violation of this Section an order to vacate the structure or
vehicle with less than 30 days notice; or institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation or nuisance.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4098,
passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4393, passed - -2020)
CHAPTER 84.26: WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS – ACCESSORY
Section
   
84.26.010   Purpose.
   
84.26.020   Applicability.
   
84.26.030   Development Standards.
§ 84.26.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of
standards for the placement of accessory wind energy systems on parcels in
unincorporated areas of the County in order to encourage the generation of
electricity for on-site use, thereby reducing the consumption of electrical
power supplied by utility companies. These regulations are intended to ensure
that accessory wind energy systems are designed and located in a manner that
minimizes visual and safety impacts on the surrounding community.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Ord. 4188, passed - -2012)
§ 84.26.020 Applicability.
   This Chapter provides development standards for accessory wind energy
systems.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Ord. 4188, passed - -2012)
§ 84.26.030 Development Standards.
   (a)   Maximum Number of Accessory Wind Energy Systems. The maximum number of
accessory wind energy systems on a single parcel is determined by the total
combined rated kW hours for all the wind turbines in a system. Wind turbines
are defined in §
810.01.250(m)(4) of this Title. The maximum number of accessory wind energy
systems is as follows:
Table 84-14a
Maximum Number of Accessory Wind Energy Systems
 Type of System Requirements
Table 84-14a
Maximum Number of Accessory Wind Energy Systems
                          Type of System             Requirements
                           Residential                25 kW
Maximum number of kW       Non-residential            50 kW or verified actual
                                                      energy use
                           Building-mounted turbines  Based on the maximum
                                                      number of kW
                                                      Based on the maximum
                           Tower-mounted turbines     number of kW. Only l
Maximum number of turbines                            turbine shall be attached
in the system                                         to each tower.
                                                      Based on the maximum
                           Combined building- mounted number of kW. Only 1
                           and tower turbines         turbine shall be attached
                                                      to a tower.
 
   (b)   Maximum tower height. The tower height limitations in Table 84-14b
(Maximum Tower Heights for Accessory Wind Energy Systems) shall apply to all
accessory wind energy systems, provided that the application for a system
includes evidence that the proposed height does not exceed the height
recommended by the manufacturer or distributor of the system.
Table 84-14 b
Maximum Tower Heights for Accessory Wind Energy Systems
                                                    Region
Land Use Zoning District (parcel size within zoning Valley Mountain Desert
district)
Table 84-14 b
Maximum Tower Heights for Accessory Wind Energy Systems
                                             Region
Land Use Zoning District (parcel size within Valley     Mountain   Desert
zoning district)
AG                                           80 feet    80 feet    120 feet
RC                                           80 feet    80 feet    120 feet
RL (minimum one-half acre)                   65 feet    65 feet    80 feet
RL-5, RL-10, RL-20, RL-40                    80 feet    80 feet    100 feet
RM (minimum one-half acre)                   52.5 feet  52.5 feet  52.5 feet
RS (minimum one-half acre)                   52.5 feet  52.5 feet  52.5 feet
All other land use zoning districts          65 feet(1) 65 feet(1) 80 feet(1)
(1)   Or the maximum structure height specified in Division 2 (Land Use
Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) for the land use zoning district in
which the system is located, whichever is greater.
 
   (c)   System Separation Requirements. All units located on the same parcel
shall be separated from each other in accordance with the manufacturer’s
recommended distances.
   (d)   Setbacks. The minimum setback from any property line shall be equal to
the system height.
   (e)   Climbing apparatus. Climbing apparatus shall be located at least 12
feet above the ground, and the tower shall be designed to prevent climbing
within the first 12 feet.
   (f)   Lighting. Tower structure lighting shall be prohibited unless required
by another code or regulation.
   (g)   Noise. The noise performance standards in §
83.01.080 (Noise) shall apply, except during short-term events (e.g., utility
outages, windstorms, etc.).
   (h)   Visual effects. An accessory wind energy system shall not
substantially obstruct views of adjacent property owners.
   (i)   Location.
      (1)   An accessory wind energy system shall be placed or constructed
below any major ridgeline when viewed from any designated scenic corridor as
identified in the Open Space Element of the General Plan and in
Chapter 82.19 (Open Space (OS) Overlay).
      (2)   An accessory wind energy system shall not be:
         (A)   Located within a scenic corridor as identified in the Open Space
Element of the General Plan and in
Chapter 82.19 (Open Space (OS) Overlay).
         (B)   Allowed where otherwise prohibited by any of the following:
            (I)   The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act.
            (II)   The terms of any easement.
            (III)   The listing of the proposed site in the National Register
of Historic Places or the California Register of Historical Resources.
   (j)   Turbine certification. All wind turbines in an accessory wind energy
system must be approved by the California Energy Commission as eligible in the
Emerging Renewables Program or certified by a national program recognized and
approved by the Energy Commission including the Clean Energy States Alliance.
   (k)   Engineering analysis. The application shall include standard drawings
and an engineering analysis of the system's tower, showing compliance with the
California Building Code (CBC) or the California Residential Code (CRC) and
certification by a professional mechanical, structural, or civil engineer
licensed by the State. However, a wet stamp shall not be required, provided
that the application demonstrates that the system is designed to meet the:
      (1)   CBC or CRC requirements for the applicable wind speed and exposure;
      (2)   CBC or CRC requirements for the applicable seismic design category;
      (3)   Requirements for a soil strength of not more than 1,000 pounds per
square foot; or
      (4)   Other relevant conditions normally required by a local agency.
   (l)   Compliance with aviation law. The system shall comply with all
applicable Federal Aviation Administration requirements and the State
Aeronautics Act (Public Utilities Code §§ 21001 et seq.).
   (m)   Compliance with electrical code. The application shall include a line
drawing of the electrical components of the system in sufficient detail to
allow for a determination that the installation conforms to the California
Electric Code (CEC).
   (n)   Reduction in onsite electricity consumption. The system shall be used
primarily to reduce onsite consumption of electricity.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4188,
passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4488, passed - -2025)
CHAPTER 84.27: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Section
   
84.27.010   Purpose.
   
84.27.020   Applicability.
   
84.27.030   Structure Height.
   
84.27.040   Separation from Residences.
   
84.27.050   Minimizing Impacts.
   
84.27.060   Review Procedures.
   
84.27.070   Project Notices.
   
84.27.080   Review Factors.
   
84.27.090   Abandoned Sites.
   
84.27.100   Elevation of Approvals.
   
84.27.110   Interjurisdictional Review.
§ 84.27.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish guidelines for
the siting of towers, antennas and related equipment.
   (b)   Acknowledgment of Federal Limitations on Local Regulations. The County
recognizes that the Telecommunication Act of 1996 [47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)]
states that local regulations shall not:
      (1)   Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally
equivalent services;
      (2)   Prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless services;
      (3)   Regulate the placement, construction, and modification of personal
wireless service facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions to the extent that the facilities comply with the
Commission’s regulations of emissions.
   (c)   Goals and Intent. Acknowledging these Federal provisions, the goals of
this Chapter are to:
      (1)   Encourage the location of wireless telecommunication facilities, to
the greatest extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the County
is minimal.
      (2)   Encourage the design and configuration of wireless
telecommunications facilities in a way that minimizes their adverse aesthetic,
health, safety and economic impacts.
      (3)   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the County quickly, effectively, and efficiently,
with minimal impact to the aesthetic, health, safety and economic character of
the County.
      (4)   Encourage the location of towers and other wireless facilities in
non-residential areas.
      (5)   Encourage where appropriate the joint use of new and existing tower
and antenna sites, including existing utility towers.
      (6)   Allow for different height limitations for wireless
telecommunication towers in the Valley Region, Mountain Region, and the Desert
Region due to the different aesthetic, health, safety, and economic impacts of
the towers in the different regions of the County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.27.020 Applicability.
   This Chapter shall apply to any wireless telecommunication project for which
land use approval has not been properly issued by the Department before
December 6, 2001. This Chapter shall not apply to the installation of remote
units required for fixed wireless telephone and high-speed Internet service.
The installation of these types of remote units is exempt from review by the
Department, the Commission, or the Board.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.27.030 Structure Height.
   (a)   Height Limitations. The height limitations in
Table 84-18 (Maximum Heights of Wireless Telecommunications Towers) shall apply
to all wireless telecommunications towers. Variances to these standards may be
issued if approved in compliance with
Chapter 85.17 (Variances).
Table 84-18
Maximum Heights of Wireless Telecommunications Towers
Land Use Zoning District Valley Region Mountain Region(1) Desert Region
Table 84-18
Maximum Heights of Wireless Telecommunications Towers
Land Use Zoning District     Valley Region     Mountain Region(1) Desert Region
Rural Living (RL)            45 feet           55 feet            120 feet
Single Residential (RS)      45 feet           35 feet            55 feet
Multiple Residential (RM)    45 feet           55 feet            60 feet
Resource Conservation (RC)   45 feet           55 feet            199 feet
Agriculture (AG)             60 feet           60 feet            75 feet
Floodway (FW)                60 feet           70 feet            75 feet
Neighborhood Commercial (CN) 60 feet           70 feet            75 feet
Rural Commercial (CR)        60 feet           70 feet            120 feet
Special Development (SD)     75 feet           75 feet            120 feet
Office Commercial (CO)       75 feet           75 feet            120 feet
Highway Commercial (CH)      75 feet           75 feet            120 feet
General Commercial (CG)      75 feet           75 feet            120 feet
Service Commercial (CS)      75 feet           75 feet            120 feet
Community Industrial (IC)    90 feet           90 feet            120 feet
Regional Industrial (IR)     180 feet          180 feet           180 feet
Institutional (IN)           180 feet          180 feet           180 feet
Specific Plan (SP)           Per Specific Plan
Notes:
(1)   The maximum height of towers shall be the height indicated in the above
table or, where the site is forested, 20 feet above the predominant height of
the trees in the prime direction of signal propagation.
 
   (b)   Height Measurement.
      (1)   Ground-mounted Antennas. For ground-mounted antennas, the height of
the antenna structure shall be measured from the lowest ground surface at the
base of the tower to the top of the tower or to the top of any extension to the
tower.
      (2)   Antennas Mounted on Structures Other than Towers. For antennas
mounted on structures other than towers, the height of the antenna shall be
measured from the top of the structure on which the antenna is mounted to the
top of the antenna or screening, whichever is higher. The combined height of
the structure and the antenna shall not exceed the height limitations indicated
in §
84.27.030 (Structure Height), above, unless a variance is processed and
approved in compliance with
Chapter 85.17 (Variances).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.27.040 Separation from Residences.
   (a)   Separation Distance Required. Telecommunication towers and antennas
shall not be located closer than 300 feet or a distance equal to 200 percent of
the height of the tower, whichever is greater, from an off-site residence.
   (b)   Antennas and Facilities Exempt from Separation Distance Standard. This
separation standard shall not apply in the following instances:
      (1)   When wireless telecommunication facilities are totally enclosed
within another structure (i.e., steeple, sign, etc.).
      (2)   When a wireless telecommunication facility is added to an existing
structure and appears as if it were part of the architectural design of the
structure.
      (3)   When antennas are to be mounted on existing utility towers, utility
streetlights, and utility poles or their substantially similar replacements and
the:
         (A)   Height of the existing structure is not increased; and
         (B)   Antenna does not protrude above the existing structure. For the
purposes of this Section, “utility towers” do not include water tanks.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.27.050 Minimizing Impacts.
   Telecommunications facilities shall be located and designed so as to
minimize their visibility. To this end, all of the following measures shall be
implemented for new telecommunications facilities and antennas.
   (a)   Co-Location/Stealth Facilities.
      (1)   No new telecommunication facilities or antennas that are visible to
the general public shall be installed on a site that is not already developed
with telecommunication facilities or other public or quasi-public uses unless
they have been designed to minimize or eliminate the visual obtrusiveness of
the facility and meet all other requirements of this Chapter. New facilities
that cannot meet these requirements may be approved when all of the following
are provided:
         (A)   Evidence of infeasibility of co-location on another facility or
joint location in an existing antenna farm, or clear evidence that co-location
on an existing facility would result in a substantial impact; and
         (B)   Evidence of inability to stealth the facility based on technical
or design considerations.
      (2)   To avoid excessive heights of towers that are associated with co-
location of antenna arrays, co-location is not required in the Mountain Region.
      (3)   Towers that are designed to accommodate the co-location of
additional providers in the future shall be initially constructed to the lowest
possible height. When additional providers are ready to be installed, the
additional height needed to accommodate the extra antenna array(s) shall be
constructed at that time.
   (b)   Separation from Existing Facility. No telecommunications facility or
antenna that is visible to the general public from off of the applicant’s
property shall be installed closer than 2,000 feet from another visible
telecommunications facility or antenna without a variance, unless it is a co-
location or joint location facility. This provision shall not apply to
situations where either the existing or the proposed telecommunications
facility or antenna within 2,000 feet uses a camouflage or stealth design
approved by the County. Antennas proposed to be mounted on existing utility
towers, utility streetlights and utility poles, or their substantially similar
replacements shall also be exempt from this requirement.
   (c)   Ridgeline Sites. Telecommunication facilities in areas of high
visibility within sensitive viewsheds shall be sited below the ridgeline as
viewed from a distance and designed to minimize their profile (e.g., screened,
depressed, or located behind berms, trees, etc.).
   (d)   Non-Reflective Colors. Structures, poles, towers, antenna supports,
antennas and other components of each telecommunication site shall be treated
with non-reflective colors to provide concealment of the facilities.
   (e)   Camouflaging. For facilities that are not stealthed, telecommunication
facilities and antennas and ground equipment shall blend with the predominant
viewing background to the maximum extent practical, except when the treatment
does not comply with Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) requirements.
   (f)   Support Facilities.
      (1)   Freestanding aboveground telecommunication support facilities
(i.e., equipment shelters) shall be no taller than one story in height and
shall be constructed to look like a structure or facility typically found in
the area.
      (2)   Where there are no structures in the immediate vicinity or for
projects where a cabinet is proposed, the support facilities shall be designed
and constructed to blend with the predominant viewing background or screened
from view by landscaping or other method to the maximum extent practical.
   (g)   Parking. Parking for service vehicles may be allowed on site. Paving
or other surfacing shall be required in compliance with
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards). Screening shall be required
where appropriate.
   (h)   Lighting. Tower structure lighting shall be prohibited unless required
by the FAA, FCC or the California Building Code (CBC). External structure and
area lighting shall be allowed only where the lighting is activated and
controlled by motion sensors.
   (i)   Outside Storage. No outdoor storage of equipment, materials or
supplies shall be allowed.
   (j)   Area Disturbance. The applicant shall avoid or minimize disturbance to
the natural landscape. Applicant shall repair disturbed areas immediately
following construction and shall regularly check to ensure that disturbances to
the natural landscape do not occur or are promptly repaired.
   (k)   Power and Communication Lines. No aboveground power or communication
lines shall be extended to the site, unless clear and convincing evidence
demonstrates that undergrounding these lines would result in substantial
environmental impacts. Underground utilities shall be installed in a manner to
minimize the disturbance of existing vegetation and wildlife habitats.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.27.060 Review Procedures.
   (a)   Conditional Use Permit Required. All wireless telecommunications
facility projects shall be subject to a Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit
in compliance with
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit), with controversial
projects requiring a public hearing before the Commission. Projects shall not
be considered controversial solely on the basis of radio frequency emissions.
   (b)   Projects Exempt from Conditional Use Permit Requirement. The following
projects shall be exempt from the Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit
requirement and shall be subject to a Site Plan Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.08 (Site Plan Permits) provided they do not require a Variance. The
limitations of §
85.08.020(b) shall not apply for projects that include any of the following:
      (1)   Any building or roof mounted antenna that does not extend above the
top of the parapet wall by more than 12 feet and painted to match the
structure, or that is completely screened from public view.
      (2)   Antennas mounted on or contained within other existing or proposed
structures (e.g., appurtenances to existing structure, penthouses, elevator
structures, parapets, steeples, signs, water tanks, pump stations, utility
towers and poles, utility streetlights, ball field lighting, etc.) so as not to
be readily identifiable as a wireless communication facility. This may include
the replacement of an existing structure to accommodate a wireless
telecommunications facility.
      (3)   The co-location of a new antenna to an existing approved support
structure, or the replacement of an existing approved support structure in
order to co-locate a new antenna, without an increase in height.
      (4)   Change of antennas or microwave dishes of similar construction,
size, and shape on any existing facility provided that the change of antenna(s)
does not result in substantial increased visibility of the structure.
   (c)   Screening Required. Utility or accessory equipment described in
Subdivision (b) (Projects Exempt from Conditional Use Permit Requirement),
above, shall be screened from view from any residence or State or County
maintained road in a manner that achieves compatibility with the surrounding
setting.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4098,
passed - -2010)
§ 84.27.070 Project Notices.
   (a)   Project Requiring Conditional Use Permit Approval. Notice of an
application for approval of a wireless telecommunications facility shall be
provided to the Municipal Advisory Council (MAC) for the area, and to all
property owners within cities and the unincorporated area of the County within
the following parameters:
      (1)   Urban Areas. 300 feet of the external boundaries of the parcel of
the proposed site.
      (2)   Rural Areas. 1,000 feet of the external boundaries of the parcel of
the proposed site or to the property owners of up to 20 separate surrounding
parcels, whichever is more, up to one quarter mile (1,320 ft.).
      (3)   Notification Timing. Notification shall be accomplished upon
application acceptance
   (b)   Project Requiring Land Use Permit Approval. Only the surrounding
property owners within 300 feet of the external boundaries of the parcel of the
proposed site shall be notified of the application for a Land Use Permit. This
notification shall be accomplished upon application acceptance.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.27.080 Review Factors.
   (a)   Factors for consideration of review authority. The review authority
shall consider the following aesthetic, health, safety, and economic factors in
determining whether to issue a Conditional Use Permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility:
      (1)   Height of the proposed tower or antenna structure.
      (2)   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries.
      (3)   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
      (4)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage or other existing structures.
      (5)   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness.
      (6)   Proposed ingress and egress.
      (7)   Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures.
      (8)   Identification of signal coverage area.
      (9)   Comments from other agencies and parties in compliance with §
84.27.110 (Interjurisdictional Review).
      (10)   Compliance with State and Federal rules (e.g., radio-frequency
emission safety rules, etc.).
   (b)   Findings Required for Conditional Use Permit Approvals. In addition to
the consideration of the factors listed in Subdivision (a), above, before
approving an application for a Conditional Use Permit, the review authority
shall find and justify that all of the findings required in §
85.06.040 (Findings Required) are true.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.27.090 Abandoned Sites.
   (a)   Abandonment. A wireless telecommunication facility that is not
operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned.
   (b)   Removal of Structures after Abandonment. The owners of an abandoned
facility shall remove all structures within 90 days of receipt of notice from
the County notifying the owner of the abandonment. The owner shall return the
site to its approximate natural condition. If an abandoned facility is not
removed within the 90 day time period, the County may remove all such
structures at the owner’s expense.
   (c)   Posting and Continuous Maintenance of Bond Required for All Users. A
bond to ensure the removal of the abandoned facility and the rehabilitation of
the site shall be required with the original project approval. If there are two
or more users of a single tower, then the provision concerning abandonment
shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. However, the
bond or a cash equivalent shall remain in force at all times and failure to
maintain a bond or cash equivalent shall result in an immediate closure of the
site with liability for rehabilitation placed upon the original permit holder
and all subsequent users and permit holders.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.27.100 Elevation of Approvals.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Subdivision
84.27.060 (b) (Projects Exempt from Conditional Use Permit Requirement) above,
any project that may be controversial and/or involves important policy
questions may be referred to the Commission for public hearing and action. The
Commission may refer these types of projects to the Board for public hearing
and action.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 84.27.110 Interjurisdictional Review.
   (a)   Review of Project That Impacts Sphere of Influence or City Within
County. When a proposed telecommunications facility is located within the
sphere of influence or located within one mile of a boundary of any city within
the County, the review authority shall refer the project to the affected city
for review and comment. The review authority shall consider the requirements of
the adopted telecommunications policies of that city and its comments, if any,
on the proposed project.
   (b)   Review of Project That Impacts State or Federal Land. When a proposed
telecommunications facility has the potential to impact Federal or State lands,
the review authority shall refer the project to the appropriate agency for
review and comment, notwithstanding the fulfillment of §
84.27.070 (Project Notices).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 84.28: SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTALS
Section
   
84.28.010   Purpose.
   
84.28.020   Applicability.
   
84.28.030   Definitions.
   
84.28.040   Permit Required.
   
84.28.050   Application Process.
   
84.28.060   Occupancy Standards.
   
84.28.070   Conditions of Operation.
   
84.28.080   Enforcement.
   
84.28.090   Suspension of Permit.
   
84.28.100   Revocation of Permit.
   
84.28.110   Hosting Platform Requirements.
§ 84.28.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a permit procedure, and
maintenance and operational standards, for the use of legal residential
dwelling units located in the Mountain and Desert Regions as transient
occupancies, to ensure the health and safety of occupants, guests, and the
surrounding residential neighborhood, and to minimize negative secondary
effects associated with such use.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4371,
passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4439, passed - -2022)
§ 84.28.020 Applicability.
   Except as otherwise provided, the standards and permit procedures of this
Chapter apply to all persons involved in the short-term rental of residential
dwelling units as a single housekeeping unit where allowed in the Mountain and
Desert Regions in compliance with Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and
Allowed Land Uses) of this Title or in connection with a legal nonconforming
residential structure located in a non-residential land use zoning district.
"Short-term" means 30 consecutive calendar days or less. The permit procedures
of this Chapter shall not apply to the rental of an alternative shelter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4331,
passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4371, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4393, passed - -2020;
Am. Ord. 440, passed - -2021; Am. Ord. 4439, passed - -2022)
§ 84.28.030 Definitions.
   The definitions in this Section are intended to apply to this Chapter only.
Any term which is not specifically defined herein shall have the definition as
provided by
Division 10 of the Development Code or elsewhere within the County Code.
   (a)   ALTERNATIVE SHELTER. Means any shelter, vehicle, or site prepared for
transient occupancy rental other than a legal residential dwelling unit or
commercial lodging facility. Examples of alternative shelters include, but are
not limited to, tents, recreational cabins, and recreational vehicles.
   (b)   BOOKING TRANSACTION. Means any reservation or payment service provided
by a person who facilitates a STR transaction between a prospective STR renter
and a STR owner.
   (c)   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof, including, but not
limited to, a manufactured home, that contains living facilities, including
provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation as required by the
California Building Code, for not more than one family, including domestic
employees of the family. Examples of a dwelling unit include, but are not
limited to, a single-family dwelling unit, condominium, accessory dwelling
unit, guesthouse, or any other accessory residential structure considered a
dwelling unit.
   (d)   HOSTING PLATFORM. Means a marketplace in whatever form or format,
which facilitates rental of a STR through advertising, match-making or any
other means, using any medium or facilitation, and from which the operator of
the hosting platform derives revenues from providing or maintaining the
marketplace.
   (e)   INSPECTIONS-INITIAL. Means any inspection incident to the review of an
application for an initial STR permit. The responsible department shall inspect
the subject property to verify compliance with the standards of this Chapter.
   (f)   INSPECTIONS-RENEWAL. Means the reinspection, upon the application for
renewal of a STR permit, whereby the subject property shall be inspected to
ensure continued compliance with the standards of this Chapter. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary, an applicant seeking renewal of a STR permit shall
comply with all applicable standards of this Chapter at the time of renewal.
   (g)   OCCUPANT. Means a person who will stay overnight in a STR. The maximum
occupancy stated on a STR permit will indicate the maximum number of occupants
approved.
   (h)   RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENT. Means the department or subdivision thereof
designated by the Chief Executive Officer of San Bernardino County to implement
this Chapter.
   (i)   SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT (STR). Means a dwelling unit or
portion thereof rented or otherwise used for residential transient occupancy,
as defined in §
14.0203 (Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax). A STR shall not be used for any
commercial activity, which includes but is not limited to weddings, wedding
receptions, corporate retreats, business meetings or conferences, filming
photography shoots, a fraternity party, or any other similar gathering, unless
regulated under an approved County-issued permit. Transient occupancy generally
means occupancy for 30 consecutive calendar days or less.
   (j)   STR OWNER. Means the owner of a property, as defined in §
810.01.170 (Definitions, O), with a dwelling unit that is being used as a STR.
An owner may include, but is not limited to, a person, corporation,
partnership, a personal or family trust, limited liability company (LLC), or
limited liability partnership (LLP). An agent may act on behalf of a property
owner to manage the STR.
   (k)   STR RENTER. Means an individual who enters into an agreement or is
authorized by the STR owner, regardless of remunerations, to use property as a
STR. Such renter is not considered a tenant or a person who hires a dwelling
unit under Civil Code § 1940.
   (l)   SURROUNDING PROPERTY OWNER. Means the owner of property that is
located within the applicable distance from the STR as set forth in
Table 85-2 of §
85.03.080 (Notice of Pending Land Use Decisions).
(Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4371, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4400,
passed - -2021; Am. Ord. 4439, passed - -2022)
§ 84.28.040 Permit Required.
   (a)   A property owner may use a dwelling unit as a STR only if said owner
has a current valid STR permit and complies with the requirements of this
Chapter and other applicable provisions of the County Code. A separate permit
shall be required for each dwelling unit used as a STR when there is more than
one legal dwelling unit on the parcel.
      (1)   A maximum of two STR permits may be issued for a parcel 2 acres or
greater. A maximum of one STR permit may be issued for a parcel less than 2
acres.
      (2)   An individual apartment located within a multi-family residential
project is not eligible for a STR permit.
      (3)   Short-term timeshare occupancy of a condominium unit may be
authorized by the condominium owners' association or other governing body
having jurisdiction over the timeshare complex, provided enforcement of such
occupancy requirement is performed by the same association or governing body.
Such occupancy shall not be subject to a STR permit.
      (4)   A STR owner shall not be eligible for more than two STR permits,
provided however that a STR owner that holds more than two active STR permits
on the effective date of this ordinance shall be eligible to renew applicable
existing STR permits as a legal non-conforming use.
   (b)   STR renters are subject to the uniform transient occupancy tax of
Section
14.0203 (Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax).
   (c)   A STR permit shall not be transferrable. A new owner that desires to
use the property as a STR shall apply for a new STR permit.
   (d)   An alternative shelter shall not be eligible for a STR permit. Rental
of an alternative shelter may be permitted as a campground use.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4371,
passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021; Am. Ord. 4439, passed - -2022)
§ 84.28.050 Application Process.
   (a)   Application. An application for a STR permit shall be submitted to the
responsible department on a pre-approved form. The required content of the form
may be revised from time to time, but at a minimum shall require the following:
      (1)   Property owner name and contact information.
      (2)   Applicant name and contact information, if different from the
property owner.
      (3)   Address and Assessor's parcel number for the dwelling unit, to be
used as a STR.
      (4)   Total square footage of the dwelling unit to be used as a STR.
      (5)   Total number of bedrooms to be used for overnight sleeping
purposes.
      (6)   The name of the managing agency, agent, or property manager, if
different from the property owner, and a telephone number at which that party
may be immediately reached on a 24-hour basis.
      (7)   Acknowledgment that the permittee understands and agrees to operate
the STR in compliance with the regulations and requirements set forth in this
Chapter.
      (8)   A fee amount to cover the application and permit fee, as set forth
in the San Bernardino County schedule of fees. If additional inspections or
enforcement actions are required, then the owner or applicant may be required
to pay for the additional services.
   (b)   Notification Requirements.
      (1)   The responsible department shall provide notice of the application
to all surrounding property owners. The notice shall provide that comments may
be submitted to the responsible department up to 20 calendar days after the
date of said notice.
      (2)   The responsible department shall notify the applicant if the
application is approved or denied including the applicable appeal provision.
Notwithstanding §
86.06.020 (Effective Date of Permits), the effective date of the STR permit
will be the first business day following a 30-day appeal period identified in
Subsection (e). The responsible department shall also send notice to all
surrounding property owners informing them that a permit was issued including
the applicable appeal provision. This notice to surrounding property owners
shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
         (A)   The name of the managing agency, agent, property manager, or
owner of the dwelling unit, and a telephone number at which that party may be
immediately reached on a 24-hour basis;
         (B)   The phone number of the County's 24/7 short-term rental
complaint line;
         (C)   The maximum number of occupants allowed in the dwelling unit;
         (D)   The maximum number of vehicles allowed to be parked on the
property; and
         (E)   A web link to on-line information regarding STR permits.
      (3)   A STR owner shall be required to update the responsible department
of any changes to the name of the managing agency, agent, or property manager
of the dwelling unit, and a telephone number at which that party may be
immediately reached on a 24-hour basis. An updated notice shall be required, at
the cost of the STR owner, when necessary to update surrounding property owners
of changes to the content required by Subsection (b).
   (c)   Operation During Application Process. Notwithstanding §
84.28.040 (Permit Required), while a new application for a STR permit is
pending, a dwelling unit may be used as a STR provided that the dwelling unit
has been permitted by a previous owner, there are no outstanding violations,
and the new owner has applied for a permit within 30 days of taking title to
the property pursuant to §
84.28.040(c).
   (d)   Application Denial. An application for a STR permit or renewal of a
permit under this Chapter shall be denied by the responsible department upon
one or more of the following grounds:
      (1)   The application is incomplete or the applicant has otherwise failed
to comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
      (2)   The applicant or permittee provided material information that is
false, which the applicant reasonably should have known to be incorrect, in the
application for a permit under this Chapter.
      (3)   The STR or property is not in compliance with the standards of this
Chapter or other applicable County Code provisions and has failed to pass the
initial or renewal inspection.
   (e)   Applicant Appeals. An applicant may appeal the denial or conditional
acceptance of an application for a STR permit. Such appeal must be in writing
and submitted to the responsible department within 30 calendar days following
the date of the notice provided pursuant to §
84.28.050(b)(2). When the thirtieth day is not a County business day, the time
frame is extended to the next County business day following the thirtieth day.
The appeal shall follow the procedure set forth in §
84.28.090 (c)(2).
   (f)   Non-Applicant Appeals. Non-applicants may appeal the granting of a new
STR permit. All such appeals must be submitted to the responsible department
within 30 calendar days following the date of the notice provided pursuant to §
84.28.050(b)(2). When the 30th day is not a County business day, the time frame
is extended to the next County business day following the 30th day. The grounds
for such appeal are limited to the claim that past use of the property as a STR
has not complied with one or more requirements of §§
84.28.060(b) through (c), or §
84.28.070, or that, based on competent evidence, any prospective use for such
purpose will likely not comply with one or more of such requirements. Such
appeal shall be heard in the same manner as specified in §
84.28.090(c)(2). The applicant shall be provided notice of the hearing. If the
appellant prevails in the appeal, then the applicant's application shall be
deemed to be denied and such decision shall be the final decision of the
County. No further appeal shall be available at the administrative level.
   (g)   Permit Renewal. A STR permit shall be renewed annually. Permit renewal
shall be approved if the current conditions of operation and other standards in
this Chapter have been met, the subject property passes the renewal inspection,
and the applicable renewal and permit fees as set forth in the San Bernardino
County Code schedule of fees are paid. Renewal payments submitted after permit
expiration are subject to a delinquent fee pursuant to the schedule of fees.
Continued use of a STR is prohibited following permit expiration until renewal
payment, including any delinquent fee, has been received by the County. Failure
to submit renewal payment within 45 calendar days of permit expiration,
including any delinquent fee, shall result in expiration of the STR permit. The
STR owner shall be required to submit a new application, pay the applicable new
permit application fee, and be subject to the application process as set forth
beginning in Subsection (a) above.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4371,
passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021; Am. Ord. 4439, passed - -2022)
§ 84.28.060 Occupancy Standards.
   (a)   Compliance with Uniform Codes and Other Laws. At the time of issuance
of a STR permit and thereafter, the STR owner shall be responsible for
compliance with the California Fire Code, California Building Code, the
National Fire Protection Association Standards or regulations, and any other
applicable uniform codes, as adopted by San Bernardino County, and other
applicable laws and codes.
   (b)   Occupancy Limits. Occupancy limits for a STR shall be determined as
follows:
      (1)   Occupancy limits shall be determined based on the number of
bedrooms in the STR. The number of bedrooms will be verified using County
Assessor data and County building records. Example occupancies:
         (A)   Studio/Single-bedroom STR: four occupants
         (B)   Two-bedroom STR: six occupants
         (C)   Three-bedroom STR: eight occupants
         (D)   Four-bedroom STR: ten occupants
         (E)   Five-bedroom STR: twelve occupants
      (2)   Kitchens, bathrooms, toilet rooms, living rooms, dens, dining
areas, halls, closets, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not
considered bedrooms and shall not be used in the calculation for determining
the maximum number of occupants.
      (3)   Occupancy Cap. Notwithstanding the allowances based on the number
of bedrooms, the maximum occupancy of any STR shall not exceed 12 occupants.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the allowances for maximum occupancy, the use of a
STR shall be limited by the capacity of on-site parking spaces, pursuant to the
minimum parking standards required by Subsection (c) below.
   (c)   Parking. All vehicles of STR occupants and their guests must be parked
on the STR property. Parking spaces may include garage, carport, and driveway
spaces, and may allow for tandem parking. On-site parking areas shall be kept
free from any obstructions, including, but not limited to, excessive amounts of
snow, which would prevent use for vehicle parking. Only the approved parking
areas/spaces pursuant to the STR permit shall be used for vehicle parking. No
vehicle related to the STR shall be parked on neighboring properties or on
public or private roads, or in any manner that would create an obstruction.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4331,
passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4371, passed - -2019; Ord. 4400, passed - -2021; Am.
Ord. 4439, passed - -2022)
§ 84.28.070 Conditions of Operation.
   The following are minimal requirements for STR operation. These are in
addition to any other applicable requirements of this Chapter, other applicable
provisions of the County Code, or other law.
   (a)   Prohibited Uses of Property. A STR shall not be used for any occupancy
other than the purposes described in this Chapter. A STR shall not be used for
any commercial activity, which includes but is not limited to weddings,
receptions, corporate retreats, business meetings or conferences, filming,
photography shoots, parties, or any similar activities, unless regulated under
an applicable approved County-issued permit.
   (b)   Record Keeping. The property owner or property manager shall maintain
records sufficient to prove compliance with this Chapter and other applicable
laws. These records shall be maintained so that they can be readily provided to
the County and provided in such a manner that establishes that the property
owner or property manager is routinely maintaining such records.
   (c)   Registration. The STR owner shall administer registration prior to
allowing occupancy of the STR. The registration shall include review of the STR
regulations with at least one adult renter. At the time of such registration,
the renter shall be provided a complete written or digital copy of the
requirements of the STR permit and applicable regulations, as well as
disclosure of the penalties associated with violations. The registration
material shall advise the renter of the occupancy and vehicle/parking
limitations, responsibility to avoid nuisance behavior, and prohibition of
commercial activity as described in Subsection (a) above. The registration
material shall include an acknowledgement to be signed by the renter and
retained in the STR owner's records. Registration materials shall be preserved
for the term of the STR permit, and shall be provided to the County, when
requested, to confirm compliance with STR permit conditions of operation and
regulations set forth in this Chapter. If the owner fails to provide adequate
directions to the dwelling unit or fails to confirm acknowledgement and
understanding of the STR regulations, the conditions of operation of the STR
permit may be amended by the County to require in-person registration.
   (d)   Advertising.
      (1)   Advertising that promotes a STR for a use that is not permitted is
prohibited.
      (2)   All advertising, including real estate magazines, fliers,
newspapers, television or radio commercials, internet pages, or web-based ads
or rental platforms that promote the use of a STR prior to approval of an STR
permit or while the STR permit is suspended or revoked, shall be prohibited to
the extent provided by law. All advertisements featuring a permitted STR shall
specify the maximum permitted number of occupants, and vehicles permitted on
the STR property.
   (e)   Posted Notices within Unit. The County-issued STR permit shall be
posted inside the unit on or adjacent to the front door, along with an exit/
emergency evacuation map. In addition, each STR shall have a clearly visible
and legible notice posted in a prominent location within the unit, containing
the following information:
      (1)   The address of the STR.
      (2)   The name of the managing agency, agent, property manager, or owner
of the unit, and a telephone number at which that party may be immediately
reached on a 24-hour basis.
      (3)   The maximum number of occupants permitted to stay overnight in the
unit.
      (4)   The maximum number of vehicles allowed to be parked on the
property.
      (5)   The contact person or agency, and phone number for snow removal.
      (6)   Instructions for disposal of trash in accordance with the
requirements of this Chapter.
      (7)   Notification that failure to comply with the requirements of this
Chapter, including parking and occupancy standards, as well as public and
private nuisance standards, is a violation of the County Code, and that such
violation may result in enforcement actions to address the violation.
Enforcement may include criminal, civil, or administrative actions, or the
calling of law enforcement for the removal of guests and their vehicles from
the property to the extent authorized by law. The notification shall state in a
prominent format that users of the dwelling unit are prohibited from disturbing
the peace of the surrounding neighborhood and that doing so is a violation of
this Chapter and the rental agreement.
      (8)   Location of utility service connections, including how to access
service connections and instructions and any tools necessary to disconnect the
STR from utility services in the event of an emergency.
      (9)   Phone numbers of local emergency medical and law enforcement
services.
      (10)   Property boundary map for the purpose of deterring trespassing on
other privately owned properties and identification of the approved parking
area(s).
   (f)   Good Neighbor Information. In addition to the required posted notices,
the STR owner shall provide a brochure or document intended to remind renters
that the STR is located in a neighborhood. The information should promote
respect for residents of the neighborhood, including their rights to expect
peace, quiet, privacy and security.
   (g)   Call Response.
      (1)   The STR owner or agent shall be personally available by telephone
on a 24-hour basis and maintain the ability to make contact by phone within 30
minutes and be physically present at the property within one hour in order to
respond to and remedy complaints regarding the condition or operation of the
dwelling unit or the behavior of persons on the property in violation of this
Chapter or other law.
      (2)   On a 24-hour basis, within one hour of receiving a report of a
complaint, the STR owner must confirm whether or not the complaint is valid. If
the complaint is valid, the STR owner shall immediately take corrective action
within the lawful authority of the STR owner to resolve the violation, or stop
the nuisance behavior that disturbs the peace for the entire duration of the
occupancy of the person causing or allowing such violation or nuisance
behavior. Corrective action may require immediate eviction of STR renters and
contacting law enforcement, if necessary, for the removal of renters, guests
and their vehicles from the property to the extent authorized by law.
      (3)   Calls or complaints about physical conditions or circumstances that
constitute an immediate threat to the public health and safety shall obligate
the STR owner to immediately contact the appropriate law enforcement, fire, or
other authority.
      (4)   Each STR owner shall keep a written record of the times and type of
complaints received, what response was undertaken by the STR owner, and when
such complaints were resolved. This written record shall be made available to
the County upon request, and shall be retained by the owner for the term of the
STR permit.
   (h)   Responsibilities of STR Owner to Prevent Nuisance Behavior and
Maintain Neighborhood Peace and Quiet. The STR owner shall take all lawful
action necessary to ensure that renters and occupants abide by the terms of
this Chapter and other applicable provisions of the County Code and law. The
STR owner must inform renters and occupants that they are not to violate any
noise standards, parking standards, or otherwise create a public or private
nuisance.
   (i)   Loud and Disturbing Noise.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any owner, renter, occupant, or guest located at
a STR to make or allow to be made, any loud, excessive, or intrusive noise that
disturbs the peace or that causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable
person of normal sensitivities in the area. Such noises may include, but are
not limited to, shouting, loud laughter, whistling, singing, playing a musical
instrument, playing loud music or noise from sound making or sound amplifying
devices, and barking dogs.
      (2)   The standard for enforcement of this Section is the "reasonable
person" standard. The inquiry is whether the noise would disturb the peace or
cause discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person under similar
circumstances.
      (3)   Factors that may be considered in determining whether a violation
of this Section has been committed include, but are not limited to, the
following:
         (A)   The level of noise;
         (B)   The level and intensity of ambient noise, if any;
         (C)   The proximity of the noise to the reporting party;
         (D)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;
         (E)   The duration of the noise;
         (F)   Whether the noise is constant, recurrent, or intermittent; and
         (G)   Whether the noise is produced by a mechanical or electronic
device.
   (j)   Safety.
      (1)   Solid fuel burning outdoor fireplaces, chimineas, barbeques, and
fire pits are prohibited in the Mountain Region.
      (2)   The interior and exterior of the STR shall be kept free of
hazardous conditions at all times.
      (3)   Spas/hot tubs shall be covered and locked when not in use.
   (k)   Sanitation.
      (1)   Every STR shall be cleaned after each occupancy change in order to
make the unit sanitary.
      (2)   If linens are provided for use by renters, said linens will be
exchanged for clean linens after each occupancy.
      (3)   The exterior of the STR shall be maintained and kept fee of debris.
      (4)   Spas/hot tubs shall be maintained and cleaned as frequently as
needed to preserve sanitary conditions.
   (l)   Trash. Trash shall be deposited in approved trash collection
containers on the STR property. Trash containers shall be kept closed when not
in use, never be permitted to overflow, and kept in a clean condition.
      (1)   In the Mountain Region, STR owners shall use animal-proof trash
containers (unless discouraged by the County-approved refuse collection hauler)
and procure trash collection service from the County-approved refuse collection
hauler when said service is available. Pull-out trash service shall also be
established with the County approved refuse collection hauler when said service
is available. A sufficient number of trash containers based on permitted
occupancy of the STR shall be procured.
      (2)   In the Desert Region, STR owners shall procure trash collection
service and trash collection containers from the County-approved refuse
collection hauler when said service is available except trash collection
service and containers are optional if the STR owner resides on the STR
property and removes trash promptly. A sufficient number of containers based on
occupancy levels of the rental unit shall be procured.
      (3)   Trash shall be removed from the premises after each occupancy
unless routine commercial trash collection is provided to the premises.
   (m)   Animals.
      (1)   License. No person shall have, keep, or maintain any dog on the
property of a STR unless he or she is able to provide proof of a current
license issued by the County or other municipal dog licensing agency.
      (2)   Control of Animals. No person owning or having control of any
animal shall permit such animal to stray or run at large upon any unenclosed
area on or off the STR property. No person may lawfully bring his or her dog
off a STR property unless the dog is restrained by a leash and the person is
competent to restrain the dog, or the dog is properly restrained and enclosed
in a vehicle, cage, or similar enclosure.
      (3)   Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control
of any animal to allow the animal to create excessive noise in violation of
Subsection (i) of this Section.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4371,
passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021; Am. Ord. 4439, passed - -2022)
§ 84.28.080 Enforcement.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   Owners and renters of a STR shall comply with the requirements of
this Chapter and all other applicable sections of the County Code and other
law. A hosting platform shall comply with the requirements of §
84.28.110 (Hosting Platform Requirement) and all other applicable sections of
the County Code and other law.
      (2)   In addition to any enforcement action and remedy authorized by this
Chapter, a violation of any requirement of this Chapter may result in remedial
action by appropriate members of County staff or any enforcement officer as
defined in
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code without notice if
providing notice is not reasonable considering the need for immediate remedial
action, and/or if prior notice to the property owner or the renters, either
verbal or written, has not resulted in appropriate remedial action by the
property owner. If the violation pertains to any of the parking requirements of
this Chapter, the remedy may, to the extent permitted by law, include towing of
the vehicle or vehicles causing the violation of the parking requirement.
Remedial actions taken under this Section, other than any criminal citations,
are subject to appeal pursuant to
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of the County Code or other applicable
provision, but no request for appeal shall stay the remedial actions taken
pursuant to this Section.
   (b)   Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax-Failure to Pay. Failure by the owner,
or when applicable, a hosting platform to collect and remit to the Tax
Collector the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax may result in the Tax Collector
pursuing any remedy against the owner or hosting platform, including imposing
and collecting said tax from the owner or hosting platform, authorized under
Chapter 2 of Division 4 of Title 1 of the County Code or other applicable law.
Notwithstanding the duty imposed by §
84.28.110(a), the use of a hosting platform to facilitate the rental of a
short-term residential rental unit shall not relieve an owner of liability for
violations of this Section.
   (c)   Administrative Subpoena. The County may issue and serve an
administrative subpoena as necessary to obtain specific information identified
in §
84.28.110 (Hosting Platform Requirement) regarding STR listings located in the
unincorporated areas of San Bernardino County. Any subpoena issued pursuant to
this Subsection shall not require the production of information sooner than 30
calendar days from the date of service. A person that has been served with an
administrative subpoena may seek judicial review during that 30-day period.
(Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4371, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4439,
passed - -2022)
§ 84.28.090 Suspension of Permit.
   (a)   Suspension of Permit. A STR permit may be suspended for the following
reasons:
      (1)   Substandard Building or Property or Unsafe Building or Structure.
Any violation of the requirements of
Title 6 of the County Code may result in suspension of the STR permit and
issuance of a notice of defect or notice and order to repair. Notice of such
suspension shall be provided pursuant to the requirements of
Chapter 1 of Division 3 of Title 6 of the County Code.
      (2)   General Violations. Any failure to comply with or respond to any
notice of violation or other notice from the County requiring compliance with
one or more requirements of this Chapter or other applicable provision of the
County Code or other law may result in suspension of the STR permit. Property
owners shall be informed of such suspension in a written notice mailed using
both certified mail with return receipt and first class service. In addition,
although not required, the notice may also be posted on the property and/or
mailed to any additional individuals or companies listed on the permit
application.
   (b)   Use of Property During Suspension and Stays.
      (1)   When a STR permit is suspended or stayed pending outcome of an
appeal, the property affected by the suspension shall not be used as a STR
until such time as the suspension or stay is lifted.
      (2)   Permits suspended pursuant to §
84.28.090(a)(1) will remain suspended until such time as the Building Official
or his or her designee confirms that all violations have been corrected or the
Building Appeals Board has ruled in favor of the appellant.
      (3)   Permits suspended for general violations, i.e., those under §
84.28.090(a)(2), will remain suspended until such time as the violations are
abated, or the property owner can reasonably demonstrate substantive changes in
the property management practices that would mitigate or correct the
violations, or a hearing officer has ruled in favor of the appellant. If an
appeal hearing for a general violation cannot be scheduled within 14 calendar
days after an appeal was filed or if the hearing is scheduled but, through no
fault of the appellant, not held within 30 calendar days after the appeal was
filed, the suspension shall be stayed through the date a ruling on the appeal
is issued.
   (c)   Appeals of Suspensions. An appeal must be filed no later than ten
calendar days after the date the notice of suspension is issued. When the tenth
day is not a County business day, the time frame is extended to the next County
business day following the tenth day.
      (1)   The suspension of a permit pursuant to §
84.28.090(a)(1) may be appealed for a hearing before the Building Appeals
Board. The format and process of the appeal shall be as required by §
63.0105. A decision by the Building Appeals Board shall be final and no further
appeal within the County shall be available.
      (2)   The suspension of a permit for a general violation may be appealed
to a County-designated hearing officer. The decision by the hearing officer
shall be final and no further appeal within the County shall be available. The
hearing procedure shall include the following:
         (A)   At least ten calendar days written notice of the hearing shall
be given to the permit holder prior to the hearing date. The hearing date may
be postponed or continued by stipulation of the parties. If the permit holder
does not respond or appear, no further hearing procedure shall be required.
         (B)   Witnesses shall swear or affirm to tell the truth. The oath or
affirmation shall be taken by the hearing officer. The County shall present its
case first, with oral testimony and documentary evidence or other evidence. The
County shall have the right of cross-examination. The permit holder shall have
the right to be represented and shall have the right of cross-examination.
         (C)   No determination or order shall be based solely on hearsay
evidence. The hearing officer shall make his or her determination within five
working days following the hearing. The determination shall be in writing and
shall state the findings upon which the determination is made. The decision by
the hearing officer shall be final and no further appeal within the County
shall be available.
      (3)   The failure to appeal a suspension in a timely manner shall render
the action to suspend final and no further appeal within the County shall be
available.
(Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4371, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4439,
passed - -2022)
§ 84.28.100 Revocation of Permit.
   (a)   Revocation of Permit. A STR permit may be revoked for the following
reasons:
      (1)   The severity of a violation of a requirement of Title 6 of the
County Code necessitated the immediate vacation of the property.
      (2)   The conditions or actions that resulted in the suspension of the
permit have not been abated or addressed by a demonstrable change in the
business practices associated with the STR within 60 calendar days of the
suspension being upheld on appeal or otherwise deemed final.
      (3)   The condition or the business practice that resulted in the
suspension of the permit reoccurs within 12 months following the date the
suspension was upheld on appeal or otherwise deemed final.
      (4)   A permit is suspended two times in a consecutive 24-month period,
where said suspensions are either upheld on appeal or otherwise deemed final.
      (5)   The permit was obtained through fraud or deceit.
      (6)   The permit was issued in error.
   (b)   Appeals of Revocation of Permit.
      (1)   The revocation of a permit based on substandard building conditions
or other violations of Title 6 of the County Code may be appealed for a hearing
before the Building Appeals Board. The format and process of the appeal shall
be as required by §
63.0105. A decision by the Building Appeals Board shall be final and no further
appeal within the County shall be available.
      (2)   The revocation of a permit pursuant to §§
84.28.100(a)(2), (a)(3), or (a)(4), where the underlying violation or
violations are general violations, or pursuant to §§
84.28.100(a)(5) or (a)(6), may be appealed for a hearing before a County
appointed hearing officer as defined by §§
12.2701,
12.2702,
12.2703, and
12.2705. The procedure for such hearing is set forth in §
84.28.090(c)(2)(A) through (C) and (c)(3). A decision by the hearing officer
shall be final and no further appeal within the County shall be available.
   (c)   New Application After Revocation of Permit. No application for a
permit shall be permitted within 12 months after a revocation is made final.
(Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4371, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4439,
passed - -2022)
§ 84.28.110 Hosting Platform Requirement.
   (a)   For purposes of this Chapter a hosting platform shall be responsible
for collecting all applicable uniform transient occupancy tax required by §
14.0203 and remitting the same to the County. The hosting platform shall be
considered an agent of the STR owner for purposes of transient occupancy tax
collections and remittance, as set forth in §
14.0203, if the hosting platform collects payment for the rental. If a hosting
platform does not collect payment for rentals, the STR owner is solely
responsible for the collection of all applicable transient occupancy taxes.
   (b)   Subject to applicable laws and procedures provided in §
84.28.080(c), when requested by the County, a hosting platform shall disclose,
in a commonly used electronic format, the address of each STR within the
unincorporated San Bernardino County listed on the hosting platform, the names
of the persons responsible for each such listing, the address of each such
listing, the length of stay for each such listing and the price paid for each
stay.
   (c)   A hosting platform shall display the County STR permit number for any
STR listing located in the unincorporated San Bernardino County.
   (d)   A hosting platform operating exclusively on the internet, which
operates in compliance with Subsections (a), (b) and (c) above, shall be
presumed to be in compliance with this Chapter, except that the hosting
platform remains responsible for compliance with the administrative subpoena
provisions of this Chapter.
   (e)   The provisions of this Section shall be interpreted in accordance with
otherwise applicable state and federal laws and will not apply if determined by
the County to be in violation of, or preempted by, any such laws.
(Ord. 4371, passed - -2019; Am. Ord. 4439, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 84.29: RENEWABLE ENERGY GENERATION FACILITIES
Section
   
84.29.010   Purpose.
   
84.29.020   Applicability and Land Use Zoning Districts.
   
84.29.030   Wind Energy Development Standards.
   
84.29.040   Solar Energy Development Standards.
   
84.29.050   Special Fencing Standards.
   
84.29.060   Additional Wind and Solar Energey Development Standards.
   
84.29.070   Decommissioning Requirements.
§ 84.29.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish standards and permit procedures
for the establishment, maintenance and decommissioning of renewable energy
generation facilities. These regulations are intended to ensure that renewable
energy generation facilities are designed and located in a manner that
minimizes visual and safety impacts on the surrounding community.
(Ord. 4098, passed - -2010)
§ 84.29.020 Applicability and Land Use Zoning Districts.
   (a)   This Chapter provides findings and development standards for
commercial wind and solar renewable energy facilities.
   (b)   The Land Use Zoning Districts that allow commercial renewable energy
facilities are limited to the following:
      RC (Resource Conservation).
      AG (Agricultural).
      FW (Floodway).
      RL (Rural Living).
      CR (Rural Commercial).
      CN (Neighborhood Commercial).
      CO (Office Commercial).
      CG (General Commercial).
      CS (Service Commercial).
      CH (Highway Commercial).
      IC (Community Industrial).
      IR (Regional Industrial).
      IN (Institutional).
(Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4213, passed - -2013)
§ 84.29.030 Wind Energy Development Standards.
   (a)   Height Limits. Wind generator machine and associated meteorological
tower overall height shall not exceed 500 feet. For the purposes of this
Chapter, machine height shall be measured as follows:
      (1)   Overall machine height of horizontal axis of machines shall be
measured from grade to the top of the structure, including the uppermost
extension of any blades.
      (2)   Machine height of vertical axis or other machine designs shall be
measured from grade to the highest point of the structure. Further restrictions
may apply to ensue aviation safety.
   (b)   Setbacks and Spacing. Wind generator setbacks shall be as follows:
      (1)   Setbacks Where Adjacent Parcels Contain Less than 40 Acres. 
         (A)   A minimum wind generator setback of two times the overall
machine height (measured from grade to the top of the structure, including the
uppermost extension of any blades) or 500 feet, whichever is less, shall be
maintained from exterior project boundaries where the project site is adjacent
to existing parcels of record that contain less than 40 acres and are not zoned
as any of the compatible districts, which are as follows:
            RC (Resource Conservation).
            AG (Agriculture).
            FW (Floodway).
            RL (Rural Living).
            IR (Regional Industrial).
         (B)   The Director may allow a reduction in this setback, not to
exceed a minimum setback of one times the overall machine height (measured from
grade to the top of the structure, including the uppermost extension of any
blades) if a letter of consent from the owner(s) of record of adjacent parcels
is filed with the County Advance Planning Division.
      (2)   Setback Where Adjacent Parcels Contain 40 Acres or More. A minimum
wind generator setback of one and one-half times the overall machine height
(measured from grade to the top of the structure, including the uppermost
extension of any blades) or 500 feet, whichever is less, shall be maintained
from all exterior project boundaries. The Director may allow a reduction or
waiver of this setback requirement in accordance with both of the following
provisions:
         (A)   The project exterior boundary is a common property line between
two (2) or more approved wind energy projects or both properties are located
within compatible districts as listed above; and
         (B)   The property owner of each affected property has filed a letter
of consent to the proposed setback reduction with the Director.
      (3)   Setback from Off-Site Residence(s) on Adjacent Parcels. In all
cases, regardless of parcel area, a minimum wind generator setback of one and
one-half times the overall machine height (measured from grade to the top of
the structure, including the uppermost extension of any blades) or 1,500 feet,
whichever is greater, shall be maintained from any off-site residence. The
Director may allow a reduction in this setback, not to exceed a minimum setback
of one times the overall machine height, if a letter of consent from the owner
(s) of record of the adjacent parcel is filed with the Director.
      (4)   Setback from On-Site Residences and Accessory Structures Designed
for Human Occupancy. A minimum wind generator setback of one times the overall
machine height (measured from grade tot he top of the structure, including the
uppermost extension of any blade) shall be maintained from any on-site
residence or accessory structure designed for human occupancy.
      (5)   Setback from Public Highways and Streets, Public Access Easements,
Public Trails, and Railroads. A minimum wind generator setback of one and one-
half times the overall machine height (measured from grade to the top of the
structure, including the uppermost extension of any blade) shall be maintained
from any publicly maintained public highway or street. A minimum wind generator
setback of one times the overall machine height shall be maintained from any
public access easement or railroad right-of-way. A minimum wind generator
setback of 150 feet shall be maintained from the outermost extension of any
blade to any public trail, pedestrian easement, or equestrian easement.
      (6)   Project Interior Wind Generator Spacing. Wind generator spacing
within the project boundary shall be in accordance with accepted industry
practices pertaining to the subject machine.
   (c)   Compliance with Aviation Law and Department of Defense Restrictions.
The wind generator machines shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation
Administration requirements and the State Aeronautics Act (Public Utilities
Code §§ 21001 et seq.). Additionally, the local Department of Defense contact
person(s) shall be notified and clearance from the Department of Defense shall
be required for all wind generators.
   (d)   Lighting. Wind energy generation facilities shall be lighted in
compliance with FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) regulations.
   (e)   Site Design for Protection of Biological Resources. Wind energy
generation facilities will be designed in such a manner as to protect special-
status species and avian and bat species, including the following:
      (1)   The design will discourage the use of the site by raptors by
including landscaping and ground conditions that are unattractive to raptors.
      (2)   The design and siting of these facilities shall avoid the placement
of turbines on or immediately adjacent to the upwind side of ridge crests;
      (3)   The design may include other design features to minimize impacts to
bats and birds; and
      (4)   An avian and bat management plan shall be required for all projects
to address unanticipated significant adverse impacts on the population of avian
or bat species or with any other migratory corridor.
(Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4156, passed - - 2011)
§ 84.29.035 Required Findings for Approval of a Commercial Solar Energy
Facility.
   (a)   In order to approve a commercial solar energy generation facility, the
Planning Commission shall, in addition to making the findings required under §
85.06.040(a) of the San Bernardino County Development Code, determine that the
location of the proposed commercial solar energy facility is appropriate in
relation to the desirability and future development of communities,
neighborhoods, and rural residential uses, and will not lead to loss of the
scenic desert qualities that are key to maintaining a vibrant desert tourist
economy by making each of the findings of fact in Subdivision (c).
   (b)   In making these findings of fact, the Planning Commission shall
consider:
      (1)   The characteristics of the commercial solar energy facility
development site and its physical and environmental setting, as well as the
physical layout and design of the proposed development in relation to nearby
communities, neighborhoods, and rural residential uses; and
      (2)   The location of other commercial solar energy generation facilities
that have been constructed, approved, or applied for in the vicinity, whether
within a city or unincorporated territory, or on State or Federal land.
   (c)   The finding of fact shall include the following:
      (1)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility is either:
         (A)   Sufficiently separated from existing communities and existing/
developing rural residential areas so as to avoid adverse effects, or
         (B)   Of a sufficiently small size, provided with adequate setbacks,
designed to be lower profile than otherwise permitted, and sufficiently
screened from public view so as to not adversely affect the desirability and
future development of communities, neighborhoods, and rural residential use.
      (2)   Proposed fencing, walls, landscaping, and other perimeter features
of the proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will minimize the
visual impact of the project so as to blend with and be subordinate to the
environment and character of the area where the facility is to be located.
      (3)   The siting and design of the proposed commercial solar energy
generation facility will be either:
         (A)   Unobtrusive and not detract from the natural features, open
space and visual qualities of the area as viewed from communities, rural
residential uses, and major roadways and highways,1 or
         (B)   Located in such proximity to already disturbed lands, such as
electrical substations, surface mining operations, landfills, wastewater
treatment facilities, etc., that it will not further detract from the natural
features, open space and visual qualities of the area as viewed from
communities, rural residential uses, and major roadways and highways.
      (4)   The siting and design of project site access and maintenance roads
have been incorporated in the visual analysis for the project and shall
minimize visibility from public view points while providing needed access to
the development site.
      (5)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will not
adversely affect the feasibility of financing infrastructure development in
areas planned for infrastructure development or will be located within an area
not planned for future infrastructure development (e.g., areas outside of water
agency jurisdiction).
      (6)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will not
adversely affect to a significant degree the availability of groundwater
supplies for existing communities and existing and developing rural residential
areas.
      (7)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will
minimize site grading, excavating, and filling activities by being located on
land where the existing grade does not exceed an average of five percent across
the developed portion of the project site, and by utilizing construction
methods that minimize ground disturbance.
      (8)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will be
located in proximity to existing electrical infrastructure, such as
transmission lines, utility corridors, and roads, so that:
         (A)   Minimal ground disturbance and above ground infrastructure will
be required to connect to the existing transmission grid, considering the
location of the project site and the location and capacity of the transmission
grid,
         (B)   New electrical generation tie lines will be co-located on
existing power poles whenever possible, and
         (C)   Existing rights-of-way and designated utility corridors will be
utilized to the extent practicable.
      (9)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will be
sited so as to avoid or minimize impacts to the habitat of special status
species, including threatened, endangered, or rare species, Critical Habitat
Areas as designated by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, important habitat/
wildlife linkages or areas of connectivity designated by County, State or
Federal agencies, and areas of Habitat Conservation Plans or Natural Community
Conservation Plans that discourage or preclude development.
      (10)   Adequate provision has been made to maintain and promote native
vegetation and avoid the proliferation of invasive weeds during and following
construction.
      (11)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will be
located so as to avoid or mitigate impacts to significant cultural and historic
resources, as well as sacred landscapes.
      (12)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will be
designed in a manner that does not impede flood flows, avoids substantial
modification of natural water courses, and will not result in erosion or
substantially affect area water quality.
      (13)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will not
be located within a floodway designated by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), has been evaluated for flood hazard impacts pursuant to
Chapter 82.14 of the Development Code, and will not result in increased flood
hazards to upstream or downstream properties.
      (14)   All on-site solar panels, switches, inverters, transformers, and
substations shall be located at least one foot above the base flood elevation
as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
      (15)   For development sites proposed on or adjacent to undeveloped
alluvial fans, the commercial solar energy generation facility has been
designed to avoid potential channel migration zones as demonstrated by a
geomorphic assessment of the risk of existing channels migrating into the
proposed development footprint, resulting in erosion impacts.
      (16)   For proposed facilities located on prime agricultural soils or
land designated by the California Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program as
Prime Farmland, Unique Farmland, or Farmland of Statewide Importance, where use
of the land for agricultural purposes is feasible, the proposed commercial
solar energy generation facility will not substantially affect the agricultural
viability of surrounding lands.
      (17)   If the proposed site is subject to a Williamson Act contract, the
proposed commercial solar energy generation facility is consistent with the
principals of compatibility set forth in California Government Code § 51238.1.
      (18)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will not
preclude access to significant mineral resources.
      (19)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will
avoid modification of scenic natural formations.
      (20)   The proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will be
designed, constructed, and operated so as to minimize dust generation,
including provision of sufficient watering of excavated or graded soil during
construction to prevent excessive dust. Watering will occur at a minimum of
three times daily on disturbed soil areas with active operations, unless dust
is otherwise controlled by rainfall or use of a dust palliative, or other
approved dust control measure.
      (21)   All clearing, grading, earth moving, and excavation activities
will cease during period of winds greater than 20 miles per hour (averaged over
one hour), or when dust plumes of 20 percent or greater opacity impact public
roads, occupied structures, or neighboring property, and in conformance with
Air Quality Management District (AQMD) regulations.
      (22)   For sites where the boundary of a new commercial solar energy
generation facility will be located within one-quarter mile of a primary
residential structure, an adequate wind barrier will be provided to reduce
potentially blowing dust in the direction of the residence during construction
and ongoing operation of the commercial solar energy generation facility.
      (23)   Any unpaved roads and access ways will be treated and maintained
with a dust palliative or graveled or treated by another approved dust control
method to prevent excessive dust, and paving requirements will be applied
pursuant to
Chapter 83.09 of the Development Code.
      (24)   On-site vehicle speed will be limited to 15 miles per hour.
      (25)   For proposed commercial solar energy generation facilities within
two miles of the Joshua Tree National Park boundaries, the location, design,
and operation of the proposed commercial solar energy generation facility will
not be a predominant visual feature along the main access roads to the park
(Park Boulevard and Utah Trail), nor will it substantially impair views from
hiking/nature trails, campgrounds, and backcountry camping areas within the
National Park.
      (26)   For proposed facilities within two miles of the Mojave National
Preserve boundaries, the location, design, and operation of the proposed
commercial solar energy facility will not be a predominant visual feature of,
nor substantially impair views from, hiking and backcountry camping areas
within the National Preserve.
      (27)   For proposed facilities within two miles of Death Valley National
Park boundaries, the location, design, and operation of the proposed commercial
solar energy facility will not be a predominant visual feature of, nor
substantially impair views from, hiking and backcountry camping areas within
the National Park.
      (28)   For proposed facilities within two miles of the boundaries of a
County, State or Federal agency designated wilderness area, the location,
design, and operation of the proposed commercial solar energy facility will not
be a predominant visual feature of, nor substantially impair views from, the
designated wilderness area.
      (29)   For proposed facilities within two miles of the boundaries of any
active military base, the location, design, and operation of the proposed
commercial solar energy facility will not substantially impair the mission of
the facility.
      (30)   When located within a city’s sphere of influence, in addition to
other County requirements, the proposed commercial solar energy facility will
also be consistent with relevant city zoning requirements that would be applied
to similar facilities within the city.
      (31)   On terms and in an amount acceptable to the Director, adequate
surety is provided for reclamation of commercial solar energy generation
facility sites should energy production cease for a continuous period of 180
days and/or if the site is abandoned.
(Ord. 4213, passed --2013)
1 To assist in this determination, photo simulations of the proposed commercial
solar energy generation facility as viewed from sensitive receptors (i.e.,
residences, trails, parks) and public roadways in the area may be required as
part of the project’s application package.
§ 84.29.040 Solar Energy Development Standards.
   (a)   Setbacks. Solar energy generating equipment and their mounting
structures and devices shall be set back from the property line either pursuant
to the standards in the Land Use Zoning District, or 130 percent of the mounted
structure height, whichever is greater.
   (b)   Glare. Solar energy facilities shall be designed to preclude daytime
glare on any abutting residential land use zoning district, residential parcel,
or public right-of-way.
   (c)   Night Lighting. Outdoor lighting within a commercial solar energy
generation facility shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 83.07 of this Development Code.
   (d)   Public Safety Services Impact Fees. The developer of an approved
commercial solar energy generation facility shall pay a fee on an annual basis
according to the following schedule:
 
Parcel Size         Fee Per Acre
0—4.99 acres      $580.00
5—14.99 acres     $280.00
15 acres or greater $157.00
 
      Alternatively, the developer of an approved commercial solar energy
generation facility shall pay an annual public services impact fee on a per
acre basis based on a project-specific study of the project’s public safety
services impacts, which study shall be paid at the developer’s expense, using a
consultant approved by the County.
      Whether based on the above schedule or on the basis of the project-
specific study, the per acre annual impact fee shall be adjusted annually based
on the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) for the Los
Angeles-Riverside-Orange County, California area.
   (e)   Special Use Permit. Prior to the start of construction, the developer
of an approved commercial solar energy generation facility shall submit for
review, and gain approval for, a Special Use Permit (SUP) from County of San
Bernardino Code Enforcement. Thereafter, the SUP shall be renewed annually
subject to annual inspections and the payment of fees required in Subsection
(d) of this Section. The annual SUP inspections shall review and confirm
continuing compliance with the performance standards included in the Planning
Commission’s findings of fact and the listed conditions of approval, including
all mitigation measures. This comprehensive compliance review shall include
evaluation of the operation and maintenance of the entire commercial solar
energy generation facility. Failure to comply shall cause enforcement actions
against the operator and owner of the facility. Such actions may cause a
hearing or an action that could result in revocation of the facility’s
Conditional Use Permit and imposition of additional sanctions and/or penalties
in accordance with established County of San Bernardino land use enforcement
procedures. Any additional inspections that are deemed necessary by the County
of San Bernardino Code Enforcement Supervisor shall constitute a special
inspection and shall be charged at a rate in accordance with the County Fee
Schedule, including travel time, not to exceed three hours per inspection.
   (f)   Project Notices. Notice of an application for approval of a commercial
solar energy generation facility shall be provided to the Municipal Advisory
Council (MAC) for the area, any Community Service District or water agency
serving the project site, and to all property owners, whether located in a city
or in the unincorporated area of the County, within the following parameters:
      (1)   Area to be Notified. Owners of property located within 1,000 feet
of the external boundaries of the parcel of the proposed site, or owners of
property located up to 20 separate parcels away but not to exceed one quarter
mile (1,320 feet), whichever is greater.
      (2)   Notification Timing. Notification shall be accomplished upon
acceptance of a new Conditional Use Permit application or a revision to an
approved action application for a commercial solar energy generation facility,
with additional notice of public hearings provided as required by law to
property owners within the area to be notified cited above.
(Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4156, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4213,
passed --2013)
§ 84.29.050 Special Fencing Standards.
   Special fencing standards may be applied without a variance in recognition
of the capital costs of renewable energy facilities. Total fence heights
allowed are inclusive of any height extension devices such as slanted razor-
wire panels.
   (a)   Fencing on Street Side. Chainlink fencing up to eight feet in height
may be installed no closer than 15 feet from the right-of-way on streetside
boundaries. Security devices such as razor-wire height extensions may only be
directed inward to the property, and may not extend beyond the property
boundary to overhang the right-of-way.
   (b)   Fencing on Interior Boundaries. Chainlink fencing up to eight feet in
height may be installed along the property line on interior (non-streetside)
boundaries. Security devices such as razor-wire height extensions may only be
directed inward to the property, and may not extend beyond the property
boundary to overhang any other property.
   (c)   Electric Fencing. Electric fencing is not allowed.
(Ord. 4098, passed - -2010)
§ 84.29.060 Additional Wind and Solar Energy Development Standards.
   (a)   Facilities Adjoining Agricultural Operations. Supporting off-site
facilities, such as transmission lines, shall be designed and sited in a manner
that will allow for continued use of adjoining agricultural operations.
   (b)   Large Bird Protection. Transmission lines and all electrical
components shall be designed, installed, and maintained to reduce the
likelihood of large bird electrocutions and collisions.
(Ord. 4156, passed - -2011)
§ 84.29.070 Decommissioning Requirements.
   (a)   Closure Plan. Following the operational life of the project, the
project owner shall perform site closure activities to meet federal, state, and
local requirements for the rehabilitation and revegetation of the project site
after decommissioning. The project owner shall prepare a Closure, Revegetation,
and Rehabilitation Plan and submit it to the Planning Division for review and
approval prior to building permit issuance. Under this plan, all aboveground
structures and facilities shall be removed to a depth of three feet below
grade, and removed offsite for recycling or disposal. Concrete, piping, and
other materials existing below three feet in depth may be left in place. Areas
that had been graded shall be restored to original contours unless it can be
shown that there is a community benefit for the grading to remain as altered.
Succulent plant species native to the area shall be salvaged prior to
construction, transplanted into windrows, and maintained for later
transplanting following decommissioning. Shrubs and other plant species shall
be revegetated by the collection of seeds and re-seeding following
decommissioning.
   (b)   Compliance with Other Requirements.
      (1)   Project decommissioning shall be performed in accordance with all
other plans, permits, and mitigation measures that would assure the project
conforms to applicable requirements and would avoid significant adverse
impacts. These plans include the following as applicable:
         (A)   Water Quality Management Plan.
         (B)   Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
         (C)   Drainage Report.
         (D)   Notice of Intent and Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
         (E)   Air Quality Permits.
         (F)   Biological Resources Report.
         (G)   Incidental Take Permit, Section 2081 of the Fish and Game Code.
         (H)   Cultural Records Report.
      (2)   The County may require a Phase 1 Environmental Site Assessment be
performed at the end of decommissioning to verify site conditions.
(Ord. 4156, passed - -2011)
CHAPTER 84.30: GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION PLAN IMPLEMENTATION
Section
   
84.30.010   Purpose.
   
84.30.020   Applicability and Land Use Zoning Districts.
   
84.30.030   GHG Performance Standards.
§ 84.30.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a mechanism intended to reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in compliance with the County GHG Emissions
Reduction Plan, adopted on December 6, 2011. These regulations are intended to
ensure consistent application of these uniform standards for development within
San Bernardino County.
(Ord. 4156, passed --2011)
§ 84.30.020 Applicability and Land Use Zoning Districts.
   This Chapter provides development standards to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions that apply to all types of development with the County’s land use
jurisdictional area.
(Ord. 4156, passed - -2011)
§ 84.30.030 GHG Performance Standards.
   All new residential, commercial, industrial and institutional development
shall comply with the development standards provided in Appendix F to the GHG
Emissions Reduction Plan.
(Ord. 4156, passed - -2011)
CHAPTER 84.31: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION IN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FOR DISABLED
INDIVIDUALS
Section
   
84.31.010   Purpose.
   
84.31.020   Note to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process.
   
84.31.030   Requesting Reasonable Accommodation.
   
84.31.040   Decision on Application.
   
84.31.050   Required Findings.
   
84.31.060   Waiver of Time Periods.
   
84.31.070   Notice of Decision.
   
84.31.080   Amendments or Revisions.
   
84.31.090   Expiration of Grants of Reasonable Accommodation.
§ 84.31.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter, pursuant to Fair Housing Laws, as defined in §
801.01.080, is to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable
accommodation in the application of the County’s rules, policies, practices and
procedures, as necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose is also
to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for,
and be provided, reasonable accommodation, when reasonable accommodation is
warranted under the law based upon sufficient evidence, with respect to the
various laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the County,
including land use and zoning regulations.
(Ord. 4169, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.31.020 Notice to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process.
   The department shall prominently display in the public areas of the Land Use
Services Department at County offices a notice advising those with disabilities
or their representatives that they may request a reasonable accommodation in
accordance with the procedures established in this Chapter. County employees
shall direct individuals to the display whenever an inquiry regarding
reasonable accommodation is made or they reasonably believe that individuals
with disabilities or their representatives may be entitled to a reasonable
accommodation.
(Ord. 4169, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.31.030 Requesting Reasonable Accommodation.
   (a)   In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a
disability, a disabled person or representative may request reasonable
accommodation, pursuant to this Chapter, relating to the application of various
land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or
procedures of the County.
   (b)   If an individual or representative needs assistance in making a
request for reasonable accommodation, or appealing a determination regarding
reasonable accommodation, the department will endeavor to provide the
assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant
or representative. The applicant may be represented at all stages of the
proceeding by a person designated by the applicant as his or her
representative.
   (c)   A request for reasonable accommodation in laws, rules, policies,
practices and/or procedures must be filed on an application form provided by
the department. It shall be signed by the owner of the property and shall
describe exactly what is being requested and the specific reason the requested
accommodation is necessary. All documentation that supports the request shall
be submitted along with the application. The housing unit must be the primary
residence of the person for whom reasonable accommodation is requested.
   (d)   Within ten calendar days after the Director has deemed as complete an
application for a major reasonable accommodation, the Director or his or her
designee shall provide notice of the request for reasonable accommodation as
follows:
      (1)   In the event there is no approval, permit, or entitlement sought
other than the request for reasonable accommodation, the notice shall be mailed
to the owners of record of all properties that are immediately adjacent to and
directly across the street from the property that is the subject of the
request.
      (2)   In the event that the request is being made in conjunction with
some other approval, permit or entitlement, the notice shall be transmitted
along with the notice of the other proceeding.
(Ord. 4169, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.31.040 Decision on Application.
   (a)   The Director shall have the authority to consider and act on any
application for a minor reasonable accommodation as defined in Division 10. The
Director shall issue a written determination within 30 days of the date of
receipt of a completed application and may:
      (1)   Grant the accommodation request,
      (2)   Grant the accommodation request subject to specified
nondiscriminatory conditions,
      (3)   Deny the request, or
      (4)   Refer the matter to Zoning Administrator or to the Planning
Commission, whichever is deemed appropriate, who shall render a decision on the
application in the same manner as it considers an appeal. No request for
reasonable accommodation may be referred to the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to consider and act
on any application for a major reasonable accommodation as defined in Division
10, or any minor reasonable accommodation request referred to it by the
Director. The Zoning Administrator shall consider an application at the next
reasonably available public meeting after submission of an application for
reasonable accommodation, after the submission of any additional information
required to make a determination or after referral from the Director. The
Zoning Administrator may:
      (1)   Grant the accommodation request,
      (2)   Grant the accommodation request subject to specified
nondiscriminatory conditions,
      (3)   Deny the request,
      (4)   Refer the matter to the Planning Commission, which shall render a
decision on the application in the same manner as it considers an appeal. No
request for accommodation may be referred to the Board of Supervisors, or
      (5)   Prior to referring the matter to the Planning Commission, refer the
matter to a designated hearing officer to administer oaths, to receive
evidence, to prepare a record of the proceedings, to prepare recommended
findings, conclusions and a decision and to submit such record, recommended
findings, conclusion and decision to the Zoning Administrator for action.
   (c)   If necessary to reach a determination on any request for reasonable
accommodation, the Director, the Zoning Administrator, or the Planning
Commission may request further information from the applicant consistent with
this Chapter, specifying in detail what information is required. In the event a
request for further information is made, the time period to issue a written
determination shall be stayed until the applicant reasonably responds to the
request.
   (d)   If, based upon all of the evidence presented to the Director, Zoning
Administrator or the Planning Commission, the findings required in this Chapter
may reasonably be made, the Director, Zoning Administrator or the Planning
Commission, as applicable, shall grant the requested reasonable accommodation.
   (e)   A reasonable accommodation that is granted pursuant to this Chapter
shall not require the approval of any variance as to the reasonable
accommodation.
   (f)   The reasonable accommodation shall be subject to any reasonable
conditions imposed on the approval that are consistent with the purposes of
this Chapter to further fair housing. Such conditions may generally include,
but are not limited to the following restrictions:
      (1)   That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to
particular individual(s);
      (2)   That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to the
specific use for which application is made; and/or
      (3)   That any change in use or circumstances which negates the basis for
the granting of the approval shall render the reasonable accommodation null and
void and/or revocable by the County.
   (g)    If the project for which the application for reasonable accommodation
is being made also requires some other approval, permit or entitlement, the
applicant shall file the request together with the application for such
approval, permit or entitlement.
   (h)   In the event that the applicant also seeks a concurrent approval,
permit, or entitlement that will be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator or
Planning Commission, then that planning authority shall also act as the
reviewing authority for the application for reasonable accommodation.
   (i)   A fee shall only be required for a major reasonable accommodation
requesting a land use modification for a residential care facility as
prescribed by the County Fee Ordinance (refer to §
810.01.200(f)(2)(B)). If the project requires another discretionary or
ministerial permit, then the prescribed fee shall be paid for the other permit
(s) in compliance with the County’s Fee Ordinance.
(Ord. 4169, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.31.050 Required Findings.
   (a)   The following findings must be made in order to approve a request for
reasonable accommodation:
      (1)   The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable
accommodation, will be occupied as the primary residence by an individual
protected under the Fair Housing Laws.
      (2)   The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make
specific housing available to one or more individuals protected under the Fair
Housing Laws.
      (3)   The requested reasonable accommodation will not impose an undue
financial or administrative burden on the County.
      (4)   The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental
alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies and/or procedures of the
County.
      (5)   The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of
the case, result in a direct threat to the health and safety of other
individuals or substantial physical damage to the property of others.
   (b)   The County may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors
in determining whether the requested accommodation is necessary to provide one
or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling:
      (1)   Whether the requested accommodation will affirmatively enhance the
quality of life of one or more individuals with a disability.
      (2)   Whether the individual or individuals with a disability will be
denied an equal opportunity to enjoy the housing type of their choice absent
the accommodation.
   (c)   Relative to residential care facilities, the County may consider, but
is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested
accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the
County’s zoning program:
      (1)   Whether the requested accommodation would fundamentally alter the
character of the neighborhood.
      (2)   Whether the accommodation would result in a substantial increase in
traffic or insufficient parking.
      (3)   Whether granting the requested accommodation would substantially
undermine any express purpose of either the County’s General Plan or an
applicable Specific Plan.
      (4)   Whether the requested accommodation would create an
institutionalized environment due to the number of and distance between
facilities that are similar in nature or operation.
   (d)   In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing
authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary
to ensure that the reasonable accommodation will comply with the findings
required by this Chapter.
(Ord. 4169, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.31.060 Waiver of Time Periods.
   Notwithstanding any provisions in this Chapter regarding the occurrence of
any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request
additional time beyond that provided for in this Chapter or may request a
continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the County of the
pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered
delay on the part of the County, shall not constitute failure by the County to
provide for prompt decisions on applications and shall not be a violation of
any required time period set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 4169, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.31.070 Notice of Decision.
   The reviewing authority shall notify the applicant of his or her decision by
mailing a written determination to the applicant. The notice of decision on an
application for a major reasonable accommodation shall include factual
findings, conclusions, and reasons for the decision, and notify the applicant
of the right to appeal the reviewing authority’s decision pursuant to §
85.03.110.
(Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.31.080 Amendments or Revisions.
   A request for changes in conditions of approval of a reasonable
accommodation, or a change to plans that would affect a condition of approval
shall be treated as a new application. The Director may waive the requirement
for a new application if the changes are minor, do not involve substantial
alterations or addition to the plan or the conditions of approval, and are
consistent with the intent of the original approval.
(Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.31.090 Expiration of Grants of Reasonable Accommodation.
   Any modification granted for an individual with a disability shall be a
personal accommodation for the individual applicant and shall not run with the
land, unless the Director determines that it would be impractical to require
the property to be returned to its previous condition once the disabled person
no longer occupies the property. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or
any other applicable permit for such modification, the permittee shall execute
a notarized statement that permits the County to inspect the affected property
at least annually to verify compliance with this chapter and with any
applicable conditions of approval. Prior to any transfer of interest in the
property, the permittee shall notify the transferee of the existence of the
accommodation, the personal status of the accommodation, and the requirements
that the transferee must apply for a new accommodation as necessary. Except as
otherwise provided by the Director, as set forth herein, once such transfer
takes effect the accommodation shall have no further effect.
(Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 84.32: SMALL UNLICENSED RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES
Section
   
84.32.010   Purpose.
   
84.32.020   Applicability.
   
84.32.030   Performance Standards for Unlicensed Residential Care Facilities.
   
84.32.040   Existing Nonconforming Unlicensed Residential Care Facilities.
§ 84.32.010 Purpose.
   The State of California has enacted laws and regulations to provide for the
care of mentally and physically disabled persons in a residential environment.
The purpose of this Chapter is to:
   (a)   Implement the applicable state laws in a manner that preserves the
peace, quiet, and quality of life intended for residential neighborhoods.
   (b)   Promote the public health, safety, and welfare and to implement the
goals and policies of the General Plan by ensuring that permitted and/or
conditional uses allowed in residential neighborhoods do not change the
character of the neighborhoods as primarily residential communities.
   (c)   Protect and implement the recovery and residential integration of the
disabled by providing adequate accommodation, while also ensuring that small
unlicensed residential care facilities are dispersed throughout residential
neighborhoods, rather than overly concentrated within any neighborhood.
   (d)   Provide criteria for the establishment of small unlicensed residential
care facilities serving six or fewer persons, which are by definition not
licensed by the State of California, including alcohol and drug free treatment
facilities (“sober living facilities”), recognizing that if such criteria
cannot be met or satisfied, such facilities may request a “reasonable
accommodation” in the application of one or more of these criteria pursuant to
Chapter 84.31 of this Development Code.
(Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.32.020 Applicability.
   The standards in this Chapter apply to small unlicensed residential care
facilities serving six or fewer persons where allowed in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 85.20 of this Development Code.
(Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.32.030 Performance Standards for Unlicensed Residential Care Facilities.
   In order to ensure that unlicensed residential care facilities serving six
or fewer persons are operated in a manner that is consistent with State and
Federal law and established industry standards, the criteria listed below shall
apply:
   (a)   Each unlicensed residential care facility shall conform to the
property development standards for the land use zoning district in which it is
located.
   (b)   No more than two unlicensed residential care facilities shall be
located on the same block within a Single Residential (RS) Land Use Zoning
District. Additional facilities may be sited within said block through the
reasonable accommodation process. In no case shall the County require a
facility to be sited more than 300 feet from a preexisting facility through the
reasonable accommodation process. A “block” is defined in §
810.01.040(j) of this Title.
   (c)   The operator of the facility shall maintain the residential character
of the facility, including the building facade, fences, walls and landscaping.
All trash and food items shall be promptly and properly contained within closed
containers, pending weekly trash collection. The operator shall ensure that
adequate containers are provided for the facility, and the containers shall be
stored in an area screened from public view.
   (d)   The facility shall comply with all laws, rules and regulations that
apply to its operation, including any building and fire codes. Compliance with
all rules and regulations may be verified by an inspection conducted by a code
enforcement officer, building inspector, and/or fire inspector, prior to the
issuance of any unlicensed residential care facility permit.
   (e)   The property shall comply with all applicable disabled access
regulations that are required by the California Building Code and the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
   (f)   There shall be no more than six residents, not counting a house
manager.
   (g)   The facility shall have one qualified house manager who is present to
supervise residents at the facility and who is responsible for its day-to-day
operations.
   (h)   No persons who have been adjudicated a juvenile delinquent, have a
criminal record or are required to register as sex registrants under Penal Code
Section 290 shall be considered disabled nor reside in the residential care
facility based solely on this status. No sex offender shall reside in a
residential care facility in violation of the distance requirements set forth
in Welfare and Institutions Code § 6608.5(f) or Penal Code § 3003. No persons
who currently illegally use or are addicted to a controlled substance (as
defined in § 102 of the Controlled Substances Act) or have been convicted of a
crime for the illegal manufacture, sale, or distribution of a controlled
substance, or persons with or without disabilities who present a direct threat
to the persons or property of others shall reside in a residential care
facility.
   (i)   Parking shall be provided on-site to meet the occupancy of each
facility at a ratio of not less than one parking space for each bedroom in
compliance with §
83.11.040 (Number of Parking Spaces Required). Parking spaces may include
garage, carport, and driveway spaces, and may allow for tandem parking. In the
Mountain Region, no overnight on-street parking shall be allowed, except where
the street is paved to the full width of the ultimate right-of-way. This
provision shall not exempt the residents or the manager from compliance with §
53.0303 regarding parking in snow areas.
   (j)   The facility shall not provide any treatment that would require a
State license.
   (k)   The noise level at the facility shall be maintained at or below County
standards, as detailed in §
83.01.080.
   (l)   The facility shall have a written “good neighbor policy” that directs
residents to be considerate of neighbors, including refraining from engaging in
excessively loud behavior or in any activity that would violate any of the
standards contained in the section that would interfere with the neighbors’
enjoyment of their properties. The good neighbor policy shall establish a
written protocol for the house manager to follow when a neighbor complaint is
received.
   (m)   All sober living facilities must prepare and post in a common area
within the facility “House Rules” to which all residents must adhere. These
rules shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Resident participation in recovery programs, such as, Alcoholics
Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous, or 12-Step Recovery.
      (2)   A prohibition of the possession, use, sale or distribution of any
alcohol or any non-prescription controlled substances by any resident either on
or off site.
      (3)   A prohibition of visitors who possess, or who are under the
influence of any, alcohol or any non-prescription controlled substances.
      (4)   A prohibition of any activity that would result in a direct threat
to the health and safety of other individuals or substantial physical damage to
the property of others.
   (n)   The operator of the facility shall be responsible for updating any
information required by the permit issued pursuant to
Chapter 85.20 of this Title as soon as practical.
(Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 84.32.040 Existing Nonconforming Unlicensed Residential Care Facilities.
   Any person who has an existing unlicensed residential care facility as
defined in §
810.01.200(dd) of this Development Code must seek the issuance of an unlicensed
residential care facility permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.20 of the this Development Code to continue the use. If the facility
is not a small unlicensed residential care facility but is serving seven or
more persons in a RM (Multiple Residential) Land Use Zoning District, the
operator must seek and obtain an approved Conditional Use Permit. The operator
may also seek a reasonable accommodation for this use.
(Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 84.33: EMERGENCY SHELTERS
Section
   
84.33.010   Purpose.
   
84.33.020   Applicability.
   
84.33.030   Development Standards for Emergency Shelters.
§ 84.33.010 Purpose.
   The State Legislature has enacted laws to provide for the siting of
emergency shelters. In 2007, the State Legislature adopted Senate Bill No. 2
which, among other things, provided that all jurisdictions require no more than
building permits for the siting of emergency shelters within selected land use
zoning districts within that jurisdiction. The purpose of this Chapter is to
provide development standards for these shelters so that they can be located
without a formal land use approval.
(Ord. 4251, passed - -2014)
§ 84.33.020 Applicability.
   The standards in this Chapter apply to emergency shelters where allowed in
compliance with Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) of
Title 8 and subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4251, passed - -2014)
§ 84.33.030 Development Standards for Emergency Shelters.
   In order to ensure that emergency shelters are operated in a manner that is
consistent with State and Federal law and established industry standards, the
criteria listed below shall apply:
   (a)   The maximum resident density shall be one resident per 150 square
feet, up to a maximum of 60 residents with one bed provided for each resident;
   (b)   The maximum length of stay shall be six months;
   (c)   The waiting area for potential residents and/or intake areas shall
comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The interior waiting/intake area for a facility with 14 or fewer
beds shall be no less than 125 square feet and for a facility with 15 or more
beds shall be no less than 200 square feet.
      (2)   The exterior waiting/intake area shall be no less than 450 square
feet for facilities with 14 beds or fewer. The exterior waiting/intake area
shall be no less than 900 square feet for facilities with 15 beds or more.
Exterior waiting/intake areas shall be screened from view from surrounding
properties by solid fencing of not less than six feet in height. Fencing shall
conform to the requirements of
Chapter 83.06.
   (d)   Exterior lighting conforming to the development standards of
Chapter 83.07 shall be required to ensure the security of site residents;
   (e)   Segregated sleeping, lavatory, and bathing areas shall be provided if
the emergency shelter accommodates both men and women in the same building.
Reasonable accommodation shall be made to provide segregated sleeping, lavatory
and bathing areas for families;
   (f)   Each facility shall have at least one manager present on-site 24 hours
per day, seven days per week. Any individual who does not utilize the homeless
beds and/or services of the shelter and who maintains his or her own residence
off-site may be eligible as an on-site manager. If the emergency shelter
accommodates both men and women in the same building, the facility shall have
at least one staff member of each sex present during all hours of operation;
   (g)   The site shall be located no more than one-half mile from a public
transit line;
   (h)   No emergency shelter shall be located within 300 feet, as measured in
a straight line from the property line of the parcel on which the facility is
proposed to be located to the closest property line of any other emergency
shelter;
   (i)   Any new or existing structure proposed for use as an emergency shelter
shall, in addition to meeting the requirements of this Chapter, meet current
California Building Code requirements as adopted and incorporated by the
County;
   (j)   A security and management plan shall be required to demonstrate
adequate plans and capability to operate the emergency shelter in a safe and
effective manner, including complete descriptions of the following:
      (1)   Fencing, lighting, video cameras, and any other physical
improvements intended to provide or enhance security for residents and staff;
      (2)   Staffing plans, including the qualifications and responsibilities
of all staff members and the number and positions of staff members on each
shift;
      (3)   Procedures and policies for screening of potential residents to
identify individuals who should be referred to medical facilities, social care
facilities, other service agencies or law enforcement;
   (k)   Adequate sewer and water infrastructure, as determined by the
appropriate sewer or water agency, shall be available to the site for the
planned facility;
   (l)   An emergency shelter shall be constructed to and operated in
compliance with the development standards contained in this Development Code.
No variances will be considered unless filed concurrently with a Conditional
Use Permit.
(Ord. 4251, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 84.34: COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY
Section
   
84.34.010   Purpose.
   
84.34.020   Definitions.
   
84.34.030   Prohibition of Commercial Cannabis Activity.
   
84.34.040   Exemption for Cultivation by Specified Persons.
   
84.34.050   Exemption for Primary Caregiver Affiliated with Licensed Facility.
   
84.34.060   Landlords.
   
84.34.070   Application with other laws.
   
84.34.080   Items Used to Facilitate Unlawful Cannabis Cultivation
§ 84.34.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to prohibit, to the maximum extent allowed
under State law, the operation of commercial cannabis activity, with limited
exceptions, within the unincorporated area of the County, pursuant to the
authority granted by Article XI, section 7 of the California Constitution,
Business and Professions Code §§ 19300 et seq., Government Code §§ 25845,
53069.4, and 65850, and Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.83 and 11362.768(f).
(Ord. 4309, passed - -2016)
§ 84.34.020 Definitions.
   The definitions in this Section are intended to apply to this Chapter only.
Any term which is not specifically defined herein shall have the definition as
provided by Division 10 of the Development Code or elsewhere within the County
Code.
   (a)   CANNABIS OR MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa
Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. “Cannabis”
also includes “marijuana” as defined by § 11018 of the Health and Safety Code
as currently enacted or hereafter amended.
   (b)   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. Cannabis that has undergone a process to
concentrate the cannabinoid active ingredient, thereby increasing the product’s
potency. Concentrate includes, but is not limited to, wax, oil, and tinctures.
   (c)   CANNABIS PLANT. Any mature or immature cannabis plant, any cannabis
seedling or any clipping or cutting from a cannabis plant that contains roots.
   (d)   CANNABIS PRODUCT. Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the
raw cannabis has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not
limited to, cannabis concentrate. Cannabis product also includes products
containing cannabis and other ingredients, such as, but not limited to, edible
cannabis products and topical cannabis products.
   (e)   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY. Any enterprise or activity, whether or
not for profit, gain or benefit, concerning the cultivation, production,
storage, processing, manufacture, dispensing, delivery, distribution,
laboratory testing, transportation, provision, or sale of cannabis or cannabis
products, for medical purposes or otherwise. Without limiting the foregoing,
“commercial cannabis activity” specifically includes, but is not limited to,
those activities defined as “commercial cannabis activity” by Business and
Professions Code § 19300.5, as currently enacted or hereafter amended.
   (f)   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis, whether conducted indoors or
outdoors.
   (g)   DELIVERY. The transfer of cannabis or cannabis products by: a person
or entity located within the unincorporated County directly to an individual
within the unincorporated County; or, a person, entity or location outside of
the unincorporated County to an individual within the unincorporated County.
Delivery includes the use of any technology platform that enables entities or
individuals to arrange for or facilitate the transfer of cannabis or cannabis
products.
   (h)   DISPENSARY. A facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where
cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis
products are offered, made available to, or provided, either individually or in
any combination, with or without remuneration, for medical purposes or
otherwise. A dispensary includes those facilities defined as a “dispensary” by
Business and Professions Code § 19300.5, as currently enacted or hereafter
amended.
   (i)   DISTRIBUTION. The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis or
cannabis products between entities or facilities. Distribution does not include
such transactions if done directly to an individual end-user.
   (j)   EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCT. Manufactured cannabis that is intended to be
used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited
to, any type of food, drink, or pill, for medical purposes or otherwise.
   (k)   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any County employee, Special District employee,
or agent of the County or Special District with the authority to enforce any
provision of the County Code, specifically:
      (1)   The Code Enforcement Chief, Program Manager, each Code Enforcement
Supervisor, and each Code Enforcement Officer or other designated employee of
the Code Enforcement Division of the Land Use Services Department, or successor
department thereto;
      (2)   The Building Official, each Regional Building and Safety
Supervisor, each Building Inspector, and other designated employees of the
Building and Safety Division of the Land Use Services Department;
      (3)   The Fire Chief/Fire Warden, Fire Marshal, and other designated
employees of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District;
      (4)   The Director, each Inspector, and other designated employees of the
Environmental Health Services Division of the Department of Public Health;
      (5)   The Division Chief, each Animal Control Supervisor/Officer, and
other designated employees of the Animal Care and Control Program of the
Department of Public Health;
      (6)   The Sheriff-Coroner, each Deputy Sheriff (all ranks), and other
designated employees of the Department of the Sheriff-Coroner;
      (7)   The Director and other designated employees of the Public Works
Department;
      (8)   The Agricultural Commissioner, Agricultural/Standards Officers, and
other designated employees of the Department of Agriculture/Weights and
Measures; and
      (9)   Any other director and other designated employees of a County
department or Special District as designated by the County Executive Officer or
the Board of Supervisors.
   (l)   IDENTIFICATION CARD. A document issued by the California Department of
Public Health that identifies a person authorized under California law to
engage in the medical use of marijuana and the person’s designated primary
caregiver, if any.
   (m)   MANUFACTURE.  To produce, prepare, propagate, compound, blend,
extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product. The
manufacture of cannabis includes the use of non-volatile solvents and volatile
solvents. Volatile solvents include, but are not limited to, volatile organic
compounds, including:
      (1)   Explosive gases, such as butane, propane, xylene, styrene,
gasoline, kerosene, O2 and H2; and
      (2)   Dangerous poisons, toxins, or carcinogens, such as methanol, iso-
propyl alcohol, methylene chloride, acetone, benzene, toluene, and tri-chloro-
ethylene.
   (n)   MANUFACTURER.  A person or facility that conducts the production,
preparation, propagation, manufacture, or compounding of manufactured cannabis,
or cannabis products, either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods,
or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of
extraction and chemical synthesis. Manufacturer includes, but is not limited
to, those persons defined as “manufacturers” by Business and Professions Code §
19300.5, as currently enacted or hereafter amended.
   (o)   PERSON WITH AN IDENTIFICATION CARD. An individual who is a qualified
patient and who has applied for and received a valid identification card
pursuant to the Medical Marijuana Program (Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7 et
seq.) as currently in effect or hereafter amended.
   (p)   PRIVATE RESIDENCE. A single-family dwelling, a multi-family dwelling
unit, a mobile home, or a residential accessory structure thereto. For purposes
of this Chapter, a residential accessory structure includes only those
structures that are limited to the sole use of the single-family dwelling,
multi-family dwelling unit, or mobile home in which the person with an
identification card or primary caregiver resides. A private residence does not
include: hotels, motels, bed and breakfast inns, residential care facilities,
group residential facilities, transitional housing, or any other use subject to
the Transient Occupancy Tax as provided in § 14.0203 of the County Code.
   (q)   PRIMARY CAREGIVER. The individual designated by a qualified patient or
person with an identification card as one who has consistently assumed
responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of the patient and who meets
the definition of a “primary caregiver” as defined by Health and Safety Code §
11362.7, as currently enacted or hereafter amended.
   (r)   QUALIFIED PATIENT. A person entitled to the protections of Health and
Safety Code § 11362.5, but who does not have an identification card.
   (s)   TOPICAL CANNABIS PRODUCT. A product containing cannabis that is
intended for external use, such as but not limited to, lotions, balms, and
oils.
   (t)   TRANSPORT. The transfer of cannabis or cannabis products from one
facility or site to another facility or site, for the purposes of conducting
commercial cannabis activity.
   (u)   TESTING LABORATORY. A facility, entity, or site that offers or
performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products. A testing laboratory includes,
but is not limited to, those facilities, entities, and sites defined by
Business and Professions Code § 19300.5, as currently enacted or hereafter
amended.
(Ord. 4309, passed - -2016)
§ 84.34.030 Prohibition of Commercial Cannabis Activity.
   Except as expressly provided by §§
84.34.040 and
83.34.050, commercial cannabis activity shall not be considered a permitted or
conditionally permitted use in any land use zoning district. Commercial
cannabis activity, including delivery, is prohibited in all land use zoning
districts, as those may be amended from time to time, and no permit of any type
shall be issued therefor. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, cause
to be conducted, or permit to be conducted, a commercial cannabis activity
within the unincorporated area of the County. Any person violating any
provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance
with the provisions of
Chapter 86.09 (Enforcement) and
Chapter 2 of Division 1 of Title 1 of this Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
a misdemeanor violation may be cited, charged, and prosecuted as an infraction.
This Section shall not affect the right to possess or use cannabis as
authorized by Federal or State law.
(Ord. 4309, passed - -2016; Am. Ord. 4360, passed - -2019)
§ 84.34.040 Exemption for Cultivation by Specified Persons.
   Notwithstanding §
84.34.030, the prohibition concerning commercial cannabis activity does not
apply to a person with an identification card cultivating cannabis for his or
her personal medical use or to a primary caregiver cultivating cannabis for the
personal medical use of no more than five specified persons with identification
cards, subject to the following requirements:
   (a)   The cannabis is not sold, distributed, donated, or provided to any
other person or entity.
   (b)   A primary caregiver may only receive compensation in full compliance
with Health and Safety Code § 11362.765, subdivision (c).
   (c)   Cultivation may only be conducted indoors at the private residence of
the person with an identification card or the primary caregiver of the person
with an identification card.
   (d)   Cultivation shall be limited to no more than:
      (1)   Twelve cannabis plants per person with an identification card or
primary caregiver per private residence; and,
      (2)   An aggregate total of 24 cannabis plants per private residence when
more than one person with an identification card or primary caregiver lives at
the private residence.
   (e)   A private residence where cultivation occurs must be a fully enclosed
structure, that includes solid walls, and a ceiling, roof, or top. Cultivation
of cannabis plants within the limitations described above must be conducted in
one distinct designated cultivation area within the private residence. The
designated cultivation area must be separately secured and locked from all
other uses of the private residence, such that all cannabis plants are
reasonably secured from theft and from access by minors or other unauthorized
persons. The cultivation must not be perceptible from the exterior of the
private residence, by means, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Common visual observation, including any form of signage;
      (2)   Odors, smells, fragrances, or other olfactory stimulus generated by
the cultivation;
      (3)   Light pollution, glare, or brightness of artificial illumination
associated with the cultivation.
    (f)   The cultivation must be subordinate, incidental, and accessory to the
residential use.
   (g)   The designated area where cannabis is cultivated must be in full
compliance with all other applicable requirements of the County Code,
including, but not limited to, the building, safety, and technical codes and
requirements relevant to obtaining necessary building, plumbing, electrical,
mechanical, or other permits, inspection of the residence, and the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy.
   (h)   The cultivation of cannabis shall not occur outdoors in the yard,
curtilage, or other area outside of a private residence.
   (i)   No cultivation is permitted within the common areas of a multi-family
dwelling, residential development, mobile home park, or other similar
residential arrangements.
   (k)   If the person with an identification card or a primary caregiver
cultivates cannabis within any private residence that he or she does not own,
written consent must be obtained from the property owner prior to commencing
the cultivation of cannabis plants on the property. Such written documentation
shall include the property owner’s express consent to the cultivation of
cannabis within the residence, and to any material alterations to the private
residence associated with the cultivation of cannabis plants, including but not
limited to alterations to walls, windows, ventilation, plumbing, or electrical,
in addition to obtaining all necessary building permits. The written consent
must be maintained at the private residence and provided upon request to an
enforcement officer.
   (l)   All cultivation must be conducted in full compliance with the
Compassionate Use Act (Health and Safety Code § 11362.5), the Medical Marijuana
Program (Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7 et seq.) and the Medical Marijuana
Regulation and Safety Act (Business and Professions Code §§ 19300 et seq.), as
currently enacted or hereafter amended.
   (m)   The following activities shall not be permitted pursuant to this
exemption, but such restrictions shall not be deemed to prohibit the use of
lawful fertilizers, additives, supplements or nutrients:
      (1)   Any activity involving the use of a chemical or other process to
enhance tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in cannabis; or
      (2)   The manufacture of cannabis product.
   (n)   Cultivation shall not occur within any private residence containing a
child day care, as defined by §
810.01.060, subdivision (e).
   (o)   A primary caregiver shall provide the identification card number of
each of his or her patients to enforcement officers, upon request, when acting
in the course of their official duties while investigating compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter.
   (p)   If, after the adoption of this Chapter, any Federal or State law is
passed which requires the County to allow the cultivation of cannabis by any
persons not included within the exemption stated above, the exemption shall be
expanded to include those persons specifically identified by said Federal or
State law, upon the date the law becomes effective. Any plant limitations
imposed by said Federal or State law, if in an amount less than specified in
this Section, shall apply to the additional exempted persons. All other
provisions of this Section shall apply to the additional exempted persons. It
is the intent of this provision that the cultivation of cannabis within the
unincorporated areas of the County is as restrictive as allowed under State
law.
(Ord. 4309, passed - -2016)
§ 84.34.050 Exemption for Primary Caregiver Affiliated with Licensed Facility.
   (a)   Notwithstanding §
84.34.030, the prohibition against commercial cannabis does not apply to a
person designated as a primary caregiver by a qualified patient or person with
an identification card, if such primary caregiver is the owner or operator of
one of the following licensed facilities, or is one of no more than three
employees who are designated by the owner or operator of one of the following
licensed facilities:
      (1)   A clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with § 1200) of
Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;
      (2)   A health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 (commencing
with § 1250) of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;
      (3)   A residential care facility for persons with chronic life-
threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 (commencing with §
1568.01) of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code;
      (4)   A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to
Chapter 3.2 (commencing with § 1569) of Division 2 of the Health and Safety
Code;
      (5)   A licensed hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to
Chapter 8 (commencing with § 1725) of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code.
   (b)   Before commencing a commercial cannabis activity, operators of those
entities or facilities listed above shall register with the Land Use Services
Department, and renew said registration on an annual basis. Upon said
registration and each renewal thereof, the operator shall provide proof of a
valid license as provided by Chapters 2, 3.01, 3.2, 8 and/or 8.5 of Division 2
of the Health and Safety Code.
   (c)   No facility or entity listed above shall conduct outdoor cultivation
of cannabis.
(Ord. 4309, passed - -2016; Am. Ord. 4329, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4360,
passed - -2019)
§ 84.34.060 Landlords.
   Nothing in this Chapter is intended, nor shall it be construed, to preclude
a landlord from limiting or prohibiting marijuana cultivation, smoking, or
other related activities by tenants.
(Ord. 4309, passed - -2016; Am. Ord. 4329, passed - -2017)
§ 84.34.070 Application with other laws.
   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to allow the use of cannabis that
is otherwise illegal under State or Federal law. No provision of this Chapter
shall be deemed a defense or immunity to any action brought against any person
by the San Bernardino County District Attorney, the Attorney General of the
State of California, or the Attorney General of the United States of America.
(Ord. 4309, passed - -2016; Am. Ord. 4329, passed - -2017)
§ 84.34.080 Items Used To Facilitate Unlawful Cannabis Cultivation.
   Items typically used to facilitate the unlawful cultivation of cannabis,
when located at a property confirmed to be cultivating cannabis in violation of
this Chapter, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement
and discarding as provided by this Code. For purposes of this Section, items
typically used to facilitate the unlawful cultivation of cannabis include, but
are not limited to:
   (a)   Temporary structures in which cannabis cultivation is observed
occurring such as hoop houses, greenhouses, shade structures, sheds, gazebos,
huts, and similar facilities;
   (b)   Fencing or shielding actively used to conceal or obstruct view of
cannabis cultivation;
   (c)   Electrical equipment such as lights, fans, evaporation coolers,
heating and air-conditioning, irrigation pumps, well pumps, and generators that
are being utilized to grow cannabis;
   (d)   Irrigation systems including above-ground, subterranean, and/or drip
irrigation being utilized to cultivate cannabis; and
   (e)   Trailers and vehicles.
(Ord. 4423, passed - -2021)
CHAPTER 84.35: INDUSTRIAL HEMP
Section
   
84.35.010   Purpose.
   
84.35.020   Prohibited Activities.
   
84.35.030   Applicability.
   
84.35.040   Definitions.
   
84.35.050   Permit Requirements.
   
84.35.060   Approval Requirements for Industrial Hemp Activities.
   
84.35.070   General Development Standards.
   
84.35.080   Outdoor Industrial Hemp Operational Standards.
   
84.35.090   Manufacturing Facilities Operational Standards.
   
84.35.100   Administration and Enforcement.
   
84.35.110   Registered Hemp Entity Responsible for Violations.
   
84.35.120   Limitations on County Liability.
§ 84.35.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate the establishment and operation
of industrial hemp activities in order to protect neighboring residents,
businesses, and the surrounding environment from negative impacts caused by the
cultivation and manufacturing of industrial hemp, and to enforce rules and
regulations consistent with State law.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.020 Prohibited Activities.
   (a)   Industrial hemp activity not authorized in compliance with Division 2
of this Title (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and registered
with the County Agricultural Commissioner is prohibited in all zones and is
hereby declared a public nuisance subject to all available legal remedies as
provided in §
84.35.100 (Administration and Enforcement).
   (b)   Indoor industrial hemp cultivation is prohibited in all Land Use
Zoning Districts.
   (c)   The use of hauled water for outdoor industrial hemp cultivation is
prohibited.
   (d)   The use of temporary water storage structures, including but not
limited to plastic lined ponds, for outdoor industrial hemp cultivation is
prohibited.
   (e)   Industrial hemp activities shall not be located within 1,000 feet of
any sensitive receptor. For purposes of this Chapter, distance shall be
measured from the nearest point of the respective lot lines using a direct
straight-line measurement. A new adjacent use will not affect the continuation
of an existing legal use that has been established under this Chapter and
continuously operating in compliance with the applicable land use permit and
other applicable State and local laws and regulations. This location
requirement may be modified with the approval of a major variance in compliance
with
Chapter 85.17 (Variances).
   (f)   The use of greenhouses, hoop structures or similar permanent or non-
permanent structures for outdoor industrial hemp cultivation is prohibited.
   (g)   The use of screening, including but not limited to exterior gates or
fencing to completely screen industrial hemp activities is prohibited except
for cultivation sites adjacent to a residential zoning district or sensitive
receptor.
   (h)   Industrial hemp manufacturing facilities using volatile solvents are
prohibited.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.030 Applicability.
   The requirements of this Chapter apply to industrial hemp activities where
allowed in compliance with Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed
Land Uses). A registered hemp entity legally operating with a valid
registration issued by the County Agricultural Commissioner at the time of the
effective date of this ordinance may continue cultivation of industrial hemp,
at the existing cultivation site identified on the registration, as a legal
nonconforming use in accordance with
Chapter 84.17 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures), provided the registered hemp
entity timely renews and continues to maintain a valid hemp registration with
the County Agricultural Commissioner. The failure to timely renew and maintain
a valid hemp registration shall constitute prima facie evidence that the use
has been discontinued and abandoned. In the event a registered hemp entity
allows the registration to lapse or is lawfully revoked, a registered hemp
entity shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.040 Definitions.
   The definitions in this Section are intended to apply to this Chapter only.
Any term which is not specifically defined herein shall have the definition as
provided by Division 10 of the Development Code.
   (a)   COUNTY. Refers to San Bernardino County, a political subdivision of
the State of California, and means the unincorporated area of San Bernardino
County.
   (b)   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the propagation, planting,
growing, breeding, harvesting, drying, curing, or other development of
industrial hemp plants or propagative material. Cultivation shall not include
the manufacture or retail sale of industrial hemp or industrial hemp products.
   (c)   CULTIVATION SITE. Contiguous land area on which the hemp entity plans
to engage in industrial hemp cultivation, storage, or both.
   (d)   CULTIVATION SUPPORT SERVICES. Means uses that are supportive of the
farm community and are fully compatible with agricultural uses. CULTIVATION
SUPPORT SERVICES are uses that directly support or that are accessory or
incidental to an established industrial hemp use within the general vicinity.
These services do not adversely affect surrounding properties, groundwater or
infrastructure. These include but are not limited to storage of machinery
equipment and supplies, products packaging and processing, or agricultural
product warehousing and storage.
   (e)   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Shall have the same meaning as defined in §
11.0202 (Definitions) of the County Code.
   (f)   GREENHOUSE. A structure that is used for the indoor propagation of
plants, whether or not installed with permanent structural elements, such as
footings or foundations, and is constructed with a translucent roof or walls.
   (g)   HOOP STRUCTURE. A structure consisting of a lightweight metal,
plastic, or wooden frame, or a series of hoops, that is covered by an
impermeable, removable layer of plastic or polyethylene film used to protect
plants grown in the soil. A HOOP STRUCTURE has no permanent structural
elements, such as footings, foundations, plumbing, or electrical wiring. The
term HOOP STRUCTURE includes structures commonly known as “hoop houses.”
   (h)   INDOOR CULTIVATION. The cultivation of industrial hemp within a
temporary or permanent building or structure using artificial light.
   (i)   INDUSTRIAL HEMP. Shall have the same meaning as defined in Food and
Agricultural Code § 81000, and as hereafter amended.
   (j)   INDUSTRIAL HEMP ACTIVITY OR ACTIVITIES. Includes, but is not limited
to the cultivation, possession, distribution, manufacturing, storing,
laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, dispensing
or sale of industrial hemp for commercial purposes. INDUSTRIAL HEMP ACTIVITIES
do not include the retail sale of industrial hemp or industrial hemp products.
   (k)   MANUFACTURE. To produce, prepare, propagate, compound, or otherwise
blend, extract, or infuse hemp and/or hemp products either directly or
indirectly, or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis.
   (l)   MANUFACTURED HEMP. Raw hemp that has undergone a process whereby the
raw hemp has been transformed into a concentrate, extract, or other
manufactured product intended for internal consumption, through inhalation,
oral ingestion, or for topical application, or any other use in which the hemp
is used, including but not limited to building material, food, fuel, medicine,
paper, plastic, substitute, rope and textiles.
   (m)   OUTDOOR CULTIVATION. Any cultivation of industrial hemp that is not
indoor cultivation and is exclusively planted in the soil on the cultivation
site and not in containers, other than for initial propagation before planting
in the soil.
   (n)   REGISTERED HEMP ENTITY. Any person who has properly registered an
industrial hemp activity with the County. This includes any individual, firm,
partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability
company, estate, trust, business, business trust, receiver, syndicate,
collective, cooperative, institution, or any other group or entity, or
combination acting as a unit.
   (o)   SCREENING. Means the method by which a view of one lot from another
adjacent lot is shielded, concealed, or hidden. SCREENING techniques include
fences, walls, non-invasive species of hedges, shrubs, trees or natural forest,
berms and other features.
   (p)   SENSITIVE RECEPTOR. A facility or land use that serves or attracts
members of a population who are particularly sensitive to the effects of air
pollutants or strong odors. Examples of SENSITIVE RECEPTORS include, but are
not limited to, a daycare facility, senior living facility, K-12 school, public
park, sports complex, youth-oriented center or similar facility serving
children, the elderly, or people with illness.
   (q)   VOLATILE SOLVENT. Any solvent that is or produces a flammable gas or
vapor that, when present in the air in sufficient quantities, will create an
explosive or ignitable mixture. Examples include, but are not limited to,
butane, hexane, and propane.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.050 Permit Requirements.
   (a)   Permit Requirements. The permit requirements provided in Table 84-19
and in compliance with Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land
Uses) apply to industrial hemp activities.
 
Table 84-19
Permit Requirements for Industrial Hemp
Use/Permit Required          Scope of Use                    Minimum Lot Size
Small Scale Cultivation      Outdoor cultivation grown in
Site Plan Permit             acreages of a total combined    1 acre
                             area less than a half-acre.
Large Scale Cultivation      Outdoor cultivation grown in
Conditional Use Permit       acreages of a total combined    5 acres
                             area of more than a half-acre.
                             Manufacturing industrial hemp
Class I Manufacturing        for its products or by-products
Minor Use Permit/Conditional using non-volatile solvents and 5 acres
Use Permit                   using methods that do not
                             produce loud noises, strong
                             odors, fumes, or vibrations.
 
   (b)   Special Use Permit. In addition to the requirements of Table 84-19
(Permit Requirements for Industrial Hemp), an applicant shall be required to
obtain a special use permit. Special use permits are subject to the review and
procedures provided in Chapter 85.14 (Special Use Permits).
   (c)   Additional Registration. In addition to the requirements of Table 84-
19 (Permit Requirements for Industrial Hemp), an applicant may be required to
obtain additional licenses, permits or registrations from other County
departments or State agencies, including but not limited to a license from the
County Agricultural Commissioner pursuant to
Chapter 15 (Industrial Hemp Agricultural Registration and Regulations),
Division 3, Title 3 of the County Code.
   (d)   Background Checks. Pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code § 81013,
every applicant requesting an industrial hemp permit must submit to and pass a
background check as described in Code of Regulations, Title 3, § 4902. No
person or entity ineligible to participate in the State industrial hemp program
pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code § 81013 may obtain a permit authorized
by this Chapter.
   (e)   Proof of Ownership or Lease Agreement. Every applicant requesting an
industrial hemp permit must show proof of ownership or a notarized lease
agreement to show they have the present ability to cultivate or manufacture on
the property subject to the applicable permit. In addition to the notarized
lease agreement, an applicant that does not own the property where industrial
hemp is to be grown must submit a notarized form from the owner with their
registration application acknowledging that industrial hemp is to be grown on
the property and that the owner understands that any violations of this Chapter
may result in future applications to cultivate industrial hemp being denied
pursuant to the Director’s authority to establish additional rules,
regulations, or standards governing the issuance or denial of industrial hemp
cultivation permit as authorized by §
84.35.100(a) (Administration and Enforcement).
   (f)   Performance Guarantees. In order to protect neighboring residents,
businesses, and the surrounding environment from negative impacts caused by the
cultivation and manufacturing of industrial hemp, the deposit of a security
shall be required consistent with the requirements of §
86.06.050 (Performance Guarantees) of the Development Code. The minimum
requirement for a cultivation site less than five acres shall be $5,000.00. An
additional $1,000.00 per acre for sites larger than five acres shall be
required.
   (g)   Health and Safety. Industrial hemp activities shall at all times be
operated in such a manner as to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the
public. Industrial hemp activities shall not create a public nuisance or
adversely affect the health or safety of the community by creating dust, glare,
heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, unsafe condition,
or other impacts, or be hazardous due to the use or storage of materials,
processes, products, and runoff of water, pesticides or wastes.
   (h)   Relocation of Permitted Industrial Hemp Activity. In the event the
registered hemp entity vacates and relocates the industrial hemp activity to a
new location, a new entitlement required by Table 84-19 (Permit Requirements
for Industrial Hemp) shall be required in accordance with this Chapter prior to
commencing operations at the new location.
   (i)   Permit and Registration Posting. The registered hemp entity shall post
or cause to be posted all required County and State permits and registrations
to operate at the industrial hemp site that is readily viewable by the public.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.060 Approval Requirements for Industrial Hemp Activities.
   (a)   Findings. In addition to findings required by either
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit / Minor Use Permit) or
Chapter 85.08 (Site Plan Permits), no permit listed in Table 84-19 (Permit
Requirements for Industrial Hemp) for industrial hemp cultivation shall be
approved unless the following findings are made:
      (1)   The outdoor cultivation proposal includes adequate quality control
measures to ensure cultivation meets State and County regulatory standards.
      (2)   The outdoor cultivation proposal includes adequate measures that
minimize use of water for cultivation on the lot.
      (3)   The outdoor cultivation proposal includes adequate measures that
address indirect harms that may be associated with industrial hemp activities,
including restricting access to minors and ensuring that industrial hemp is
obtained from and supplied only to other permitted and/or licensed sources.
      (4)   The issuance of an industrial hemp permit will not be detrimental
to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (b)   Manufacturing Findings. In addition to findings required by
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit / Minor Use Permit), no permit listed in
Table 84-19 (Permit Requirements for Industrial Hemp) for an industrial hemp
manufacturing facility shall be approved unless the following findings are
made:
      (1)   The proposed industrial hemp manufacturing facility complies with
all the requirements of the State and County for the manufacturing of
industrial hemp.
      (2)   The proposed industrial hemp manufacturing facility does not pose a
significant threat to the public or to neighboring uses from explosion or from
the release of harmful gasses, liquids, or substances.
      (3)   The proposed industrial hemp manufacturing facility includes
adequate quality control measures to ensure hemp manufactured at the facility
meets industry standards and a documented employee safety training program.
      (4)   The proposed industrial hemp manufacturing facility includes
adequate measures that address indirect harms that may be associated with
industrial hemp activities, including restricting access to minors and ensuring
that industrial hemp and industrial hemp products are obtained from and
supplied only to other permitted and/or licensed sources.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.070 General Development Standards.
   (a)   Development Standards. In addition to the applicable permit and
approval requirements provided in this Chapter and the development standards
for the applicable zoning classification, industrial hemp activities shall
comply with the standards provided in this Section. If there is an
inconsistency between the development standards of the zone classification and
the standards of this Chapter, the more restrictive standards shall apply.
   (b)   Setbacks. Minimum setback requirements for an area used for industrial
hemp cultivation, cultivation support services or manufacturing shall be as
specified for the applicable land use zoning district except when adjacent to a
residential zone or sensitive receptor. Industrial hemp operations adjacent to
a residential zoning district shall have a minimum setback of 100 feet from any
property line. Industrial hemp operations adjacent to a sensitive receptor
shall have a minimum setback of 1,000 feet from any property line.
   (c)   Storage Areas. The total area for the storage of industrial hemp shall
not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area of any structure used for
cultivation support services.
   (d)   Sign Requirements. Any site used for the cultivation of industrial
hemp shall have on-site signage. The sign shall:
      (1)   State “Industrial Hemp”;
      (2)   State “NO TRESPASSING”;
      (3)   Measure at least three feet wide by three feet high, with letters
and symbols not less than three inches in height that sharply contrast with
their immediate background;
      (4)   When adjacent to public right of way, the sign shall be posted at
intervals of not more than one-third of a mile along the border of the property
line; and
      (5)   Posted at locations of points of entry, except clear sight
triangles, maintained and unobstructed.
   (e)   Water Conservation Measures. All industrial hemp activities shall
include adequate measures that minimize use of water for cultivation activity.
Water conservation measures, water capture systems, or grey water systems shall
be incorporated into the operations in order to minimize use of water where
feasible.
   (f)   Water Availability. All industrial hemp activities shall obtain a
“will serve” letter from an applicable water purveyor, indicating agreement to
supply water to the cultivation site. The letter shall include the activity
proposed and any improvements required for service. When water service is not
available, all industrial hemp activities shall comply with applicable County
Department of Public Health – Division of Environmental Health requirements for
a permitted water well.
   (g)   Water Storage. Building permits are required for all water storage in
excess of 10,000 gallons regardless of the type of storage method. The water
storage must be incidental and subordinate and cannot be the primary or
exclusive use.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.080 Outdoor Industrial Hemp Operational Standards.
   (a)   Storage and Waste. An applicant for an industrial hemp permit shall
identify how industrial hemp and associated product waste will be stored and
secured in a manner that prevents diversion, theft, loss, hazards and nuisance.
   (b)   Transportation. An applicant for an industrial hemp permit shall
identify procedures for safe and secure transportation and delivery of
industrial hemp to and from the registered hemp entity.
   (c)   Noise. Industrial hemp activities shall comply with residential noise
standards in
Chapter 83.01 (General Performance Standards) of the Development Code.
   (d)   Generators. On-site generators are prohibited, except as a source of
energy in emergencies. On-site generators for emergency use shall be included
in the applicable site plan.
   (e)   Grading. Industrial hemp activities shall comply with Title 6
(Building Regulations) of the County Code and shall not be used to screen
industrial hemp activities unless approved on the applicable site plan.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.090 Manufacturing Facilities Operational Standards.
   (a)   Industrial Hemp Manufacturing Facilities. In addition to the
applicable permit and approval requirements provided in this Chapter and the
development standards for the applicable zoning classification, industrial hemp
manufacturing facilities shall comply with the standards provided in this
Section. If there is an inconsistency between the development standards of the
zone classification and these standards, the more restrictive standards shall
apply.
      (1)   Setbacks. Non-volatile industrial hemp manufacturing facilities
shall be set back from all lot lines a minimum of 25 feet.
      (2)   Security. Surveillance video cameras shall be installed and
maintained in good working order to provide coverage on a 24-hour basis of all
internal and exterior areas where industrial hemp is manufactured, packaged,
stored, and/or transferred. The security surveillance cameras shall be oriented
in a manner that provides clear and certain identification of all individuals
within those areas. Cameras shall remain active at all times and shall be
capable of operating under any lighting condition. Security video must use
standard industry format to support criminal investigations and shall be
maintained for 60 days.
      (3)   Locks. Industrial hemp manufacturing facilities shall be secured
with California Building Code compliant commercial-grade, non-residential door
locks and window locks.
   (b)   Operations.
      (1)   Compressed Gases. Any compressed gases used in the manufacturing
process shall not be stored on any lot within containers that exceed the amount
which is approved by the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District and
authorized by the applicable land use permit.
      (2)   Compressed Gas Extraction. Closed loop systems for compressed gas
extraction systems must be commercially manufactured, bear a permanently
affixed visible serial number and certified by an engineer licensed by the
State of California that the system was commercially manufactured, is safe for
its intended use, and was built to codes of recognized and generally accepted
good engineering practices.
      (3)   Training. Industrial hemp manufacturing facilities shall have a
training program for persons using solvents or gases in a closed loop system to
create hemp extract on how to use the system, to access applicable material
safety data sheets and to handle and store the solvents and gases safely.
      (4)   Nuisance Odors Manufacturing Industrial Hemp. All manufacturing
industrial hemp activities shall be sited and operated in a manner that
prevents industrial hemp odors from being detected offsite. A sufficient odor
absorbing ventilation and exhaust system shall be provided so that odor
generated, distinctive to the operation, is not detected outside of the
manufacturing facility, anywhere on adjacent lots or public rights of way, on
or about the exterior or interior common area walkways, hallways, breezeways,
foyers, lobby areas, or any other areas available for use by common tenants or
the visiting public, or within any other unit located inside the same building
as the manufacturing facility. In order to control nuisances such as odors,
humidity and mold, industrial hemp manufacturing facilities shall install and
maintain at a minimum, the following equipment, or any other equipment that can
be proven to be an equally or more effective method or technology to control
these nuisances:
         (A)   An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents
odors from being emitted externally; and
         (B)   An air system that creates negative air pressure between the
indoor industrial hemp activities interior and exterior, so that the odors
generated by the indoor industrial hemp activity are not detectable from the
outside of the manufacturing facility.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.100 Administration and Enforcement.
   (a)   Administration. The Director or his or her respective designees, are
charged with the responsibility of administering and exercising the authority
conferred under this Chapter and is authorized to establish additional rules,
regulations, or standards governing the issuance or denial of an industrial
hemp cultivation permit, the ongoing operation of industrial hemp cultivation,
and the County’s monitoring and inspection activities if the rule, regulation,
or standard is necessary to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.
   (b)   Consent to Entry, Inspection and Additional Testing. Registered hemp
entities consent to the entry by enforcement officers to make such inspections
and to take such actions as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this
Chapter and the Development Code may be a condition of the issuance of any
industrial hemp permit.
   (c)   Violations. Every violation of this Chapter shall constitute a
separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement
measures authorized by
Chapter 86.09 (Enforcement) of the Development Code and
Chapter 2 (Violations and Enforcement) of Division 1, Title 1 of the County
Code.
   (d)   Misdemeanor. Each violation of the provisions of this Chapter may be
cited as a misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000.00 or imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (e)   Compliance with State and Local Laws. It shall be the responsibility
of the owners and employees of the registered hemp entity to ensure that it is,
at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable State and
local laws and/or regulatory, licensing or certification requirements, and any
specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed
by the County.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.110 Registered Hemp Entity Responsible for Violations.
   The registered hemp entity shall be responsible for any and all violations
of State and/or local laws, as well as any regulations promulgated under this
Chapter, whether committed by the registered hemp entity, any employee or agent
of the registered hemp entity.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
§ 84.35.120 Limitations on County Liability.
   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the County shall not assume any
liability whatsoever with respect to having registered any industrial hemp
entity pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 4444, passed - -2022)
DIVISION 5: PERMIT APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
CHAPTER 85.01: PERMIT APPLICATION FILING AND PROCESSING
Section
   
85.01.010   Purpose of Division.
   
85.01.020   Organization.
   
85.01.030   Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions.
§ 85.01.010 Purpose of Division.
   This Division contains the procedures necessary to process development
proposals in any land use zoning district.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.01.020 Organization.
   (a)   Types of Procedures.
      (1)   This Development Code utilizes the following four basic procedures
to review all types of applications:
         (A)   Public hearing;
         (B)   Staff review with notice;
         (C)   Staff review without notice; and
         (D)   Alternate review procedures.
      (2)   
Chapter 85.02 (Basic Review Procedures) describes each of the six procedures
and then follows with the application provisions common to each.
   (b)   
Division 6 (Development Code Administration).  
Division 6 (Development Code Administration) describes each policy development
application type and the provisions of this Development Code unique to that
application type as well as the review authority for each. The types of policy
development applications appear in the following order:
      (1)   Agricultural Preserves/Land Conservation Contract Actions;
      (2)   Amendments (e.g., Development Code and General Plan); and
      (3)   Specific Plan Adoption and Amendment.
   (c)   Application Types. Chapters 4 through 18, below describes each land
use and design application type and the provisions of this Development Code
unique to that application type as well as the review authority for each. The
types of land use applications appear in the following order:
      (1)   Certificates of Land Use Compliance;
      (2)   Planned Development Permits;
      (3)   Pre-Construction Inspections;
      (4)   Site Plan Permits;
      (5)   Special Use Permits;
      (6)   Subdivision Sign Location Plans;
      (7)   Temporary Use Permits;
      (8)   Temporary Special Event Permits;
      (9)   Tenant Improvement Permits;
      (10)   Use Permits (Conditional and Minor); and
      (11)   Variances (Major and Minor).
   (d)   
Division 7 (Subdivisions).  
Division 7 (Subdivisions) describes each division of land application type and
the provisions of this Development Code unique to that application type as well
as the review authority for each. The types of land use applications appear in
the following order:
      (1)   Tentative and Final Map;
      (2)   Parcel Maps and Minor Subdivisions;
      (3)   Vesting Tentative Map;
      (4)   Composite Development Plan;
      (5)   Lot Line Adjustments;
      (6)   Lot Mergers;
      (7)   Reversions to Acreage;
      (8)   Certificate of Subdivision Compliance;
      (9)   Official Maps; and
      (10)   Resident Initiated Mobile Home Park Conversion.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.01.030 Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions.
   
Table 85-1 (Review Authority) identifies the County official or authority
responsible for reviewing and making initial decisions on each type of
application or land use entitlement required by this Development Code, the
nature of the initial decision (i.e. issue, approve, or recommend), and the
nature of the response of the subsequent review authority.
Table 85-1
Review Authority
Type of        Applicable                 Planning Commission Board of
Entitlement or Citation   Director(1) (2) (3)                 Supervisors(4)
Decision
Table 85-1
Review Authority
Type of            Applicable                 Planning           Board of
Entitlement or     Citation   Director(1) (2) Commission(3)      Supervisors(4)
Decision
ABC Licensing      Ch. 85.04  Issue           Appeal(5)          Appeal
Adult Business     Ch. 84.21  Recommend       Approve            Appeal
Regulatory Permit
Amendments
(General Plan,
Development Code,  Ch. 86.12  Recommend       Recommend          Approve
Community Plan,
and Area Plan)
Airport
Comprehensive Land Ch. 86.11  Recommend       Recommend          Approve
Use Plan and
Amendments
Certificates of
Land Use           Ch. 85.05  Issue           Appeal             Appeal
Compliance
Conditional Use    Ch. 85.06  Recommend       Approve/ Recommend Approve/Appeal
Permits
Development
Agreements and     Ch. 86.13  Recommend       Recommend          Approve
Amendments
Home Occupation    Ch. 84.12  Approve         Appeal             –
Permits
Housing Incentives Ch. 83.03  Recommend       Recommend          Approve
Program(6)
Interpretations    Ch. 81.02  Issue           Appeal             Appeal
Major Variances    Ch. 85.17  Approve         Appeal             –
Minor Use Permits  Ch. 85.06  Approve         Appeal             Appeal
Minor Variances    Ch. 85.17  Approve         Appeal             –
Planned
Development        Ch. 85.10  Recommend(10)   Recommend          Approve
Permits
Revisions to an    Ch. 85.12  Approve         Appeal             Appeal
Approved Actions
Sign Permits       Ch. 85.13  Issue           Appeal             Appeal
Sign Registration  Ch. 85.13  Issue(8)        Appeal             Appeal
Site Plan Permits  Ch. 85.08  Issue           Appeal             –
Special Use        Ch. 85.14  Issue(7 or 8)   Appeal             Appeal
Permits
Specific Plans and Ch. 85.14  Recommend       Recommend          Approve
Amendments
Subdivision Sign   Ch. 85.13  Issue(8)        Appeal             —
Location Plans
Surface Mining &   Ch. 85.06  Recommend       Approve            Appeal
Reclamation
Temporary Special  Ch. 85.15  Approve         Appeal             Appeal
Event Permits
Temporary Use      Ch. 85.15  Issue(7 or 8)   Appeal             Appeal
Permits
Tenant Improvement Ch. 85.09  Issue(7)        Appeal             Appeal
Permits
Wind Energy        Ch. 85.18  Approve         Appeal             —
Systems Permit
Notes:
(1)   The Director may defer action and refer any permit or approval
application to the Commission for final determination.
(2)   All decisions of the Director are appealable to Commission, and then to
the Board, in compliance with Division 11, Article 6 (Appeals), except for
those decisions addressed in Note (3).
(3)   The Commission may refer consideration of an appeal to the Board, except
for those decisions involving only a Variance, determination as to the
completeness of an application, the determination to approve or deny a Home
Occupation Permit, an Accessory Wind Energy Permit, a Subdivision Sign Location
Plan, or the requirement for preparation of an Environmental Impact Report
(EIR). In these instances the Commission’s decision shall be the final and
conclusive decision. The Board will not accept nor consider an appeal of these
Commission decisions.
(4)   All decisions of the Board are final.
(5)   “Recommend” means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a
higher review authority; “Appeal” means that the review authority may consider
and decide upon appeals to the decision of an earlier review authority, in
compliance with Division 11, Chapter 8 (Appeals).
(6)   The Housing Incentives Program application shall only be filed
concurrently with one of the following applications: Conditional Use Permit,
Tentative Parcel Map, Tentative Tract, or Planned Development Permit.
(7)   Issued by the Building Official.
(8)   Issued by Code Enforcement.
(9)   Concurrent processing. Multiple applications for the same project shall
be processed concurrently, and shall be reviewed, and approved or disapproved
by the highest review authority designated by this Development Code for any of
the required applications (e.g., a project with applications for both a Zoning
Map amendment and a Conditional Use Permit shall have both applications decided
by the Board, instead of the Commission acting on the Conditional Use Permit as
otherwise provided by
Table 85-1 [Review Authority]).
(10)   Initial review by the Development Review Committee is required in
compliance with §
85.10.040(a).
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 85.02: BASIC REVIEW PROCEDURES
Section
   
85.02.010   Purpose.
   
85.02.020   Public Hearing.
   
85.02.030   Staff Review with Notice.
   
85.02.040   Staff Review without Notice.
   
85.02.050   Alternate Review Procedures.
§ 85.02.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter contains the basic review procedures necessary to process
development proposals in any land use zoning district.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.02.020 Public Hearing.
   (a)   Formal Open Forum for Public Review. Public hearing procedures are
distinguished by a formal open forum for public review of a proposal. During
the course of the public hearing, the applicable review authority invites
public testimony for and against the land use proposal, reviews evidence and
then renders its decision in compliance with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings). A public hearing may be conducted before the
Board, the Commission, or the Director (when acting as the Zoning
Administrator).
   (b)   Review Evidence and State Relative Positions. Public hearing
procedures shall be used to give all interested parties an opportunity to
review the evidence and to state their relative positions in a common public
forum before the applicable review authority.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.02.030 Staff Review with Notice.
   (a)   Based upon Specific Findings or Conditions. Staff review with notice
procedures are distinguished by land use decisions that are based upon specific
findings or conditions that limit the discretion of the applicable review
authority.
   (b)   Rendering of a Decision with Notice. Staff review with notice
procedures shall provide written or published notice given to affected and
interested parties followed by a decision by the applicable review authority.
The notice shall be designed to ensure that all interested parties are aware of
the pending decision and are given a chance to comment before the review
authority renders its decision.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.02.040 Staff Review without Notice.
   (a)   Decisions Based upon Adopted Standards. Staff review without notice
procedures are distinguished by land use decisions made by the applicable
review authority based upon standards that have been adopted by the County as
law or as policy.
   (b)   Rendering of a Decision Without Notice. Staff review without notice
procedures shall be used when sufficient standards have been adopted by the
Commission or the Board to allow the applicable review authority to render a
decision without giving notice to surrounding property owners and other
parties.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.02.050 Alternate Review Procedures.
   Unless preempted by State or Federal Law, the specific land uses listed in
the land use tables in Chapters
82.03 through
82.22 shall be allowed without a Conditional Use Permit when the following
alternate review procedures have been completed to the satisfaction of the
Director.
   (a)   Alternate Procedures.
      (1)   The land use has been approved at a public hearing by a State or
Federally appointed body or commission empowered to approve or license the land
use.
      (2)   Notice has been given to provide an opportunity for those
interested or affected by the proposed use to take part in local public
hearings conducted by the State or Federal body or commission approving the
land use.
      (3)   The review process used by the approving agency has substantially
addressed the same issues and concerns that would be addressed in applicable
County review and approval process.
      (4)   The approving State or Federal body or commission has made a
reasonable effort to respond to concerns expressed by the County of San
Bernardino and its citizens.
      (5)   The approval of the land use would not have a substantially
detrimental effect on the public health, safety, and welfare.
      (6)   Approval of the land use has complied with all applicable
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
      (7)   The land use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable
specific plan.
   (b)   Acceptable Alternate Procedures. Projects approved by the following
agencies shall qualify as the alternate review authority:
      (1)   Projects approved by the Bureau of Land Management.
      (2)   Projects approved by the State Energy Commission.
      (3)   Projects approved by the State Lands Commission.
      (4)   Projects approved by the State Department of Education.
      (5)   Projects approved by the State Public Utilities Commission.
      (6)   State or Federal Water Projects.
      (7)   Projects approved by the U.S. Forest Service.
      (8)   Projects approved by the U.S. Department of Defense.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.03: APPLICATION PROCEDURES
Section
   
85.03.010   Purpose.
   
85.03.020   Applications for Land Use Decisions.
   
85.03.030   Development Review Committee.
   
85.03.040   Environmental Review.
   
85.03.050   Concurrent Applications.
   
85.03.060   Application Forms and Information Packets.
   
85.03.070   Pre-application Review.
   
85.03.080   Notice of Pending Land Use Decisions.
   
85.03.090   Conditions of Approval.
   
85.03.100   Automatic Conditions.
   
85.03.110   Post Decision Notice.
   
85.03.120   Expiration of Inactive Applications.
§ 85.03.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes the application requirements and noticing
provisions necessary to process development proposals in any land use zoning
district.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.03.020 Applications for Land Use Decisions.
   (a)   Application Submittal. Applications for all land use decisions shall
be made at the offices of the applicable review authority on forms supplied by
the Department. Each application for a land use decision shall be accompanied
by the information and materials deemed necessary to render the requested land
use decision before the application is deemed complete and accepted for filing.
Any application made under the provisions of this Development Code may be
initiated by the Board or by any interested party unless otherwise indicated in
this Development Code.
   (b)   Submittal Shall Not Constitute a Waiver.  The submission of a complete
application for land use approval and the participation in and cooperation with
the applicable application review process shall not nullify, excuse, or
exonerate any violation of the County Code existing on the property or arising
from the use of the property for which such application was made. Further, the
submission of a complete application for land use approval and the
participation in and cooperation with the applicable application review process
shall not toll or bar any enforcement action taken by or on behalf of the
County to abate, remove, correct, or enjoin any violation of the County Code
existing on the property or arising from the use of the property for which such
application was made, whether said enforcement action is taken prior to,
during, or after the application review process or prior to the granting of the
appropriate land-use approval.
   (c)   Application Submittal Subsequent to an Enforcement Action.
Notwithstanding the authority to abate, remove, correct, or enjoin any
violation of the County Code that is the subject matter of an application
submitted subsequent to the initiation of any enforcement action, the Director
may enter into an agreement with an applicant agreeing to stay the commencement
or prosecution of an enforcement action. Such agreement may allow an
unpermitted use to temporarily continue while a decision on an application and/
or appropriate land use approval is pending. Any agreement entered into under
this Subdivision shall require the approval of the Director. The Director may
grant the approval of an agreement under this Subdivision if the Director, in
the exercise of his or her discretion, makes all of the following findings:
      (1)   The nature, type, and extent of the violation is not adversely
affecting the environment, public health, safety, or welfare, and does not
constitute a public nuisance for reasons independent of the applicant’s failure
to first obtain the appropriate permit, license, and/or approval.
      (2)   The subject matter of the application is a permitted use within the
land use zoning district, subject to approval of the pending application, and
would not require an amendment to the General Plan.
      (3)   The applicant has demonstrated a willingness and ability to obtain
the appropriate permit, license, and/or approval in a timely manner.
      (4)   Any structure(s) and/or the use or occupancy of any structure(s)
that is the subject matter of the application meets applicable building
regulations, as required for continued occupancy by Title 6 of this Code, and
has not been declared unsafe or unfit for occupancy.
      (5)   There are no unpaid monetary fines, penalties, or liens issued or
placed against the property, or any responsible party associated with the
property, resulting from any past or current enforcement action by the County.
   (d)   Agreement Staying Enforcement. A decision on whether the Director
should enter into an agreement pursuant to Subdivision (c) may require an
investigation by appropriate County staff or agents working on behalf of the
County to determine if an agreement is appropriate, and the County may
establish and require payment of a fee for said investigation. Any decision
made by the Director to approve or disapprove an agreement is final and a
nonappealable administrative decision. All agreements approved by the Director
shall be revocable in the event an applicant fails to abide by the terms of the
agreement, fails to obtain approval to occupy the structure(s) and/or commence
the proposed land use within 180 days after the final decision on the
application, or to the extent the violation that is the subject of the
enforcement action begins to adversely affect the environment, public health,
safety or welfare, or constitute a public nuisance for reasons independent of
the applicant’s failure to first obtain the appropriate permit, license, and/or
approval. The Director may grant an extension of time if a written request for
extension is submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration date and the
applicant demonstrates that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant
prevent timely approval given the type of land-use approval required and the
nature of the violation to be corrected.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4360,
passed - -2019)
§ 85.03.030 Development Review Committee.
   (a)   Evaluation of Proposals by the Development Review Committee (DRC).
Development review procedures include evaluation of proposals at a scheduled
meeting of the DRC.
   (b)   Consideration of Design and Proposed Conditions. The DRC meeting
allows informal discussions between the applicant, County staff, and others
regarding the design and proposed conditions for a given proposal. The DRC
provides a recommendation to the applicable review authority.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.03.040 Environmental Review.
   (a)   Applications Subject to CEQA. All land use applications that are
subject to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) shall be reviewed by
the Department in compliance with the County Environmental Review Guidelines.
   (b)   Environmental Findings Required. Before taking an action to approve a
land use application that is subject to CEQA, the Planning Agency shall make
one or more environmental findings. The environmental finding(s) is required in
addition to the findings specified in this Development Code for each
application type.
   (c)   Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions Review. All land use applications that
are subject to CEQA review shall have the potential impacts of the project’s
GHG emissions evaluated pursuant to the procedures entitled Review of GHG
Emissions, Land Use Service Department Standard Policy/Procedures Manual,
Section 9 (Environmental Review Guidelines).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4156, passed - -2011)
§ 85.03.050 Concurrent Applications.
   When more than one land use decision is required for a single project, all
applications may be filed concurrently.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.03.060 Application Forms and Information Packets.
   (a)   Forms and Information Packets. Each land use application Forms and
Information Packet shall include a list of the information and materials
required for the application to be considered complete.
   (b)   Failure to Provide Required Information. Any application for a land
use decision that does not contain the required information and materials, or
that is not accompanied by the appropriate application fee in compliance with
the County Fee Ordinance, may be rejected as incomplete by the Planning Agency.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.03.070 Pre-application Review.
   When the complexity of a land use application warrants it, the applicable
review authority or the office given responsibility for accepting the land use
application may require that the applicant submit materials and attend
necessary conferences or hearings to conduct a preliminary review of a
development proposal before the acceptance of the application.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.03.080 Notice of Pending Land Use Decisions.
   (a)   Public Hearing or Staff Review with Notice Procedures. Upon receipt of
a request for a land use decision that utilizes the public hearing or staff
review with notice procedures, the applicable review authority shall give
notice specifying the time and place for the decision at least ten calendar
days before the date of the scheduled land use approval/denial by the following
applicable methods:
      (1)   Notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the respective community of the proposal for the following land
use decisions using the public hearing procedure:
         (A)   Amendments to the text of the General Plan or a specific plan.
         (B)   Development Code amendments.
         (C)   General Plan map amendments.
         (D)   Subdivisions, where a tentative and final map are required.
      (2)   Notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has
filed a written request for a specific application.
      (3)   Notice shall be given by first class mail or delivery to all
surrounding property owners within a certain distance of the exterior
boundaries of the subject site for land use decisions using the public hearing
or staff review with notice procedures. The distances shall be in compliance
with the
Table 85-2 (Distance Requirements of Noticing Purposes), below.
Table 85-2
Distance Requirements for Noticing Purposes
                          Property owners of parcels located within the
Size of Project Parcel(s) following distances of the exterior boundaries of the
                          subject parcel(1)
20 acres or less          300 feet
20.1 to 160 acres         700 feet
160.1 acres or greater    1,300 feet
Notes:
(1)   Refer to
Chapter 85.04 (ABC Licensing) for special noticing requirements for ABC
Licensing projects.
 
      (4)   Notice shall be given by first class mail or delivery to all
contiguous property owners for land use decisions using the staff review with
notice procedures.
      (5)   Notice shall also be given, as required by Government Code §
66451.3, in the case of a conversion of residential real property to a
community apartment project, condominium project, or stock cooperative.
      (6)   Notice may be given in any other manner as is deemed necessary or
desirable by the Director.
   (b)   Required Information for Notices. The notice shall include sufficient
information to give those receiving the notice a reasonable opportunity to
evaluate the implications of the proposal and to participate in the decision
making process. Furthermore, notices for land use decisions involving
subdivisions for which a tentative and final map are required shall inform the
recipient of their right to request, before the noticed land use decision date,
that the proposal be reviewed by the County under the public hearing
procedures.
   (c)   One-Eighth Page Optional Notice. An one-eighth page legal display
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation may be substituted for
individual property owner notice whenever the individual notice would require
notification of more than 1,000 property owners.
   (d)   Ownership and Addresses of Properties. Ownership and addresses of
contiguous and surrounding properties shall be determined from the latest
equalized tax assessment role or from other records of the County Assessor or
County Tax Collector, whichever contains more recent information.
   (e)   Continued Hearings. During the public hearing, items that are
continued by the review authority to a specific date shall not be re-noticed
unless specifically requested by the review authority.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.03.090 Conditions of Approval.
   In approving an application for a land use decision, the review authority
may establish reasonable conditions to its approval that are found to be
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare that are
consistent with the General Plan and this Development Code. In an application
made subsequent to the initiation of any enforcement action by the County
concerning the use of land, a structure(s), and/or the use or occupancy of a
structure(s) (as set forth in §
86.09.050) that is the subject matter of that enforcement action, the review
authority may establish different time limits as a condition of approval in
accordance with §
86.06.060(a). Conditions of approval may be changed through the
Chapter 85.12 (Revisions to an Approved Action).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4360, passed --2019)
§ 85.03.100 Automatic Conditions.
   Any development project defined in Government Code §§ 65927 and 65928, which
is automatically approved in compliance with Government Code § 65956, shall be
approved subject to all of the following standard conditions:
   (a)   Allowed Uses. The development project shall be an allowed use in the
applicable land use zoning district.
   (b)   Compliance with Plans and Development Code Required. The development
project shall be consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific
plan, and this Development Code.
   (c)   Compliance with Public Health, Safety, and Welfare Requirements. The
development project shall comply with the public health, safety, and welfare
requirements of other public agencies. These agencies include the County
Department of Public Works, Fire Department, Special Districts Department and
Divisions of Environmental Health Services and Building and Safety.
   (d)   Failure to Comply. Any automatic approval of a development project
shall become null and void unless all conditions imposed by this Section have
been fully complied with, and the occupancy, use of the land, and use of the
proposed or existing structure(s) authorized by the automatic approval, has
taken place within 36 months after the date of the automatic approval.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.03.110 Post-Decision Notice.
   (a)   Provision of Notice. Within ten days of a final decision on an
application for a permit or other approval required by this Development Code,
the County shall provide notice of its final action to the applicant and to any
person(s) who specifically requested notice of the County’s final action and
has provided a self addressed stamped envelope.
   (b)   Contents of Notice. The notice shall contain the final decision by the
review authority.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.03.120 Expiration of Inactive Applications.
   (a)   An application shall expire and be considered abandoned 180 days after
the last date that additional information, revisions, or funds (items) are
requested, if the applicant has failed to provide the items requested, except
as set forth below:
      (1)   Special Studies. Whenever special studies (e.g., CEQA, etc.) are
requested by the County that are reasonably expected to take longer than 180
days to complete, the application will not be considered inactive on the basis
of the time required to complete such special studies. Staff will estimate a
completion date and should these studies be delayed beyond the initial
projected completion date, a new projected date of completion shall be
established after which the application shall expire and be considered
abandoned in 180 days if no action occurs on the project.
      (2)   The Director may grant one 90-day extension if the following
criteria are met:
         (A)   A written request for extension is submitted at least 30 days
prior to the expiration date;
         (B)   The applicant demonstrates that circumstances beyond the control
of the applicant prevent timely submittal of the requested revisions or
information; and
         (C)   The applicant provides a reasonable schedule for submittal of
the requested revisions or information.
      (3)   At the sole discretion of the Director, the Department may extend
any expiration date, as set forth in this Subdivision (a), of an application
without a written request from an applicant when additional time for County
processing or scheduling of appointments is required; when the Department needs
information or responses from other agencies; or under other similar
circumstances as determined by the Director or authorized designee thereof.
   (b)   Notwithstanding Subdivision (a), an application made subsequent to the
initiation of any enforcement action by the County concerning the use of land,
a structure, and/or the use or occupancy of a structure(s) (as set forth in §
86.09.050) that is the subject matter of that enforcement action, shall be
deemed abandoned if the Director determines, in the exercise of his or her
discretion, that the applicant has failed to substantially comply with the
application process in a timely manner, given the type of land-use approval
required and the nature of the violation(s) to be corrected. The submission of
requested items in a piecemeal fashion resulting in unnecessary delays shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the applicant’s failure to substantially
comply with the application process in a timely manner. The Department shall
provide written notice to the applicant of any determination of expiration
under this Subdivision. Following the abandonment of an application pursuant to
this Subdivision, the County may continue with the enforcement action unless
the subject matter of that enforcement action has already been abated, removed,
corrected, or enjoined pursuant to §
85.03.020,
Chapter 86.09, or any other provision of this Code.
(Ord. 4244, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4360, passed - -2019)
CHAPTER 85.04: ABC LICENSING
Section
   
85.04.010   Purpose.
   
85.04.020   ABC Licensing.
   
85.04.030   Procedures.
§ 85.04.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter contains the County’s review procedures for an applicant
securing a license from the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control
(ABC).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.04.020 ABC Licensing.
   State law generally requires a local jurisdiction to make a “public
convenience or necessity” determination before the ABC will issue a liquor
license. (See Division 9 of the Business and Professions Code for specific
State requirements and definitions regarding alcoholic beverage control; §§
23958, 23958.4 and 23817.7 of that Code specifically address State licensing
requirements.)
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.04.030 Procedures.
   (a)   Action by the Director or Commission.
      (1)   The Director shall review and act upon a request for a letter of
“public convenience or necessity” when it is required from the local
jurisdiction by ABC.
      (2)   If a request is determined by the Director to be controversial, the
request shall be referred to the Commission for action.
      (3)   Requests to appeal the Director or Commission actions shall be
filed in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
   (b)   Procedure. Staff review with notice.
   (c)   Review Authority. Director.
   (d)   Notification of License Request. The applicant for an ABC license who
has been required by the ABC to obtain from the County a letter of public
convenience or necessity must provide notice to owners and occupants of
property located within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed
establishment. The text of the notice shall be in compliance with the
guidelines provided by the Department. Such notice shall be given by:
      (1)   Sign. A sign of at least 16 square feet, posted in a conspicuous
location on the site of the proposed establishment but not within the clear
site triangle of any driveway or intersection. The Department shall take no
action until the sign has been in place for 14 consecutive days. The sign must
be removed within 14 days of final action by the County.
      (2)   Mail. Notice of the application may be mailed when the applicant
can prove to the Department that surrounding property owners and occupants will
be as likely to be notified of the application as if by the posting of a sign.
The applicant shall provide proof of mailing, and the Department shall take no
action until 19 days after such mailing (14 days extended an additional five
days for mailing).
   (e)   Finding Required. Before issuing a letter of “public convenience or
necessity” for an ABC license, the review authority shall find that the
following is true:
      (1)   A public convenience or necessity will be served by the granting of
the license.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.05: CERTIFICATE OF LAND USE COMPLIANCE
Section
   
85.05.010   Purpose.
   
85.05.020   Procedures.
§ 85.05.010 Purpose.
   The Certificate of Land Use Compliance is used to certify the legal use of
property, establish termination dates for nonconforming uses, disclose in
public record conditions of operation, and any other long term conditions or
restrictions that apply to the subject use or property.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.05.020 Procedures.
   (a)   Filing Criteria.
      (1)   The Planning Agency may require the filing of a Certificate of Land
Use Compliance as a condition of approval of any land use application.
      (2)   The Certificate shall reflect the information required by the
Director and acknowledged by the applicant.
      (3)   The Director shall cause the Certificate to be filed for record
with the County Recorder’s Office.
   (b)   Procedure. Staff review without notice.
   (c)   Review Authority. Director.
   (d)   Content. The Certificate shall:
      (1)   Identify the real property involved;
      (2)   Certify that a given use is legally authorized by the County and
identify any land use application that was filed to authorize the development;
and
      (3)   List the conditions for the development and operation of a use on
the subject site including any required time limits for the termination of
nonconforming uses or structures.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.06: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT/MINOR USE PERMIT
Section
   
85.06.010   Purpose.
   
85.06.020   Applicability.
   
85.06.030   Procedures.
   
85.06.040   Findings Required.
   
85.06.050   Projects That Do Not Qualify for a Minor Use Permit.
   
85.06.060   DRC Consideration.
   
85.06.070   Agricultural Support Services.
   
85.06.080   Alteration to Nonconforming Uses.
   
85.06.090   Hazardous Waste Facilities.
   
85.06.100   Surface Mining and Reclamation Plan Applications.
   
85.06.110   Post Decision Procedures.
§ 85.06.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Conditional Use Permit. A Conditional Use Permit provides a process
for reviewing uses and activities that may be appropriate in the applicable
land use zoning district, but whose effects on a site and surroundings cannot
be determined before being proposed for a specific site.
   (b)   Minor Use Permit. A Minor Use Permit is designed to provide
discretionary review for minor projects and intermediate discretionary review
for projects that do not meet established development standards.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.06.020 Applicability.
   A Conditional Use Permit or Minor Use Permit, as applicable, shall be
required for all new uses allowed in a land use zoning district subject to a
Conditional Use Permit or Minor Use Permit in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) and for any
disturbance of land associated with any use subject to a Conditional Use
Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.06.030 Procedures.
   (a)   Conditional Use Permits.
      (1)   Procedure. Public hearing.
      (2)   Review Authority. Planning Commission.
      (3)   Review of Design, Location, and Manner of Development. Conditional
Use Permits are intended to provide an opportunity to review the design,
location, and manner of development of land uses before their implementation.
      (4)   Minor Adjustments and Expansions. Once established, minor
adjustments and expansions to the uses that are subject to a Conditional Use
Permit may be accommodated through
Chapter 85.12 (Revisions to an Approved Action).
    (b)   Minor Use Permits.
      (1)   Procedure. Public Hearing.
      (2)   Review Authority.  Director.
      (3)   Review of Design, Location, and Manner of Development. Minor Use
Permits are intended to provide an opportunity to review the design, location,
and manner of development of land uses before their implementation.
      (4)   Exceptions to Review Authority. The Director shall be the review
authority for all Minor Use Permit applications except for the following:
         (A)   Where the Director refers the application to the Commission for
consideration and final action; or
         (B)   Where the application is filed concurrently with an application
that has a higher review authority (e.g., the Commission or Board), in which
case the higher review authority shall prevail.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.06.040 Findings Required.
   (a)   General Findings for All Use Permits (Conditional and Minor). The
review authority shall first find and justify that all of the following are
true before approving a Conditional Use Permit or Minor Use Permit application.
      (1)   The site for the proposed use is adequate in terms of shape and
size to accommodate the proposed use and all landscaping, loading areas, open
spaces, parking areas, setbacks, walls and fences, yards, and other required
features pertaining to the application.
      (2)   The site for the proposed use has adequate access, which means that
the site design incorporates appropriate street and highway characteristics to
serve the proposed use.
      (3)   The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on
abutting property or the allowed use of the abutting property, which means that
the use will not generate excessive noise, traffic, vibration, or other
disturbance. In addition, the use will not substantially interfere with the
present or future ability to use solar energy systems.
      (4)   The proposed use and manner of development are consistent with the
goals, maps, policies, and standards of the General Plan and any applicable
community or specific plan.
      (5)   There is supporting infrastructure, existing or available,
consistent with the intensity of development, to accommodate the proposed
development without significantly lowering service levels.
      (6)   The lawful conditions stated in the approval are deemed reasonable
and necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
      (7)   The design of the site has considered the potential for the use of
solar energy systems and passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities.
   (b)   Additional Findings for Minor Use Permits. The review authority shall
first find and justify that all of the following additional findings are true
before approving a Minor Use Permit application.
      (1)   There are no circumstances that would result in standards or
conditions not being able to adequately mitigate environmental impacts.
      (2)   The project is planned for immediate development and does not
include a phased development.
      (3)   The project is not likely to result in controversy. If the proposed
project fails to satisfy any of the findings identified in this Subdivision, it
shall only be processed as a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with this
Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.06.050 Projects That Do Not Qualify for a Minor Use Permit.
   (a)   Types of Projects. Projects and/or uses that meet the following
criteria shall not qualify for a Minor Use Permit and shall be processed as a
Conditional Use Permit in compliance with this Chapter.
      (1)   Phased projects.
      (2)   Projects required to be filed concurrently with a Final Development
Plan (FDP).
      (3)   Projects that require a Health Risk Assessment.
      (4)   Projects on a site with natural slopes of 30 percent or greater on
any portion of the sites that are to be developed.
      (5)   Projects greater than 30,000 square feet of structure area in CN
(Neighborhood Commercial) and CR (Rural Commercial) land use zoning districts.
      (6)   Projects greater than 40,000 square feet of structure area in CH
(Highway Commercial) and CO (Office Commercial) land use zoning districts.
      (7)   Projects greater than 80,000 square feet of structure area in CS
(Service Commercial), CG (General Commercial), IC (Community Industrial), IN
(Institutional), and IR (Regional Industrial) land use zoning districts.
      (8)   Manufacturing operations less than 80,000 square feet of structure
area may also require approval of a Conditional Use Permit if they involve the
conversion of raw materials to intermediate or finished products and involve
the storage of large amounts of raw materials. These uses include:
         (A)   Chemicals and related products (all similar uses).
         (B)   Clay, glass, and stone products (e.g., brick, concrete, dish,
glass, insulation manufacturing, and tile plants).
         (C)   Fabricated metal products (e.g., automobile assembly plants).
         (D)   Food and related products (e.g., flour mills, slaughterhouses).
         (E)   Lumber and wood products (e.g., saw mills).
         (F)   Paper and related products (e.g., paper mills).
         (G)   Petroleum refining and related industries.
         (H)   Primary metal industries (all similar uses).
         (I)   Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products (all similar uses).
         (J)   Textile mill products.
      (9)   Broadcasting antenna or tower with a proposed height that exceeds
the maximum allowed height in the subject land use zoning district, not
including the extra height allowed by §
83.02.040.
   (b)   Cumulative Impact of Successive Projects. When the cumulative impact
of successive projects of the same type on the same parcel or within the same
ownership over time exceeds the following thresholds, all new projects in that
area shall always require approval of a Conditional Use Permit:
      (1)   Thresholds for number of required parking spaces for uses indicated
by “M/C” in Tables
82-4,
82-7,
82-11, and
82-17 in
Division 2 (Land Use Districts and Allowed Land Uses); or
      (2)   Thresholds (e.g., square footage of structure area, etc.) indicated
in Subdivision (a) (Types of Projects), above.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.06.060 DRC Consideration.
   Any Conditional Use Permit submittal that is determined by the Director to
warrant more detailed review shall be forwarded to the DRC for review and
recommendation before action by the applicable review authority.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.06.070 Agricultural Support Services.
   (a)   Review Authority’s Action. The review authority may approve, approve
with conditions, or disapprove a Conditional Use Permit for agricultural
support services, and shall record the decision and the findings upon which the
decision is based.
   (b)   Additional Required Findings. In addition to the findings required in
§
85.06.040 (Findings Required) above, when agricultural support services are
allowed subject to a Conditional Use Permit, the review authority shall also
find and justify that all of the following are true before approving the
Conditional Use Permit application.
      (1)   The proposed use is of an appropriate scale and size that will not
create a conflict with existing or planned uses of adjacent properties.
      (2)   The proposed use is incidental and subordinate to existing
agricultural uses located within the general vicinity.
      (3)   The methods of operation are compatible with existing and planned
uses of adjacent properties.
      (4)   The methods of sewage, solid waste, and wastewater disposal are
practical, safe, and will not adversely affect surrounding properties and
underground water supplies.
      (5)   The approval of the proposed use will not serve to detract from the
agricultural character of the area.
      (6)   The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on the
service support capacity of the area’s infrastructure including groundwater
supply.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.06.080 Alteration to Nonconforming Uses.
   (a)   Accommodation of New Structures or Accessory Uses. An existing
nonconforming use may be altered to accommodate a new structure or accessory
use, except where it is an existing nonconforming use of land and contains no
structures, in which case the alteration may not be approved.
   (b)   Additional Required Findings. In addition to the findings required in
§ 85.060.040 (Findings Required) above, before any alteration/modification of a
nonconforming use may be granted, the review authority shall also find and
justify that all of the following are true before approving the Conditional Use
Permit application.
      (1)   The remaining normal life of the existing nonconforming use is
determined to be in compliance with provisions specified in this Development
Code before consideration of the proposed alteration if located in a
residential land use zoning district.
      (2)   The proposed alteration shall not prolong the normal life of the
existing nonconforming use.
      (3)   The alteration of the existing nonconforming use shall not be
detrimental to, nor prevent the attainment of, general land uses, objectives,
policies, and programs specified in the General Plan or any applicable
community or specific plan.
      (4)   The granting of permission to alter the nonconforming use shall not
be substantially detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare,
or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and land use
zoning district in which the use is located.
      (5)   The alteration shall not change the primary use of the land nor
increase the intensity of the use unless such change brings the use into
greater compliance with current zoning regulations.
      (6)   The existing nonconforming use shall comply with all other existing
County regulations, including those applicable to and enforced by the Director,
and County Sheriff’s Department.
   (c)   Governmental or Court Actions Exemption. Any alteration required by
governmental or court action shall be exempt from compliance with the above
listed findings.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 85.06.090 Hazardous Waste Facilities.
   (a)   Hazardous Waste Overlay District Required. To apply for a Conditional
Use Permit for a hazardous waste facility, a General Plan amendment application
shall be filed concurrently with the Conditional Use Permit application to
ensure that a Hazardous Waste Overlay District is first applied to the subject
facility site.
   (b)   County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. For a complete discussion of
the review procedures required for a specified hazardous waste facility, refer
to § 5.3.3 and Table 5-4 of Chapter 5 of the County Hazardous Waste Management
Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.06.100 Surface Mining and Reclamation Plan Applications.
   State law requires a public hearing review for the Surface Mining and
Reclamation process. The Surface Mining and Reclamation Plan application
combines a Conditional Use Permit and Reclamation Plan into one application.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.06.110 Post Decision Procedures.
   The procedures and requirements in Chapter 6 (Time Limitations), and those
related to appeals and revocation in
Division 6 (Development Code Administration), shall apply following a decision
on an application for a Conditional Use Permit or Minor Use Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.07: FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT REVIEWS
Section
   
85.07.010   Purpose.
   
85.07.020   (Reserved).
   
85.07.030   Floodplain Development Standards Review Procedures.
§ 85.07.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide processes for the Floodplain
Development Standards Review in compliance with this Development Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4333,
passed - -2017)
§ 85.07.020 (Reserved).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012)
§ 85.07.030 Floodplain Development Standards Review Procedures.
   (a)   Procedure. Staff review without notice.
   (b)   Review Authority. Building Official.
   (c)   Applicability. A Floodplain Development Standards Review shall be
completed before the approval of a land use application or issuance of a
development permit in specified areas or where required by the Director or the
Building Official.
   (d)   Recommendation. The Land Development Division of the Land Use Services
Department shall review and act upon requests for Floodplain Development
Standards Reviews. The Division’s recommendations from these reviews shall be
incorporated into the requirements of the development permit and/or the land
use application review.
   (e)   Application Requirements. An application for a Floodplain Development
Standards Review shall be filed and processed in compliance with
Chapter 85.03 (Application Procedures). The application shall include the
information and materials specified in
Chapter 82.14 or drainage study requirements within undetermined flood hazard
areas.
   (f)   Notation of the Elevation of the First Floor. Where a Floodplain
Development Standards Review has been completed, the review authority shall
note the elevation of the first floor (including basement) of a proposed
structure on the development permit and confirm that it is either:
      (1)   One foot above the base flood elevation when the FEMA map base
flood elevations are shown, as determined from drainage study, or two feet or
more above the highest adjacent grade when the base flood elevations are not
shown in any area designated as a 100-year floodplain; or
      (2)   One foot above the highest adjacent grade in any area designated as
a 100 to 500-year floodplain.
   (g)   Structure Siting. Any structure within a project requiring a
Floodplain Development Standards Review shall be sited to modify or maintain
the natural drainage way in a manner acceptable to and approved by the Building
Official.
(Ord. 4163, passed - - 2012; Am. Ord. 4333, passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 85.08: SITE PLAN PERMITS
Section
   
85.08.010   Purpose.
   
85.08.020   Applicability.
   
85.08.030   Procedures.
§ 85.08.010 Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide an expedited process for the
County review and authorization of allowed uses and structures that are in
compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and the other
applicable requirements of this Development Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.08.020 Applicability.
   (a)   When Required. A Site Plan Permit shall be required to authorize:
      (1)   Compliance with
Division 2. The alteration, construction, or expansion of every legally
established use that is allowed by a land use zoning district subject to a Site
Plan Permit in compliance with
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses); provided, the
use complies with all applicable development standards identified in this
Development Code, an adopted specific plan or adopted by the Board;
      (2)   Provision of Additional Parking. A change or expansion of any use
that would require the provision of additional parking in compliance with
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards); and
      (3)   Publicly Owned Institutional Structures. The alteration,
disturbance, or expansion of an existing publicly owned institutional structure
that is less than 10,000 square feet in area and is proposed to be expanded by
no more than 5,000 square feet.
   (b)   Exceptions. A Site Plan Permit will not be allowed for any project
that is located within a City Sphere of Influence, a designated redevelopment
area or along a designated State highway. In such cases, the review and
approval of a Minor Use Permit, in compliance with
Chapter 85.06 will be required.
   (c)   Exempt from CEQA. A Site Plan Permit application shall be determined
exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) in compliance with
State law and the County’s Environmental Review Guidelines or it shall be
processed as a Conditional Use Permit or Minor Use Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.08.030 Procedures.
   (a)   Compliance with
Division 5 (Permit Application and Review Procedures). The Site Plan Permit
procedure is intended to provide a less complex and more streamlined review
than that required for a Conditional Use Permit or Minor Use Permit. The
project planner shall review the application in compliance with
Division 5 (Permit Application and Review Procedures).
   (b)   Procedure. Staff review with notice.
   (c)   Review Authority. Director.
   (d)   New Construction. In issuing a Site Plan Permit for new construction
the Director shall first confirm that the request satisfies all of the
following criteria:
      (1)   The structure and use is in compliance with the applicable
provisions of this Development Code; and
      (2)   The proposed site and any land use(s) or structure(s) existing on
the site shall not be in violation of any applicable provision of this
Development Code, except for nonconforming uses and structures in compliance
with
Chapter 84.17 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures).
   (e)   Reuse of Existing Structure(s). In issuing a Site Plan Permit that
proposes to establish a different use in an existing structure, the Director
shall first confirm that the request satisfies all of the following criteria in
addition to those identified in Subdivision (d), above:
      (1)   The required number of parking spaces and driveway and parking lot
improvements shall be provided and maintained in compliance with
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards);
      (2)   All on-site signs shall be in compliance with
Chapter 83.13 (Sign Regulations); and
      (3)   The proposed use and all existing structures are in compliance with
all requirements of previously approved entitlements (e.g., Minor Use Permits,
Conditional Use Permits, or Variances, etc.) including conditions of approvals.
   (f)   On-Site Inspection. An application for a Site Plan Permit may require
that the Director perform an on-site inspection of the subject parcel before
confirming that the request complies with all of the applicable criteria and
provisions identified in this Section.
   (g)   Findings. Before granting an application for a Site Plan Permit, the
review authority shall make the following findings:
      (1)   The project complies with all applicable development standards
identified in this Development Code or adopted by the Board.
      (2)   There is supporting infrastructure, existing or available,
consistent with the intensity of development, to accommodate the proposed
development without significantly lowering service levels.
      (3)   The proposed use and manner of development are in compliance with
the goals, maps, policies, and standards of the General Plan, any applicable
community plan or specific plan.
      (4)   The proposed use and manner of development are exempt from the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
   (h)   Rejection or Alternative Processing Required. If the review authority
cannot make the required findings listed in Subdivision (g), above, the project
will be either rejected or elevated to a Minor Use Permit, as determined
appropriate by the Director.
   (i)   Appeal. Appeal of a Site Plan Permit shall be limited to the
determination that the land use being requested qualifies for the Site Plan
Permit application.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.09: TENANT REVIEW
Section
   
85.09.010   Purpose.
   
85.09.020   Applicability.
   
85.09.030   Procedures.
§ 85.09.010 Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide an expedited process for the
County review and authorization of allowed uses and changes to existing
structures to accommodate the same or a different use. Adjustment of the
existing tenant space may be allowed, but not a change in the existing
structure footprint or floor area. It is intended that a Tenant Review shall
meet all standards of this Code without the necessity of discretionary
processes, environmental review or public hearings.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 85.09.020 Applicability.
      (a)   A Tenant Review is required for the first use of a structure that
was constructed when the occupant was undetermined or when remodeling an
existing structure to meet the needs of a new or existing tenant. However, a
Tenant Review shall not be required for an existing structure when all of the
following criteria are true:
      (1)   An approved plot plan is on file in the Land Use Services
Department.
      (2)   The proposed use is consistent with the current land use zoning
district regulations.
      (3)   Parking and design standards are not affected.
      (4)   Planning approval is not required for the proposed use nor has the
project been conditioned to require a Tenant Review.
   (b)   The addition of an on-site sign to an approved project may also be
approved with a Tenant Review.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 85.09.030 Procedures.
   (a)   Procedure. Staff review without notice.
   (b)   Review Authority. Building Official.
   (c)   Compliance with Criteria. The project shall meet one or more of the
following criteria:
      (1)   An application shall be reviewed and approved prior to issuance of
building permits for any improvements that require building permits.
      (2)   The structure and use shall conform to an approved plot plan on
file in the Land Use Services Department, or if an approved plot plan is not on
file, the criteria for acceptance of all Tenant Review applications shall be as
determined by the Director.
       (3)   Interior or exterior alterations (e.g., electrical conveyances,
interior partitions, or plumbing) shall not result in an increase in the square
footage of the structure.
         Tenant Review applications that do not meet the criteria of this
Section shall be referred to the Current Planning Division for the appropriate
action.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
CHAPTER 85.10: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
Section
   
85.10.010   Purpose.
   
85.10.020   Applicability.
   
85.10.030   Procedures.
   
85.10.040   Review Authority.
   
85.10.050   Findings.
   
85.10.060   Concurrent Subdivision Applications.
   
85.10.070   Development Plans.
   
85.10.080   Time Limits and Expiration.
   
85.10.090   Planned Development Permit Amendments.
   
85.10.100   Post Decision Procedures.
§ 85.10.010 Purpose.
   The Planned Development Permit is intended to provide for flexibility in the
application of Development Code standards to proposed development under limited
and unique circumstances. The purpose is to allow consideration of innovation
in site planning and other aspects of project design, and more effective design
responses to site features, uses on adjoining properties, and environmental
impacts than the Development Code standards would produce without adjustment.
The County expects each Planned Development Permit project to be of obvious,
significantly higher quality than would be achieved through conventional design
practices and development standards.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.10.020 Applicability.
   A Planned Development Permit application may be filed and processed only
under the following circumstances.
   (a)   Minimum Site Area. A Planned Development Permit may be requested for a
residential, commercial, industrial, and/or mixed-use development on a site(s)
with a minimum of five acres. The Director may also accept applications for a
Planned Development Permit for residential, commercial, industrial, and/or
mixed-use development on a site(s) with a minimum of one acre, provided the
development involves construction of multiple buildings and the Director
determines that the Planned Development process would provide a more effective
tool to address development on the site than other available procedures.
   (b)   Timing of Permit. No Building or Grading Permit shall be issued on a
site for which a Planned Development Permit is proposed until the Planned
Development Permit has been approved in compliance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.10.030 Procedures.
   (a)   Application Review. Each Planned Development Permit application shall
be analyzed by the Director to ensure that the application is consistent with
the purpose and intent of this Chapter.
   (b)   Public Hearing. The review authority shall conduct a public hearing on
an application for a Planned Development Permit before the approval or
disapproval of the Permit. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and
the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings).
   (c)   Scope of Approval. Planned Development Permit approval may adjust or
modify, where determined by the review authority to be necessary and
justifiable, any applicable standard of this Development Code (e.g., size,
density, height, parking, setbacks, street layout, etc.); provided, the
approval shall not authorize a land use that is not allowed in the applicable
land use zoning district by
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4205, passed - -2013)
§ 85.10.040 Review Authority.
   (a)   Initial Review by the Development Review Committee (DRC). The DRC
shall review all applications for preliminary or final development plans before
their review by the Director, Commission, and Board.
   (b)   Commission and Board Action Required. The Commission shall review and
recommend and the Board shall act upon all initial applications for preliminary
development plans and significant revisions to previously approved preliminary
development plans for Planned Development Permits.
   (c)   Recommendation for Disapproval. A disapproval action by the Commission
shall terminate any application for a Planned Development Permit, unless it is
appealed in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
   (d)   Preliminary and Final Development Plans Required. When an applicant
chooses to file a final development plan for a project that has not had a
preliminary development plan previously approved, the applicant shall file the
preliminary and final development plans concurrently.
   (e)   Director to Review and Act upon All Final Development Plans. The
Director shall review and act upon all applications for final development plans
for a Planned Development Permit; provided, the plans have been determined to
be non-controversial and are consistent with the approved preliminary
development plans.
   (f)   Non-controversial Defined. A final development plan shall be
determined to be non-controversial when no member of the DRC objects to the
proposed development plan or any portion of the plan, the applicant is in
agreement with the requirements and conditions as proposed, and there has been
no objection voiced regarding the proposed project.
   (g)   Controversial Projects Shall Be Referred to the Commission. If the
Director determines the project to be controversial the project shall be
referred to the Commission for a recommendation to the Board.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.10.050 Findings.
   (a)   Review Authority’s Action. Following a public hearing, the review
authority may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove a Planned
Development Permit, and shall record the decision and the findings upon which
the decision is based.
   (b)   Required Findings. Before approving a request for a Planned
Development Permit, the review authority shall first find that all of the
following are true:
      (1)   The proposed development is consistent with the General Plan and
any applicable plan.
      (2)   The physical characteristics of the site have been adequately
assessed and the site for the proposed development is adequate in terms of
shape and size to accommodate the use and all landscaping, loading areas, open
spaces, parking areas, setbacks, walls and fences, yards, and other required
features.
      (3)   The site for the proposed development has adequate access, in that
the site design and development plan conditions consider the limitations of
existing streets and highways and provides improvements to accommodate the
anticipated requirements of the proposed development.
      (4)   Adequate public services and facilities exist, or will be provided,
in compliance with the conditions of development plan approval, to serve the
proposed development and the approval of the proposed development will not
result in a reduction of public services to properties in the vicinity to be a
detriment to public health, safety, and general welfare.
      (5)   The proposed development, as conditioned, will not have a
substantial adverse effect on surrounding property or their allowed use, and
will be compatible with the existing and planned land use character of the
surrounding area.
      (6)   The improvements required by the proposed conditions of development
plan approval, and the manner of development adequately address all natural and
man-made hazards associated with the proposed development and the project site
including fire, flood, seismic, and slope hazards.
      (7)   The proposed development carries out the intent of the Planned
Development Permit provisions by providing a more efficient use of the land and
an excellence of design greater than that which would be achieved through the
application of conventional development standards.
      (8)   If the development proposes to mix residential and commercial uses
whether done in a vertical or horizontal manner, the residential use is
designed in a manner that it is buffered from the commercial use and is
provided sufficient amenities to create a comfortable and healthy residential
environment and to provide a positive quality of life for the residents. The
amenities may include landscaping, private open space, private or separated
entrances, etc.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.10.060 Concurrent Subdivision Applications.
   (a)   Subdivision Applications. Applications for a Planned Development
Permit shall not constitute an application for subdivision. If a subdivision of
land is proposed in conjunction with a Planned Development Permit project,
separate application, review, and findings shall be made in compliance with the
applicable provisions of
Division 7 (Subdivisions).
   (b)   Expiration of Planned Development Permit Shall Terminate Subdivision
Application. In the event a tentative subdivision map application is
concurrently filed with a Planned Development Permit application, expiration of
an approved or conditionally approved Planned Development Permit shall
terminate all proceedings or any associated land use application. No final
subdivision map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property
included within a Planned Development Permit shall be filed for record without
first processing a new Planned Development Permit application.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.10.070 Development Plans.
   (a)   Detailed Development Plan Required. A detailed site plan or
development plan shall be submitted with all Planned Development Permit
proposals. All development plans shall contain sufficient detail to depict the
manner in which the proposed development complies with the purpose and
provisions of this Chapter.
   (b)   Planned Development Permit Requests for Large Projects. Planned
Development Permit requests for mixed-use projects or projects with more than
500 dwelling units may be submitted in two stages.
      (1)   Preliminary Development Plan (PDP). The first stage shall be
referred to as a Preliminary Development Plan.
      (2)   Final Development Plan (FDP). The second stage shall be referred to
as a Final Development Plan.
      (3)   Definition of Plans. Preliminary Development Plans and Final
Development Plans are defined in the following manner:
         (A)   Preliminary Development Plans. A Preliminary Development Plan
(PDP) functions as a development suitability analysis and a comprehensive plan
of the proposed developments. The PDP:
            (I)   Identifies and quantifies the constraints and opportunities
for development in the following manner:
               (i)   The physical characteristics of the site;
               (ii)   Available public services and facilities;
               (iii)   The capacity of the existing circulation system; and
               (iv)   The existing and planned land use of adjacent properties.
            (II)   Establishes a list of specific limits, parameters, and
planning objectives to guide development based on the identified development
constraints and opportunities.
            (III)   Describes one or more potential development schemes derived
from the limits, parameters, and planning objectives controlling the
development. Each proposed development scheme shall describe in detail the:
               (i)   Proposed land uses and approximate distribution of the
land uses;
               (ii)   Proposed density of residential uses;
               (iii)   Estimated population;
               (iv)   Estimated service demands;
               (v)   Anticipated impact on the existing circulation system;
               (vi)   Anticipated impact on adjacent properties;
               (vii)   Anticipated types of commercial and industrial uses; and
               (viii)   Relationship of the plan to the various elements of the
General Plan and any applicable specific plan.
            (IV)   Identifies in the form of diagrams, maps, and/or written
text a detailed plan of development based upon the application of the
established limits, parameters, and planning objectives controlling
development. The plan shall describe in detail the following:
               (i)   Proposed land uses and structure types, the functional
arrangement of the uses and structure types and the relationship to
circulation, lighting, parking, paving, recreation and open space areas,
screening, setbacks, site, site grading, and adjacent properties;
               (ii)   How the established limits, parameters, and planning
objectives have been adhered to;
               (iii)   The level of public services and facilities required by
the proposed development and the program for providing, operating, and
maintaining the services and facilities;
               (iv)   Access and circulation requirements;
               (v)   Known man-made and natural hazards and methods for
mitigation of the hazards;
               (vi)   Significant natural features and areas to be retained for
common open space, and provisions for the conservation, preservation,
utilization, and maintenance of the areas; and
               (vii)   How the plan conforms to the objectives of the General
Plan, any applicable specific plan, and the applicable provisions of this
Development Code.
         (B)   Final Development Plans (FDP). The FDP:
            (I)   Is a detailed site plan that identifies the dimensions and
location of all uses and structures in sufficient detail to permit the
preparation and recordation of construction drawings; and
            (II)   Shall comply with all approved Preliminary Development Plans
(PDP).
         (C)   Planned Residential Developments.
            (I)   Planned Residential Developments are residential projects
consisting of 500 dwelling units or fewer. Planned Residential Developments are
compatible with, and not a significant departure from surrounding land uses,
and will be so located in relation to public utility systems and installations
that neither the extension nor enlargement of the systems will be required that
results in public capital expenditures greater than would develop in a form
generally allowed in the area. Planned Residential Developments shall be so
located with respect to parks, schools, and other public services and
facilities required as to have access in the same degree as would develop in a
form generally allowed in the area.
            (II)   Planned Residential Developments not meeting the above
criteria shall not be processed under the regulations of this Chapter.
Exception, however, residential projects greater than 500 units may be
processed as a Planned Residential Development when the Development Review
Committee (DRC) determines at the pre-application conference meeting that the
project though greater in number of units:
               (i)   Is compatible with, and not a significant departure from,
surrounding land uses;
               (ii)   Will not require public capital expenditures for the
public utility systems greater than that required for the type of development
generally allowed in the area;
               (iii)   Has reasonable access to parks, schools, and other
public services and facilities in the same degree as would the type of
development generally allowed in the area; and
               (iv)   Otherwise complies with the provisions of this Chapter.
            (III)    The records of the pre-application conference shall
specify those findings determining the above criteria have been met.
            (IV)    The provisions of this Chapter shall modify the development
standards of any land use zoning district designated for residential uses
subject to the review and approval a Planned Residential Development
application, in compliance with this Chapter.
            (V)    All land uses within a Planned Residential Development shall
conform to the allowed uses of the underlying land use zoning district, except
as follows:
               (i)   Residential dwelling units, as defined in Division 12 may
be attached or detached.
               (ii)   Certain internally oriented, incidental service uses
including civic, community or country clubs, conference centers, or convenience
shops designed and intended to provide goods and services to residents of the
Planned Residential Development project may be allowed. These incidental
service uses shall not be located on the periphery of the project, nor shall
the use encompass more than ten percent of the total project area.
            (VI)   The conditions of approval of a Planned Residential
Development project shall specifically designate those uses, including types of
dwelling units, allowed within the project.
   (d)   Application Procedures for Staged Developments. An application for a
Preliminary Development Plan (PDP) shall encompass all of the land included
within the Planned Development Permit. A Final Development Plan (FDP) may be
for a portion of the land included within the Planned Development Permit or a
phase of the Permit; provided:
      (1)   Each phase shall function as a complete and separate development
from the remaining phases; and
      (2)   Any densities proposed or open space areas provided within the
subject phase shall not result from a transfer of density from adjoining
phases.
   (e)   Pre-application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be
required for all Planned Development Permit applications. This pre-application
conference will acquaint the applicant with the procedural requirements of the
Planned Development Permit provisions of this Development Code and the general
acceptability of the plan and its compatibility with applicable policies,
issues, and development regulations. The conference may be with the Development
Review Committee or with selected staff based upon the complexity of the
project.
   (f)   Conformance of Plans. Each Final Development Plan (FDP) shall
substantially conform to the approved Preliminary Development Plan (PDP).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 85.10.080 Time Limits and Expiration.
   The time limit and expiration of Planned Development Permit applications
shall be in compliance with §
86.06.060 (Time Limits and Extensions).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.10.090 Planned Development Permit Amendments.
   (a)   Review Authority Action on Requested Changes. Any requested change in
the Planned Development Permit, other than those allowed by Subdivision (c),
below, shall be submitted to the review authority that originally approved the
permit for review and approval following the same review notice and hearing
procedures as required for the original approval.
   (b)   Added Conditions. The review authority may, as a condition of
approval, impose added changes or conditions to the Planned Development Permit
amendment as it deems reasonable and necessary to carry out the purpose and
intent of the original Planned Development Permit and this Chapter.
   (c)   Minor Changes by Director. Minor changes in the Planned Development
Permit that do not involve an increase in structure area, an increase in the
number of dwelling units, or a change of use may be approved by the Director in
compliance with §
86.06.070 (Changes to an Approved Project).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.10.100 Post Decision Procedures.
   The procedures and requirements in
Chapter 86.06 (Time Limitations), and those related to appeals and revocation
in
Division 6 (Development Code Administration), shall apply following a decision
on an application for a Planned Development Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.11: PRE-CONSTRUCTION FLOOD HAZARD MITIGATION AND EROSION CONTROL
INSPECTION
Section
   
85.11.010   Purpose.
   
85.11.015   Scope.
   
85.11.020   Flood Hazard Mitigation Required.
   
85.11.030   Erosion Control Plan and Inspection Required.
§ 85.11.010 Purpose.
   The provisions of this Chapter are enacted to control soil erosion pollution
and regulate construction of proposed structures that are subject to flood
hazards due to storm events within local flood hazard areas that are not within
a designated Flood Plain Safety (FP) Overlay District or Floodway (FW) Land Use
Zoning District.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4333,
passed - -2017)
§ 85.11.015 Scope.
   The provisions of this Chapter apply to all unincorporated areas of the
County except that §
85.11.020 shall only apply to areas not within a designated FP Overlay District
or FW Land Use Zoning District.
(Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4333, passed - -2017)
§ 85.11.020 Flood Hazard Mitigation Required.
   (a)   No Disturbance of Land and/or Construction without Prior Approval. No
person, except as provided in this Chapter, shall commence with a disturbance
of land (e.g., grading or land clearing) and/or construction activity that has
the potential to affect a discernible water course without first obtaining
approval to ensure that the disturbance and/or construction activity will not
increase the velocity or alter the direction or point of discharge of a local
drainage course in a manner that it negatively effects the proposed structure
(s) or other adjacent properties.
   (b)   Determination by the Building Official. The Building Official shall
determine, upon visual inspection of the site and review of any pertinent
available resources, whether there is evidence of a discernible watercourse
that could affect or could be affected by the proposed improvements or land
disturbing activity. If evidence of a discernible watercourse exists, the
Building Official may require a Floodplain Development Standards Review
conducted by the Land Development Division that will provide further review of
the site and proposed improvements. A review fee may be required.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4163,
passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4333, passed - -2017)
§ 85.11.030 Erosion Control Plan and Inspection Required.
   (a)   No Land Disturbance or Construction Activity without Prior Approval.
No person except as provided in this Chapter, shall commence with a disturbance
of land (e.g., grading or land clearing) or construction activity that has that
potential to cause erosion without first obtaining approval of erosion control
measures to ensure that erosion would not reasonably be expected to occur. Best
Management Practices (BMPs) shall be implemented at all land disturbance sites,
regardless of the area of disturbance.
   (b)   Inspections Required. Site inspections shall be conducted as needed to
verify compliance with this Chapter. Project proponents must also recognize
that their project is subject to inspection by the Public Works Department,
Environmental Management Division, and Regional Water Quality Control Board
staff as part of their General Construction Permit obligations.
   (c)   Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. Projects disturbing more than
one acre are also required to have coverage under the State General
Construction Permit issued by the State Water Resources Control Board and
develop a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). The property owner is
required to abide by all provisions of the State General Construction Permit
and obtain a Waste Discharge Identification (WDID) number prior to the issuance
of building or grading permits when the disturbance is more than one acre.
   (d)   Review Requirements of Plan. The Building Official, with the
concurrence of the Planning Division and the Land Development Division, when
appropriate, shall review the plan and determine that the proposed erosion
control measures will be adequate and whether or not an erosion control permit
is specifically required.
   (e)   Maintenance of Features. The required features of the approved Erosion
Control Plan shall be implemented during the land disturbing activity and
maintained thereafter in accordance with the approved plan.
(Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4333, passed - -2017)
CHAPTER 85.12: REVISIONS TO AN APPROVED ACTION
Section
   
85.12.010   Purpose.
   
85.12.020   Procedures.
   
85.12.030   Minor Revisions to an Approved Action.
§ 85.12.010 Purpose.
   Modifications of the conditions of approval or project design for an
approved development project and for the alteration, expansion, or any
disturbance of land associated with any use subject to a Conditional Use
Permit, Minor Use Permit, or Site Plan Permit may be revised (e.g., modified or
expanded) through the approval of a Revision to an Approved Action application
in compliance with this Chapter. A Minor Revision to an Approved Action may be
used for certain minor changes to a project (see §
85.12.030 below).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014)
§ 85.12.020 Procedures.
   (a)   Action by the Director or Commission.
      (1)   The Director shall review and act upon a request for a Revision to
an Approved Action.
      (2)   If the Director determines that the request requires a public
hearing, the Director shall refer the request to the Commission for action.
      (3)   Requests to appeal the Director’s or Commission’s actions shall be
filed in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
   (b)   Review Procedure.
      (1)   Any Minor Revision shall be processed using the Staff Review
without Notice procedures.
      (2)   Any revision that includes an expansion of the use of up to 10,000
square feet or 25 percent of the ground area covered by the use or square
footage of the structure, whichever is greater, shall be processed using the
Staff Review with Notice procedures. The procedures and appeal rights of §
85.08.030 shall apply.
      (3)   Any revision that includes an expansion of the use greater than 25
percent of the ground area covered by the use or square footage of the
structure and such expansion is greater than 10,000 square feet shall be
processed using the review procedures outlined in
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permit/Minor Use Permit).
   (c)   Review Authority. Director.
   (d)   Notification of Request. Notice shall be given in compliance with the
same notice requirement of the original application type. However, an expansion
of the use beyond 25 percent would require notice in compliance with the Minor
Use Permit requirements.
   (e)   Findings Required. Before approving the requested revision, the review
authority shall find that the findings for the original application type can
still be made.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4245,
passed - -2014)
§ 85.12.030 Minor Revisions to an Approved Action.
   (a)   Applicability. A Minor Revision may be used to approve minor changes
to an already approved project based on the following criteria:
      (1)   An approved plot plan is on file in the Land Use Services
Department.
      (2)   The proposed use is consistent with the current land use zoning
district regulations.
      (3)   Parking and design standards are not affected.
      (4)   The proposal is an expansion of the use of up to 1,000 square feet
or 10 percent of the ground area covered by the use or square footage of the
structure, whichever is greater.
   (b)   Action by the Director or Commission.
      (1)   The Director shall review and act upon a request for a Minor
Revision to an Approved Action.
      (2)   Requests to appeal the Director’s or Commission’s actions shall be
filed in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
(Ord. 4245, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 85.13: SIGN LOCATION PLANS
Section
   
85.13.010   Purpose.
   
85.13.020   Procedures.
§ 85.13.010 Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide an expedited process for the
County review and authorization of a Sign Location Plans in compliance with
this Development Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.13.020 Procedures.
   (a)   Procedure. Staff review without notice.
   (b)   Review Authority. Director.
   (c)   Findings. Before acting upon a request for a Sign Location Plan, the
review authority shall first find all of the following to be true. The
construction of the sign structures in compliance with the proposed Sign
Location Plan will:
      (1)   Be compatible with the character of the community(ies) in which the
sign structures are to be located;
      (2)   Not have an adverse affect upon properties adjoining the proposed
sign location; and
      (3)   Be consistent with the policies contained within the General Plan
and any applicable specific plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.14: SPECIAL USE PERMITS
Section
   
85.14.010   Purpose.
   
85.14.020   Types of Special Use Permits and Review Authorities.
   
85.14.030   Procedures.
   
85.14.040   General Provisions.
   
85.14.050   Special Uses.
   
85.14.060   Findings for Specific Special Uses.
§ 85.14.010 Purpose.
   Special Use Permits are required to regularly monitor the operation of
certain land uses to ensure their continued compatibility with the surrounding
property.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.14.020 Types of Special Use Permits and Review Authorities.
   
Table 85-3 (Special Use Permits) identifies the various types of Special Use
Permits with the appropriate review authorities:
Table 85-3
Special Use Permits
Type of Entitlement Applicable Citation Director(1) (2) Commission(3) Board(4)
or Decision
Table 85-3
Special Use Permits
Type of Entitlement  Applicable Citation Director(1) (2) Commission(3) Board(4)
or Decision
Bed and Breakfast    Ch. 84.05           Issue(5)        Appeal        Appeal
Permit
Exotic Animals       Ch. 84.04           Issue(5)        Appeal        Appeal
Home Occupations     Ch. 84.12           Issue(5)        Appeal        ----
Private Kennels      Ch. 84.04           Issue(5)        Appeal        Appeal
Recycling Facilities Ch. 84.19           Issue(5)        Appeal        Appeal
Short-Term           Ch. 84.28           Issue(5)        Appeal        ----
Residential Rentals
Notes:
(1)   The Director may defer action and refer any permit or approval
application to the Commission for final determination.
(2)   All decisions of the Director are appealable to Commission, and then to
the Board, in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals), except for those decisions addressed in Note (3).
(3)   The Commission may refer consideration of an appeal to the Board, except
for those decisions involving only a Variance, determination as to the
completeness of an application, the determination to approve or deny a Home
Occupation Permit, an Accessory Wind Energy Permit, a Short-Term Private Home
Rental, a Subdivision Sign Location Plan, or the requirement for preparation of
an Environmental Impact Report (EIR). In these instances the Commission’s
decision shall be the final and conclusive decision. The Board will not accept
nor consider an appeal of these Commission decisions.
(4)   All decisions of the Board are final.
(5)   Issued by Code Enforcement.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4331, passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4341,
passed - -2018)
§ 85.14.030 Procedures.
   (a)   Requests for Special Use Permits. The Director shall review and act
upon requests for Special Use Permits subject to the findings and conditions
for each type of use as identified within the applicable sections of this
Development Code that provides for the use.
   (b)   Procedure. Staff review with notice.
   (c)   Review Authority. Director.
   (d)   An Advertised Meeting May Be Held. When necessary, the review
authority may conduct an advertised meeting to consider evidence and take
testimony before acting upon an application for a Special Use Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.14.040 General Provisions.
   (a)   Shall Be Allowed in the Land Use Zoning District. The uses described
in this Chapter shall be an allowed use in the subject land use zoning
district, subject to the issuance of a Special Use Permit.
   (b)   Disapproval Due to Violation(s). Special Use Permit applications shall
be disapproved if there is any violation(s) of this Development Code on the
property for which the application is filed and appropriate legal action will
be taken to abate the violation(s).
   (c)   Additional Conditions May Be Added. The Director may add additional
conditions or requirements as deemed reasonable and necessary to any Special
Use Permit.
   (d)   Annual Renewal and Inspections Required. Special Use Permits shall be
renewed annually, unless otherwise specified by this Chapter and inspections
will be conducted by the Director before each annual renewal.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.14.050 Special Uses.
   (a)   Conditional Use Permits. Any use that is the subject of an approved
Conditional Use Permit and if required by the conditions of approval shall also
be made subject to the issuance of a Special Use Permit.
   (b)   Limited Time Periods May Be Applied. Special Use Permits may be issued
for limited time periods. A new application shall be required for renewal of a
Special Use Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.14.060 Findings for Specific Special Uses.
   (a)   Findings for Bed and Breakfast Uses. Before acting upon an application
for a Special Use Permit for a bed and breakfast use, the review authority
shall first find all of the following to be true:
      (1)   The site upon which the bed and breakfast use is to be established,
shall conform to all standards of the land use zoning district in which it is
located, and the site for the proposed use is adequate in terms of shape and
size to accommodate the use and parking areas, setbacks, structure coverage,
yards, and other applicable requirements of this Development Code; and
      (2)   The residential character of the neighborhood in which the use is
located shall be maintained and preserved and the issuance of the Special Use
Permit shall not be significantly detrimental to the public health, safety, and
welfare or injurious to the vicinity and land use zoning district in which the
use is located.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4341, passed - -2018)
CHAPTER 85.15: TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
Section
   
85.15.010   Purpose.
   
85.15.020   Types of Temporary Use Permits and Review Authorities.
   
85.15.030   Minor Short-Term Activities.
   
85.15.040   Temporary Use Permit Required.
   
85.15.050   Procedures.
   
85.15.060   Review Authority.
   
85.15.070   Exempt Short-Term Activities.
   
85.15.080   Allowed Short-Term Activities.
   
85.15.090   Development Standards.
   
85.15.100   Application Requirements.
   
85.15.110   Findings and Decision.
   
85.15.120   Post Decision Procedures.
§ 85.15.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes procedures and standards for the granting of
Temporary Use Permits for allowed short-term activities. Compliance with
applicable standards ensures that the establishment, maintenance, and operation
of the short-term activity would not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, and welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the
proposed activity.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.020 Types of Temporary Use Permits and Review Authorities.
   
Table 85-4 (Temporary Use Permits) identifies the various types of Temporary
Use Permits with the appropriate review authorities:
Table 85-4
Temporary Use Permits
Type of Permit Applicable Citation Director(1) (2) Commission(3) Board(4)
Table 85-4
Temporary Use Permits
Type of Permit       Applicable Citation Director(1) (2) Commission(3) Board(4)
Temporary Use Permit Ch. 84.25           Issue           Appeal        Appeal
- General
Temporary            Ch. 84.25           Issue(5)        Appeal        Appeal
Construction Office
Temporary Model Home Ch. 84.25           Issue(6)        Appeal        Appeal
Temporary Occupancy  Ch. 84.25           Issue(5)        Appeal        Appeal
- Residential
Temporary Real       Ch. 84.25           Issue(6)        Appeal        Appeal
Estate Office
Temporary Seasonal   Ch. 84.25           Issue(5)        Appeal        Appeal
Sales Lot
Temporary Signs      Ch. 84.25           Issue(6)        Appeal        Appeal
Temporary Special    Ch. 84.25           Issue(7)        Appeal        Appeal
Event
Notes:
(1)   The Director may defer action and refer any permit or approval
application to the Commission for final determination.
(2)   All decisions of the Director are appealable to Commission, and then to
the Board, in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals), except for those decisions addressed in Note (3).
(3)   The Commission may refer consideration of an appeal to the Board, except
for those decisions involving only a Variance, determination as to the
completeness of an application, the determination to approve or deny a Home
Occupation Permit, an Accessory Wind Energy Permit, a Subdivision Sign Location
Plan, or the requirement for preparation of an Environmental Impact Report
(EIR). In these instances the Commission’s decision shall be the final and
conclusive decision. The Board will not accept nor consider an appeal of these
Commission decisions.
(4)   All decisions of the Board are final.
(5)   Issued by the Building Official.
(6)   Issued by Code Enforcement.
(7)   Issued by Current Planning.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.030 Minor Short-Term Activities.
   A Temporary Use Permit (TUP) allows short-term activities that might not
meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable land use zoning
district, but may otherwise be acceptable because of their temporary nature.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.040 Temporary Use Permit Required.
   Short-term activities shall not be conducted, established, or operated in
any manner without the approval and maintenance of a valid Temporary Use
Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.050 Procedures.
   (a)   Director’s review. Each application shall be reviewed by the Director
to ensure that the proposal complies with all applicable requirements of this
Development Code.
   (b)   Procedure. Staff review without notice.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.060 Review Authority.
   (a)   Director’s Authority. Temporary Use Permits may be reviewed and
approved or disapproved by the Director, in compliance with this Chapter.
   (b)   Referral to the Commission. The Director may refer any Temporary Use
Permit application to the Commission for final action.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.070 Exempt Short-Term Activities.
   The following short-term activities are allowed without the requirement of
obtaining a Temporary Use Permit. Short-term activities that do not fall within
the following categories shall comply with §
85.15.080 (Allowed Short-Term Activities), below.
   (a)   Construction Yards - On-Site. On-site contractors’ construction yards,
for an approved construction project. The construction yard shall be removed
immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of
the Building Permit authorizing the construction project, whichever first
occurs.
   (b)   Emergency Facilities. Emergency public health and safety needs/land
use activities, as determined by the Board.
   (c)   Events on Sites Approved for Public Assembly. An event on the site of,
or within, a golf course, meeting hall, religious facility, school, theater, or
other similar facility designed, and approved by the County for public
assembly.
   (d)   Fund-Raising Car Washes.
      (1)   Car washes on property within a commercial, industrial, or
institutional zone, limited to a maximum of two days per month for each
sponsoring organization.
      (2)   Sponsorship shall be limited to educational, fraternal, religious,
or service organizations directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts, or to
tax exempt organizations in compliance with § 501(c) of the Federal Revenue and
Taxation Code.
      (3)   Even though fundraising car washes are exempt from obtaining a
Temporary Use Permit, they shall still be conducted in compliance with
applicable stormwater regulations to minimize potential water quality impacts.
   (e)   Garage Sales. Garage sales, not to exceed four per year, each of which
may not exceed three consecutive days.
   (f)   Location Filming. The temporary use of a specific site for the
location filming of commercials, movies, videos, etc., for the time specified
by the Director. Even though this use is exempt from a Temporary Use Permit, it
does require a permit through the Inland Empire Film Commission.
   (g)   Public Property or Public Right-of-Way. Construction and maintenance
activities conducted on public properties that are authorized by an
Encroachment Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.080 Allowed Short-Term Activities.
   A Temporary Use Permit may authorize the following short-term activities
within the specified time limits, but in no event for more than 12 months.
Other short-term activities that do not fall within the categories defined
below, or within §
85.15.070 (Exempt Short-Term Activities), above, shall instead comply with the
planning permit requirements and development standards that otherwise apply to
the property.
   (a)   Batch Plants. Batch plants necessary for the construction of major
public infrastructure improvements provided proper review in compliance with
the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) is completed.
   (b)   Construction Yards - Off-Site. Off-site contractors’ construction
yards, for an approved construction project. The construction yard shall be
removed immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the
expiration of the Building Permit authorizing the construction project,
whichever first occurs.
   (c)   Events. Art and craft exhibits, carnivals, circuses, concerts, fairs,
farmer’s markets, festivals, flea markets, food events, open-air theaters,
outdoor entertainment/sporting events, religious revivals, rummage sales,
second hand sales, swap meets, and other special events for up to five
consecutive days, or four two-day weekends, within a 12-month period, allowed
only on nonresidential properties. Refer to
Chapter 85.16 (Temporary Special Event Permits) for specific requirements for a
Temporary Special Event Permit.
   (d)   Model Homes. A model home or model home complex may be authorized
before the completion of subdivision improvements in compliance with the
following standards.
      (1)   The sales office and any off-street parking shall be converted back
to residential use and/or removed before the issuance of the Final Occupancy
Permit or within 14 days from the sale of the last parcel in the subdivision,
whichever first occurs.
      (2)   The model home complex shall be used to sell only units within the
subdivision within which the complex is located.
      (3)   Model home permits will be finaled and the model homes will be
allowed to be open to the public only after all subdivision improvements are
completed and accepted by the County.
      (4)   Model home sign permits will be issued only after all subdivision
improvements are completed and accepted by the County.
      (5)   The review authority may require other conditions of approval
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
persons residing or working in the neighborhood.
   (e)   Seasonal Sales Lots. Seasonal sales activities (e.g., Christmas,
Halloween, Thanksgiving, etc.) including temporary residence/security trailers,
on nonresidential properties, for up to 45 days.
   (f)   Temporary Occupancy During Construction.
      (1)   Major development projects. Temporary structures and property may
be used during the construction phase of an approved major development project
(e.g., residential projects with five or more dwelling units or any commercial
or industrial project). The structures or property may be used as offices or
for the storage of equipment and/or tools.
      (2)   Minor Development Projects. An existing dwelling unit or a
temporary structure and property may be used during the construction phase of
an approved minor development project (e.g., residential projects with four or
fewer dwelling units). The structure or property may be used as a temporary
residence, an office, or for the storage of equipment and/or tools.
      (3)   Appropriate Conditions. The permit shall contain reasonable and
necessary conditions regarding the following matters:
         (A)   Provisions for adequate ingress and egress.
         (B)   Provisions for the work to be performed on-site.
         (C)   Provisions for the storage of asphalt, concrete, and dirt at
designated sites within the subject property; provided, the applicant furnishes
a schedule, acceptable to the Director, for the periodic disposal or recycling
of these materials.
         (D)   Provisions designed to minimize potential conflicts between the
work to be performed on-site and the ordinary business and uses conducted
within the County.
      (4)   Length of Permit. The permit may be approved for up to 12 months
following the issuance of the companion Building Permit, or upon completion of
the subject development project, whichever first occurs.
      (5)   Extension of Permit. The permit may be extended by the Director if
a written request for extension is submitted at least 14 days before expiration
of the permit and reasonable reasons are provided by the applicant to justify
the requested extension (e.g., the delay was caused by reasons beyond the
control of the applicant). The permit may be extended for up to an additional
12 months. Multiple extensions may be approved, but in no case shall these
extensions exceed a total of five years.
      (6)   Condition of Site Following Completion. All temporary structures
and related improvements shall be completely removed from the subject site
following expiration of the Temporary Use Permit or within 30 days of
completion of the development project, whichever first occurs.
   (g)   Temporary Real Estate Sales Offices. A temporary real estate sales
office may be established within the area of an approved subdivision, solely
for the first sale of homes. An application for a temporary real estate office
may be approved for a maximum of 12 months from the date of approval.
   (h)   Temporary Structures. A temporary classroom, office, or similar
structure, including a manufactured or mobile unit, may be approved for a
maximum of 12 months from the date of approval, as an accessory use or as the
first phase of a development project.
   (i)   Temporary Work Trailers. A trailer or mobile home used as a temporary
work site for employees of a business; provided, that:
      (1)   The use is authorized by a Building Permit for the trailer or
mobile home, and the Building Permit for the permanent structure;
      (2)   The use is appropriate because:
         (A)   The trailer or mobile home will be in place during construction
or remodeling of a permanent commercial or industrial structure for a maximum
of 12 months, or upon expiration of the Building Permit for the permanent
structure, whichever first occurs; or
         (B)   The applicant has demonstrated that the temporary work site is a
short-term necessity for a maximum of 12 months, while a permanent work site is
being obtained; and
      (3)   The trailer or mobile home is removed before final building
inspection or the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the permanent
structure.
   (j)   Similar Temporary Activities. A temporary activity that the Director
determines is similar to the other activities listed in this Section and
compatible with the applicable land use zoning district and surrounding land
uses.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.090 Development Standards.
   The Director shall establish the following standards based on the type of
short-term activity, using the requirements of the applicable land use zoning
district, and
Divisions 3 (Countywide Development Standards) and
4 (Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities) for guidance:
   (a)   Structure and Property Development Improvements. Access, floor areas,
heights, landscaping, off-street parking, setbacks, signs, utilities, and other
structure and property development improvements and features;
   (b)   Removal of the Activity and Site Restoration. Measures for removal of
the activity and site restoration, to ensure that no changes to the site would
limit the range of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this
Development Code; and
   (c)   Time limitation. Limitation on the duration of an approved “temporary
structure,” to a maximum of 12 months, so that it shall not become a permanent
or long-term structure.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.100 Application Requirements.
   An application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be filed and processed in
compliance with
Chapter 85.03 (Application Procedures). The application shall include the
information and materials specified in the Department handout for Temporary Use
Permits. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in
support of the findings required by §
85.15.110 (Findings and Decision), below.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.110 Findings and Decision.
   A Temporary Use Permit shall be approved by the Director only after the
Director first finds that the requested short-term activity complies with
applicable standards in this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.15.120 Post Decision Procedures.
   The procedures and requirements in
Chapter 86.06 (Time Limitations), and those related to appeals and revocation
in Division 6 (Development Code Administration), shall apply following a
decision on an application for a Temporary Use Permit.
   (a)   Condition of the Site Following Short-term Activity. Each site
occupied by a short-term activity shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or other
evidence of the temporary activity on completion or removal of the activity,
and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this
Development Code. Performance security may be required before initiation of the
activity to ensure cleanup after the activity is finished in compliance with §
86.06.050 (Performance Guarantees).
   (b)   Performance Security for Temporary Structures. Before issuance of a
Temporary Use Permit the applicant shall provide performance security in a form
and amount acceptable to the Director to guarantee removal of all temporary
structures within 30 days following the expiration of the Temporary Use Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.16: TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
Section
   
85.16.010   Purpose.
   
85.16.020   Review Authority and Procedure.
   
85.16.030   Procedures.
   
85.16.040   Post Decision Procedures.
§ 85.16.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations that will protect
the general public health, safety, and welfare under the authority granted to
governments by the Constitution of the State of California.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.16.020 Review Authority and Procedure.
   (a)   Director’s Authority. Temporary Special Event Permits may be reviewed
and approved or disapproved by the Director, in compliance with this Chapter.
   (b)   Procedure. Staff review without notice.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.16.030 Procedures.
   (a)   General Provisions.
      (1)   Intent. The intent of this Chapter is to provide regulations for
the establishment, operation, removal, and cleanup of temporary special events
that do not constitute a “land use” of sufficient magnitude or longevity to
require permanent land use approval.
      (2)   Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided by the County Code or
State law, no person or entity shall advertise, conduct, maintain, operate, or
provide admission for any temporary special event within the unincorporated
areas of the County without possessing an unexpired, unsuspended, and unrevoked
Temporary Special Events Permit from the Department for each temporary special
event.
      (3)   Exemptions. The following temporary events are exempt from the
requirements of obtaining a Temporary Special Events Permit in compliance with
this Chapter:
         (A)   Any sites that have received land use approval (e.g.,
Conditional Use Permit) to allow temporary special events.
         (B)   Any temporary special events held in County Regional Parks.
         (C)   Any Class I minor event as defined in
Division 10 (Definitions) with an anticipated attendance of less than 500
persons per day. This exemption shall not apply to a staging event as defined
in §
28.0401 of Title 2 of this Code involving ten or more persons operating off-
highway motor vehicles. §
28.0404 of Title 2 requires a Temporary Special Event Permit for such staging
events.
         (D)   Any Class II minor event with an anticipated attendance of less
than 200 persons per day.
      (4)   Relevant Agencies. The Department shall notify and consult with all
relevant County, State, and Federal agencies including the following:
         (A)   The County Departments of Airports, Fire, Public Health, Public
Works, Sheriff, and the County Code Enforcement Division;
         (B)   The State of California Departments of Alcoholic Beverage
Control, Fish and Game, Highway Patrol, and Transportation; and
         (C)   The U.S. Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of
Reclamation, and the U.S. Park Service.
   (b)   Required Information and Timing of Application. Before organizing any
temporary special event, the applicant shall supply the information the
Department may reasonably require based upon the location, intensity, and level
of services required for each proposed temporary special event. Application for
events shall be submitted in a complete form in advance of the anticipated
commencement of the activity in the following manner:
      (1)   Minor Events.
         (A)   Events Proposed to Operate for the First Time. At least 30 days
in advance for a community celebration, and at least 90 days in advance for any
other event.
         (B)   Recurring Events. At least 30 days in advance if the event had
been previously reviewed and approved.
      (2)   Major Events. At least 180 days in advance.
   (c)   Fees.
      (1)   For major events only, within 60 days of notification by the
Department, any County department substantially affected by an event, other
than the Sheriff’s Department which is covered under Subdivision (i), below,
shall submit a billing to the event applicant (with a copy to the Department)
of the estimated total fees and charges of that department pertaining to the
special event.
      (2)   All estimated total fees and charges shall be deposited by the
event applicant with the affected department(s) at least 60 days before the
scheduled opening of the special event.
      (3)   Within 30 days of the end of the special event, the affected County
department shall give a final accounting/billing to the event operator (with a
copy to the Department).
      (4)   Within 60 days of the end of the special event, the event operator
shall deposit all unpaid County departments’ fees and charges and the affected
department(s) shall refund any surpluses, as applicable.
   (d)   Bonding and Insurance.
      (1)   Each applicant may be required to provide sufficient liability
insurance naming the County as an additional named insured.
      (2)   The insurance shall be sufficient to protect, defend, and indemnify
the County, its agents, employees, officers, servants, and volunteers from and
against any claim, damage, injury, liability, and loss of any nature arising
out of, or in any way connected to, the temporary special event.
      (3)   The amount, quality, and type of the insurance shall be determined
in compliance with the policy established by the Risk Management Division.
      (4)   The County may require a bond be posted before the special event to
ensure that all conditions are met, including the cleanup and restoration of
landscape.
   (e)   Review Procedures.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a completed application and all related fees, the
Department shall consult with all applicable agencies and departments.
      (2)   The special event shall comply with the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA) in compliance with §§ 15301 and 15304 of the CEQA
Guidelines.
      (3)   If the special event has the potential to cause adverse
environmental impacts, an environmental review of the proposed event shall be
conducted in compliance with the County Code and CEQA.
      (4)   An additional environmental review fee will be required.
      (5)   After an environmental determination has been made, or if one is
not required, the Director:
         (A)   May refer any Temporary Special Event Permit application
directly to the Board for consideration;
         (B)   May require a Conditional Use Permit or other appropriate land
use permit and approval where the magnitude or longevity of the use requires
the permit and/or approval; and
      (C)   Shall notify the applicant of the Sheriff’s determination, if the
Sheriff has determined in compliance with Subdivision (i), below, that no
permit should be issued.
   (f)   Permits Nontransferable. Any permit issued in compliance with this
Chapter shall not be transferable to any other date, organization, person,
place, or time.
   (g)   Posting. Every permit required by this Chapter shall be conspicuously
posted upon the premises of the temporary special event in a manner specified
by the Department.
   (h)   Permit Conditions. The Director, the Sheriff, and the Board shall take
into consideration all relevant information when determining the approval or
disapproval and any necessary conditions for a requested temporary special
event permit, including the following:
      (1)   Adequate office space(s) and communication equipment for all
regulatory personnel on site by the permit holder;
      (2)   Bonding and insurance requirements;
      (3)   Cleanup trash disposal;
      (4)   Communication, including temporary or additional telephones and an
adequate public address system;
      (5)   Consideration of the impositions upon adjacent properties and the
local communities;
      (6)   Electrical illumination requirements;
      (7)   Fire protection, including location of fire hydrants and
supplemental water sources;
      (8)   Food concessions;
      (9)   Inclement weather contingencies;
      (10)   Medical/first aid facilities;
      (11)   News releases required;
      (12)   Noise impact(s) (An applicant’s request to play or broadcast
music, especially between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., shall be
evaluated and determined based on all relevant information including the
following: the proximity to the nearest residence, business, or other occupied
land use; the topography of the site and relevant surrounding area; and the
time limits the music is proposed to be played);
      (13)   Overnight camping problems;
      (14)   Restoration of landscape;
      (15)   Sanitation facilities;
      (16)   Site(s) upon which the temporary special event is to occur, and
the provisions for adequate ingress/egress and adequate parking including
provisions for special traffic guards or signals;
      (17)   Topographical and ecological considerations and consideration of
alternative sites;
      (18)   Water facilities; and
      (19)   Final accounting procedures, billings, and/or reimbursements.
   (i)   Police Protection - Sheriff’s Determination.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the special event application from the Department,
the Sheriff’s Department shall take into consideration all relevant information
when determining their recommendation for the approval or disapproval and any
necessary conditions for a requested temporary special event permit, including
those items identified in Subdivision (h), above, and the following:
         (A)   Applicants’ previous relevant experience and background;
         (B)   Control of alcoholic beverages and dangerous substances;
         (C)   Crowd control measures;
         (D)   Emergency evacuation procedures;
         (E)   News releases;
         (F)   Police protection; and
         (G)   Provisions for special accessway(s) for emergency vehicles.
      (2)   If the Sheriff determines, for any of the following reasons, that
the event will endanger the public health, peace, safety, or welfare, no permit
shall be issued. The grounds for disapproval by the Sheriff are any one of the
following:
         (A)   Information contained in the application, or supplemental
information requested from the applicant, is found to be false in any material
detail;
         (B)   Another Special Event Permit application has been received prior
in time, or has already been approved, to hold another event at the same time
and place requested by the applicant, or so close in time and place as to cause
undue traffic congestion, or the Sheriff is unable to meet the needs for law
enforcement services for both events;
         (C)   The route, size, or time of the special event will substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event
route or site, or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually
subject to great traffic congestion;
         (D)   The concentration of animals, persons, and vehicles at the site
of the special event, or the assembly and disbanding areas around an event,
will prevent proper ambulance, fire, law enforcement, or paramedic services to
areas contiguous to the event;
         (E)   The size of the special event will require diversion of so great
a number of Sheriff’s deputies to ensure that participants stay within the
boundaries or route of the event, or to protect participants in the event, as
to prevent normal protection to the rest of the County. Nothing within this
Section authorizes disapproval of a permit because of the need to protect
participants from the conduct of others if reasonable permit conditions can be
imposed to allow for adequate protection of event participants with the number
of law enforcement officers available to police the event;
         (F)   The location of the special event will substantially interfere
with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along
the County streets, or a previously-granted Encroachment Permit; or
         (G)   The special event would occur at a time when a school is in
session at a location or route adjacent to the school or one of its classes,
and the noise created by the activities of the event would substantially
disrupt the educational activities of the school or one of its classes.
      (3)   When the grounds for disapproval of a permit specified in
Subdivisions (B) through (G), above, can be corrected by altering the date,
duration, location, route, or time of the special event, the Sheriff shall,
instead of disapproving the application, conditionally recommend approval of
the application upon the applicant’s acceptance of conditions for permit
issuance. The conditions imposed shall provide for only the modification of the
applicant’s proposed event as may be necessary to achieve compliance with
Subdivisions (B) through (G), above.
      (4)   If the Sheriff determines that the special event will not endanger
the public health, peace, safety, or welfare, the Director shall be advised of
the Sheriff’s determinations and recommendations.
      (5)   If the Sheriff determines that the special event will endanger the
public health, peace, safety, or welfare, unless the applicant obtains extra
police protection, the Director shall be advised of the Sheriff’s requirements
for extra police protection as a mandatory condition for the issuance of a
permit.
      (6)   Where the Sheriff specifies the employment of off-duty peace
officers, and/or reserve peace officers, to meet the requirements of this
Chapter, the peace officers shall be under the complete direction of the
Sheriff. The Sheriff shall require that the requisite number of peace officers
be provided at all times of operation, plus any specified time before and
following the special event, before the Sheriff recommends approval of the
permit.
      (7)   The employment of the specified number of law enforcement officers
shall be at the expense of the applicant, the expense to be calculated in
compliance with the County’s fee provisions pertaining to public gatherings,
and shall be paid in full 30 days in advance of the special event.
      (8)   The Sheriff shall determine whether regular or reserve officers are
to be utilized based on availability, the nature of the assignment, and the
number of officers needed to ensure the safety and welfare of the public during
the special event.
   (j)   Requests for Law Enforcement Services at Temporary Special Events.
      (1)   Any person or entity not required to obtain a permit in compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter may request law enforcement services to
preserve the peace at temporary special events.
      (2)   The application shall be made to the Sheriff and shall be in
writing, stating the name and address of the applicant, the place where the
temporary special event is to be held, the estimated number of persons to be
present, and the purpose of the temporary special event.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the application, the Sheriff shall determine
whether law enforcement services are necessary to preserve the peace, and if
the Sheriff so determines, and if the services will not reduce the normal and
regular on-going service that the County would otherwise provide, the Sheriff
shall contract with the applicant to provide the services at an amount to cover
all related costs to the County.
      (4)   The costs shall be calculated in compliance with the County’s fee
provisions pertaining to public gatherings.
   (k)   Permit Expiration. A Temporary Special Event Permit shall expire in
compliance with the terms of the permit.
   (l)   Complaints. Any interested person may file a complaint with the
Department, the Sheriff, or the Board, or petition for a suspension or
revocation of any Temporary Special Event Permit issued in compliance with this
Chapter.
   (m)   Grounds for Suspension or Revocation. The Director or the Sheriff may
suspend, and the Director may revoke, any Temporary Special Event Permit issued
in compliance with this Chapter based upon reasonable causes, which may include
any one of the following:
      (1)   Nonpayment of required fees to the County or its agents;
      (2)   Violation of any permit condition;
      (3)   Violation of any law involving the operation of the temporary
special event;
      (4)   Any disorderly conduct or use of dangerous substances caused by the
operation of the temporary special event; or
      (5)   Information contained in the application, or supplemental
information requested from the applicant, is found to be false in any material
detail.
   (n)   Suspension.
      (1)   The Director or the Sheriff may summarily suspend any Temporary
Special Event Permit if the Director or Sheriff finds or reasonably suspects
that operation of the event may constitute an immediate public health or safety
hazard.
      (2)   At the time of suspension, the Director or Sheriff shall issue a
written notice to the permit holder stating the grounds for the suspension and
notifying the permit holder of the right to a hearing on the suspension.
      (3)   If a written request for hearing is filed with the Director within
15 calendar days after the receipt of the notice, the Director shall provide a
hearing within five days of receipt of the written request for a hearing.
      (4)   If the suspension notice is given on or within 25 days of the start
date of the special event, the Director shall take reasonable steps to expedite
the hearing process.
      (5)   The hearing may be continued from time to time.
      (6)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Director shall render a
decision.
      (7)   The Director may continue the suspension in effect until the
Director determines the grounds for suspension no longer exist.
      (8)   If an urgent situation exists relative to the public health,
safety, or welfare for a specific special event, an emergency suspension may be
executed by the Director to be effective immediately.
   (o)   Revocation.
      (1)   The Director may commence revocation proceedings by mailing a
notice not less than ten days before the date set for hearing, informing the
permit holder of the causes for revocation and the time and place at which the
revocation matter will be heard.
      (2)   If the revocation notice is given on or within 25 days of the start
date of the event, the Director shall take reasonable steps to expedite the
hearing process.
      (3)   The hearing may be continued from time to time.
      (4)   A revocation hearing may be held concurrently with a suspension
hearing.
      (5)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Director shall render a
decision.
      (6)   If an urgent situation exists relative to the public health,
safety, or welfare for a specific special event, an emergency revocation may be
executed by the Director to be effective immediately.
   (p)   Violations/Remedies. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Advertise, conduct, or operate a temporary special event without
first possessing an unexpired, unsuspended, unrevoked Temporary Special Event
Permit for each event.
      (2)   Distribute, give, or sell admission passes or tickets to any
temporary special event without first possessing an unexpired, unsuspended,
unrevoked Temporary Special Event Permit for each event.
      (3)   Operate any temporary special event in a manner that would create a
public or private nuisance.
      (4)   Conduct, exhibit, or show within the place of the temporary special
event any activity that violates California State law or any County ordinance.
      (5)   Knowingly allow any person on the site of the temporary special
event to cause or create a disturbance in, around, or near any place of the
temporary special event by offensive or disorderly conduct.
      (6)   Knowingly allow any person to consume, distribute, possess, or sell
any alcoholic beverage on the site of the temporary special event, except as
expressly allowed as a condition of the permit and in compliance with the laws
and regulations enforced by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
      (7)   Knowingly allow any person to consume, distribute, possess, or sell
any controlled drug or dangerous substance in, around, or near any place of the
temporary special event.
      (8)   Knowingly broadcast or play any live, recorded, or synthesized
music after 11:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. at the site of a temporary special
event, except as expressly authorized as a condition of a Temporary Special
Event Permit.
   (q)   Events Conducted Without Required Permit(s). Any temporary special
event conducted without the required permit(s) is subject to closure at anytime
during the event. The promoter, business owner, and/or landowner may be subject
to cost recovery by the agencies participating in the closure.
   (r)   Temporary Special Events on Federal or State Land. When temporary
special events have received a complete land use approval by a Federal or State
agency, including the Bureau of Land Management and the U.S. Forest Service and
is properly certified to the Department, the Director may, upon consultation
with and approval of the Sheriff, limit or waive any or all the provisions of
this Chapter as they are determined to be adequately controlled by the Federal
or State agency.
   (s)   Off-Road Vehicle Race Criteria. The Director shall use the following
criteria to review off-road vehicle races.
      (1)   Any portion of the race course traversing private land shall be on
an improved public easement or traveled way that has been primarily maintained
by the use of hand or power machinery or tools in order to allow relatively
regular and continuous use; or maintained by the passage of vehicles so as to
constitute a well defined and adequate route of travel for the types of
vehicles intended for use in the special event. Any applicable permit(s) shall
first be obtained for the use of County-maintained flood control easements,
roads, or other routes.
      (2)   No spectators shall be allowed, or activities conducted other than
the passage of vehicles on any portion of the private property, road, or route.
      (3)   No passing shall be allowed on the road or route unless it has
adequate width to permit safe passage of two race vehicles abreast without
necessitating travel off the designated course.
      (4)   The race route on private lands shall pose no undue or
extraordinary hazards to the participants or the general public.
      (5)   The race shall not adversely affect any sensitive environmental
resources on private lands in compliance with the determination made during the
environmental review.
      (6)   The owner(s) of the private property to be crossed by the temporary
special event has/have issued written permission to the individual(s)
conducting the race to authorize use of the private property.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.16.040 Post Decision Procedures.
   In addition to the provisions specified in this Chapter, the procedures and
requirements in
Chapter 86.06 (Time Limitations), and those related to appeals and revocation
in
Division 6 (Development Code Administration), shall apply following a decision
on an application for a Temporary Special Event Permit. In the case of a
conflict, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.
   (a)   Condition of the Site Following Short-term Activity. Each site
occupied by a short-term activity shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or other
evidence of the temporary activity on completion or removal of the activity,
and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this
Development Code. Performance security may be required before initiation of the
activity to ensure cleanup after the activity is finished in compliance with §
86.06.050 (Performance Guarantees).
   (b)   Performance Security for Temporary Structures. Before issuance of a
Temporary Special Event Permit the applicant shall provide performance security
in a form and amount acceptable to the Director to guarantee removal of all
temporary structures within 30 days following the expiration of the Temporary
Special Event Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.17: VARIANCES
Section
   
85.17.010   Purpose.
   
85.17.020   Applicability.
   
85.17.030   Procedures.
   
85.17.040   Minor Variances.
   
85.17.050   Application Requirements.
   
85.17.060   Findings and Decision.
   
85.17.070   Conditions of Approval.
   
85.17.080   Post Decision Procedures.
§ 85.17.010 Purpose.
   A Variance (either Major or Minor) provides a process for County
consideration of requests to modify certain standards of this Development Code
when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including
location, shape, size, surroundings, topography, or other physical features,
the strict application of the development standards otherwise applicable to the
property denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners
in the vicinity and in the same land use zoning district.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.17.020 Applicability.
   A Variance may be granted to modify any requirement of this Development Code
except: allowed land uses; residential density; specific prohibitions (for
example, prohibited signs), or procedural requirements.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.17.030 Procedures.
   Each application shall be reviewed by the Director to ensure that the
proposal complies with this Chapter, and all other applicable requirements of
this Development Code.
   (a)   Procedure. Staff review with notice.
   (b)   Review Authority. Director.
   (c)   Notice. Before a decision on a Variance, the County shall provide
notice in compliance with §
85.03.080 (Notice of Pending Land Use Decisions).
      (1)   Notice. The notice shall state that the Director will decide
whether to approve or disapprove the Variance application on a date specified
in the notice, and that a public hearing will be held only if requested in
writing by any interested person before the specified date for the decision.
The request for a hearing shall be based on issues of significance directly
related to the application (e.g., provision of evidence that the request cannot
meet one or more of the findings identified in §
85.17.060 [Findings and Decision], below).
      (2)   If Hearing Is Requested. If a public hearing is requested, the
Director shall schedule the hearing, which shall be noticed and conducted in
compliance with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings).
      (3)   If No Hearing Is Requested. If no public hearing is requested, the
Director shall render a decision on the date specified in the notice referred
to in Subdivision (c)(1) above.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.17.040 Minor Variances.
   (a)   Types of Minor Variances Allowed. The Director may grant a Minor
Variance to reduce any of the following requirements of this Development Code
up to the maximum specified in the
Table 85-5 (Types of Minor Variances Allowed), below.
Table 85-5
Types of Minor Variances Allowed
Types of Minor Variances Allowed* Maximum Variance
Table 85-5
Types of Minor Variances Allowed
Types of Minor Variances Allowed*                                                    Maximum
                                                                                     Variance
1  Area requirements. Excluding parcel area requirements.                            30
                                                                                     percent
2  Distance between structures. Up to 40 percent, but no closer than 6 feet.         40
                                                                                     percent
3  Fence or wall heights. Up to 30 percent, but no higher than 6 feet in the front   30
   or street side yard setback.                                                      percent
4  Floor width requirements. Of the single-family residential design standards.      20
                                                                                     percent
5  Gross floor area requirements.                                                    10
                                                                                     percent
6  Height requirements. Except that any height adjustment not exceeding two feet in  30
   total height shall also be considered a Minor Variance.                           percent
7  Off-street parking requirements.                                                  30
      Parking and loading space requirements, not to exceed two spaces.           percent
      Parking area/lot improvements.
8  Overlay District requirements. Of the standards identified in the overlay         30
   districts.                                                                        percent
9  Setback requirements.
      a.    Front setbacks. But no closer to the nearest property line than 15 40
   in the valley and desert areas and 10 feet in the mountain region.                percent
      b.    Side setbacks. But no closer than three feet from the nearest prope40
   line, except in a Fire Safety Overlay District in which case no closer than five  percent
   feet.
      c.   Rear setbacks. But no closer than 10 feet from the nearest property 30
                                                                                     percent
10 Sign requirements.
      a.   Sign area limitations.                                              10
                                                                                     percent
      b.   Sign height and setback limitations.                                30
                                                                                     percent
      c.   Sign number limitations: Not to exceed four signs.                  100
                                                                                     percent
Notes:
(*)   Administrative criteria for Minor Variances for these structures shall be established
by the Building Official. Those proposals that do not meet the criteria shall be submitted to
the Department of Public Works, with the appropriate fee, for road safety evaluation.
Architectural design and construction materials shall be compatible with the visual setting
of the surrounding area. Variances to the requirements of §
83.02.030 regarding “clear sight triangles” shall not be evaluated with a Minor Variances.
 
   (b)   Major Variances. Any request for a Variance, other than a Minor
Variance, shall be termed a Major Variance.
   (c)   Referral to the Commission. The Director may choose to refer any
Variance application to the Commission for hearing and final action.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4085,
passed - -2009)
§ 85.17.050 Application Requirements.
   An application for a Variance (Major or Minor) shall be prepared, filed, and
processed in compliance with
Chapter 85.03 (Application Procedures). The application shall include the
information and materials specified in the Department handout for Variances. It
is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the
findings required by §
85.17.060 (Findings and Decision), below.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.17.060 Findings and Decision.
   (a)   General Findings. The review authority may approve a Variance (Major
or Minor) only after first finding all of the following:
      (1)   The granting of the Variance will not be materially detrimental to
other properties or land uses in the area and will not substantially interfere
with the present or future ability to use solar energy systems;
      (2)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applicable to the subject property or to the intended use that do not apply to
other properties in the same vicinity and land use zoning district;
      (3)   The strict application of the land use zoning district deprives the
subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity or
in the same land use zoning district; and
      (4)   The granting of the Variance is compatible with the maps,
objectives, policies, programs, and general land uses specified in the General
Plan and any applicable specific plan.
   (b)   Findings for Off-site Parking Variance. The approval of a Variance to
allow some or all of the parking spaces required for a nonresidential project
to be located off-site, or to allow in-lieu fees or facilities instead of the
required on-site parking spaces, shall require that the review authority first
make both of the following findings in compliance with Government Code §
65906.5, instead of those required by Subdivision (a), above.
      (1)   The Variance will be an incentive to, and a benefit for, the
nonresidential development; and
      (2)   The Variance will facilitate access to the nonresidential
development by patrons of public transit facilities.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.17.070 Conditions of Approval.
   In approving a Variance (Major or Minor), the review authority may impose
any conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will
comply with the findings required by §
85.17.060 (Findings and Decision), above. The violation of any required
condition shall constitute a violation of this Chapter and may constitute
grounds for revocation or modification of the Variance in compliance with §
86.09.070 (Revocation or Modification).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.17.080 Post Decision Procedures.
   The procedures and requirements in Chapter 6 (Time Limitations), and those
related to appeals and revocation in Division 11 (Development Code
Administration), shall apply following a decision on an application for a
Variance.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.18: ACCESSORY WIND ENERGY SYSTEM PERMIT
Section
   
85.18.010   Purpose.
   
85.18.020   Applicability.
   
85.18.030   Procedures.
   
85.18.040   Abandonment.
§ 85.18.010 Purpose.
   As allowed by Government Code § 65892.13, the purpose of this Chapter is to
provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards, conditions, and
procedures for the placement of accessory wind energy systems on parcels in
unincorporated areas of the County in order to encourage the generation of
electricity for on-site use, thereby reducing the consumption of electrical
power supplied by utility companies. These regulations are intended to ensure
that accessory wind energy systems are designed and located in a manner that
minimizes visual and safety impacts on the surrounding community.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 85.18.020 Applicability.
   (a)   Accessory Wind Energy System Permit. An accessory wind energy system,
as defined by §
810.01.250 (Definitions, “W”) and where allowed by Division 2 (Land Use Zoning
Districts and Allowed Land Uses) of this Development Code, shall require an
accessory wind energy system permit and shall be subject to the requirements
and standards set forth in this Chapter and
Chapter 84.26 of Division 4 of this Development Code.
   (b)   Exemptions. A single accessory wind energy system that is 35 feet or
less in height shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain an accessory
energy system permit. Multiple systems on the same parcel, even if they are 35
feet or less in height, shall be required to obtain an accessory wind energy
system permit. All accessory wind energy systems, including those systems
exempted from the accessory wind energy system permit process pursuant to this
Subdivision, shall comply with the standards set forth in
Chapter 84.26 of Division 4 of this Development Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4188,
passed - -2012)
§ 85.18.030 Procedures.
   (a)   Action. The Director shall review and act upon an application for
approval of an accessory wind energy system permit.
   (b)   Procedure. Staff review with notice in compliance with §
85.02.030 (Staff Review with Notice).
   (c)   Notification.
      (1)   Surrounding Property Owners. Notice shall be given by first class
mail or delivery to all surrounding property owners within 300 feet of the
boundaries of the parcel of the subject site when an application is accepted as
complete.
      (2)   Electric Utility Service Provider. If the applicant plans to
connect the system to the electricity grid, the applicant shall submit
documentation from the electric utility service provider that serves the
proposed site confirming they have been informed of the applicant’s intent to
install an interconnected customer-owned electricity generator. If the
applicant does not plan to connect the system to the electricity grid, notice
to the electric utility service provider shall not be required.
      (3)   Pest Control Service Providers. In the event an accessory wind
energy system is proposed to be sited as an accessory to an agricultural use
that may involve aircraft operating at low altitudes, the applicant shall take
reasonable steps to notify pest control aircraft pilots registered to operate
in the County.
      (4)   Military Airspace Authority. An accessory wind energy system shall
not be sited on land within a restricted military airspace without first giving
adequate notice to the governing authority of that airspace.
   (d)   Application Submittal Requirement. The noise ratings as published by
the manufacturer of a system proposed for installation shall be submitted to
the County for review at the time of the submittal of an application for an
accessory wind energy system permit. If multiple systems are being proposed,
the noise ratings shall be modified to address the number of systems being
installed.
   (e)   Review Authority. Director.
   (f)   Findings Required. Before approving an application for an accessory
wind energy permit, the Director shall find and justify that all of the
following are true:
      (1)   The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to
accommodate the proposed use and all yards, open spaces, setbacks, walls and
fences, parking areas, loading areas, landscaping and other features pertaining
to the proposed use.
      (2)   The site for the proposed use has adequate access (i.e., the site
design incorporates street and highway limitations).
      (3)   The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on
adjacent property or the use of the adjacent property (e.g., excessive noise,
vibration, traffic, other disturbance, etc.) and will not have a substantial
visual impact on adjacent property.
      (4)   The proposed use is consistent with the goals, policies, standards
and maps of the General Plan and any applicable Community Plan or Specific
Plan.
      (5)   The lawful conditions stated in the approval are deemed necessary
to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4188, passed - -2012)
§ 85.18.040 Abandonment.
   Under normal occupancy, an accessory wind energy system that is not operated
for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owners
of the system shall remove all structures within 90 days of receipt of notice
from the County advising the owner of the abandonment. If the system is not
removed within 90 days, the County may remove all structures at the owner’s
expense.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 85.19: FOOD TRUCK EVENT PERMITS
Section
   
85.19.010   Purpose.
   
85.19.020   Permit Required for Food Truck Events.
§ 85.19.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a reference to regulations
governing operation of food trucks in the incorporated and unincorporated areas
of the County.
(Ord. 4170, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4280, passed - -2015)
§ 85.19.020 Permit Required for Food Truck Events.
   (a)   Health Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided by the County
Code or State or Federal law, operation of a food truck within the County shall
be subject to the permit requirements and applicable standards of §
33.0408 of the County Code, as well as applicable provisions of the California
Health and Safety Code.
   (b)   Temporary Special Events. Events involving food trucks in the
unincorporated areas of the County that meet the definition of a Temporary
Special Event set forth in §
810.01.210 shall require a Temporary Special Event Permit pursuant to
Chapter 85.16 unless otherwise exempt under
Chapter 85.16.
(Ord. 4170, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4258, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4280,
passed - -2015)
CHAPTER 85.20: UNLICENSED RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES PERMIT
Section
   
85.20.010   Purpose.
   
85.20.020   Applicability.
   
85.20.030   Procedures.
§ 85.20.010 Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide an expedited process for the
County review and authorization of small unlicensed residential care facilities
in compliance with all applicable requirements of this Development Code.
(Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 85.20.020 Applicability.
   (a)   When Required. An unlicensed residential care facilities permit shall
be required to authorize:
      (1)   Compliance with Division 2 (Land Use Zoning District and Allowed
Land Uses). The establishment of a small unlicensed residential care facility
serving six or fewer persons that is allowed by a Land Use Zoning District
subject to a residential care facilities permit in compliance with Division 2
(Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses); provided, the use complies
with all applicable performance standards identified in this Development Code
as provided in
Chapter 84.32 (Small Unlicensed Residential Care Facilities);
      (2)   An Existing Unlicensed Residential Care Facility Use. The operator
of an existing unlicensed residential care facility that does not have a permit
issued in compliance with this Chapter must seek the issuance of an unlicensed
residential care facility permit to continue the use. If the facility is not a
small unlicensed residential care facility but is serving seven or more persons
in a RM (Multiple Residential) Land Use Zoning District, the operator must seek
and obtain an approved Conditional Use Permit. The operator may also seek a
reasonable accommodation for this use.
      (3)   Change of Operator. Any time that there is a change of operators of
an existing facility a new permit must be obtained in that, contrary to other
permits required by this Code, the unlicensed residential care facility permit
is issued to the operator as opposed to the use to ensure any and all new
operators commit to complying with the standards set forth in
Chapter 84.32.
   (b)   Exempt from CEQA. An unlicensed residential care facilities permit
application shall be determined exempt from the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA) in compliance with state law and the County’s Environmental
Review Guidelines or it shall be processed as a Conditional Use Permit or Minor
Use Permit.
(Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 85.20.030 Procedures.
   (a)   Compliance with Division 5 (Permit Application and Review Procedures).
The unlicensed residential care facilities permit procedure is intended to
provide a less complex and more streamlined review than the review required for
a Conditional Use Permit or Minor Use Permit. The project planner shall review
the application in compliance with Division 5 (Permit Application and Review
Procedures).
   (b)   Procedure. Staff review without notice.
   (c)   Review Authority. Director.
   (d)   New Construction. In issuing an unlicensed residential care facilities
permit for new construction the Director shall first confirm that the request
satisfies all of the following criteria:
      (1)   The unlicensed residential care facility is in compliance with the
applicable provisions of
Chapter 84.32 (Unlicensed Residential Care Facilities) of this Development
Code; and
      (2)   The proposed site and any unlicensed residential care facility
existing on the site shall not be in violation of any applicable provision of
this Development Code, except for nonconforming uses and structures in
compliance with
Chapter 84.17 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures).
   (e)   Reuse of Existing Structure(s). In issuing an unlicensed residential
care facilities permit that proposes to establish an unlicensed residential
care facility in an existing structure, the Director shall first confirm that
the request satisfies all of the following criteria in addition to those
identified in Subdivision (d), above:
      (1)   The required number of parking spaces and driveway and parking lot
improvements shall be provided and maintained in compliance with
Chapter 83.11 (Parking and Loading Standards);
      (2)   The proposed facility and all existing structures are in compliance
with all requirements of previously approved entitlements (e.g., Minor Use
Permits, Conditional Use Permits, or Variances, etc.) including conditions of
approvals.
   (f)   On-Site Inspection. An application for an unlicensed residential care
facilities permit may require that the Director perform an on-site inspection
of the subject parcel before confirming that the request complies with all of
the applicable criteria and provisions identified in this Section.
   (g)   Contact Person. The contact information for the owner/operator of the
project will be extracted from the application of all approved permits and
posted on the Land Use Services website to include the following information:
name, mailing address, email address and phone number.
   (h)   Findings. Before granting an application for an unlicensed residential
care facilities permit, the review authority shall make the following findings:
      (1)   The project complies with all applicable performance standards
identified in this Development Code.
      (2)   There is supporting infrastructure, existing or available,
consistent with the intensity of development, to accommodate the proposed
development without significantly lowering service levels.
      (3)   The proposed use and manner of development are in compliance with
the goals, maps, policies, and standards of the General Plan, and any
applicable community plan or specific plan.
      (4)   The proposed unlicensed residential care facility and manner of
development are exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
   (i)   Rejection or Alternative Processing Required. If the review authority
cannot make the required findings listed in Subdivision (h), above, the project
will be either rejected or elevated to a minor use permit, as determined
appropriate by the Director.
   (j)   Appeal. Appeal of an unlicensed residential care facilities permit
shall be limited to the determination that the land use being requested
qualifies for the unlicensed residential care facilities permit application.
   (k)   Revocation of Permit. If, after the approval of an unlicensed
residential care facilities permit, the provisions of
Chapter 84.32 are violated, the Code Enforcement Division of the Land Use
Services Department will issue a notice of violation detailing the
discrepancies with this Development Code. If such violations are not corrected
within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of violation, the unlicensed
residential care facilities permit shall be revoked using the procedures set
forth in §
86.09.170.
(Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
CHAPTER 85.21: ADULT BUSINESS REGULATORY PERMIT
Section
   
85.21.010   Purpose
   
85.21.020   Permit Required/Applicability
   
85.21.030   Issuance of Permit/Procedures
   
85.21.040   Inspection
   
85.21.050   Suspension or Revocation of an Adult Business Regulatory Permit
   
85.21.060   Appeal Procedures
   
85.21.070   Transfer of Adult Business Regulatory Permit
   
85.21.080   Violations
   
85.21.090   Applicability of Chapter to Existing Adult Businesses
   
85.21.100   Regulations Non-Exclusive
§ 85.21.010 Purpose.
   It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide a process for the County Land
Use Services Department to review all applications submitted to the County for
an Adult Business Regulatory Permit that are in compliance with Division 2
(Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses) and the other applicable
requirements of this Development Code. This process will ensure that all adult
businesses are in compliance with all applicable regulations and will promote
the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the County, and
prevent the deleterious secondary effects of adult businesses within the
County. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any
communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is
neither the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by
adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to
their intended market.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 85.21.020 Permit Required/Applicability.
   (a)   All adult businesses are subject to the Adult Business Regulatory
Permit requirements of
Chapter 84.02, this Chapter as well as all other applicable ordinances of the
County and laws of the State of California. It shall be unlawful for any person
to establish, operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult business
within San Bernardino County unless the person first obtains, and continues to
maintain in full force and effect, an Adult Business Regulatory Permit as
herein required. Any occurrence of the “establishment” of an adult business as
defined in
Chapter 810.01 of this Title, shall require a new application for an Adult
Business Regulatory Permit. The Adult Business Regulatory Permit shall be
subject to the development and operational standards of
Chapter 84.02 of this Title and the requirements of the zoning or other land
use provisions applicable to where the facility is located.
   (b)   The Planning Commission shall grant, deny and/or renew an Adult
Business Regulatory Permit in accordance with these regulations.
   (c)   Permit applicants shall file a written, signed and verified
application at the office of the County Land Use Services Department on a form
provided by the Department. Such application shall contain the following
information and be accompanied by the following documents:
      (1)   If the permit applicant is an individual, the individual shall
state his or her legal name, including any aliases, and address, and shall
submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   If the permit applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state
the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, and
whether the partnership is general or limited; and shall attach a copy of the
partnership agreement, if any.
      (3)   If the permit applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall
provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the
corporation is in good standing under the laws of the State of California, the
names and capacities of all officers and Directors, the name of the registered
corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service of
process.
      (4)   A signed and verified statement that the permit applicant has not
pled guilty or nolo contendere to nor has the permit applicant been convicted
of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex or sex-related
offense, including crimes involving moral turpitude, prostitution, or
obscenity, subject to the following time periods:
         (A)   If a misdemeanor, more than two years have elapsed from the date
of the plea or conviction or from the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, to the date of the application; or
         (B)   If a felony, more than five years have elapsed from the date of
the plea or conviction or from the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, to the date of the application; or
         (C)   If two or more misdemeanors, the pleas or convictions occurred
within any 24-month period and more than five years have elapsed from the date
of the last plea or conviction or from the most recent date of release from
confinement for the conviction or plea, whichever is the later date, to the
date of application.
   If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, such verified statement
must be submitted by each and every partner, officer and/or director.
      (5)   The permit applicant shall provide a list of all performers and
non-performers, which includes the performer’s/non-performer’s legal name, and
mailing address, and satisfactory written proof that each performer/non-
performer is at least 18 years of age. If the Adult Business Regulatory Permit
is granted, the owner/ operator shall maintain this list with current and
updated information and shall make this list available for inspection upon
reasonable notice.
      (6)   Each performer and non-performer working for a permit applicant
shall provide the permit applicant with a signed and verified statement that
the performer or non-performer has not pled guilty or pled nolo contendere or
been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex or
sex-related offense, including crimes involving moral turpitude, prostitution,
or obscenity, within the time periods established in Subdivisions
85.21.020(c)(4)(A), (B), and (C).
      (7)   If the permit applicant intends to operate the adult business under
a name other than that of the permit applicant, the permit applicant shall file
the fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the
fictitious name.
      (8)   A description of the type of adult business for which the permit is
requested and the proposed address where the adult business will operate, plus
the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult business site.
      (9)   The address to which notice of action on the application is to be
mailed if different from the applicant’s address.
      (10)   A diagram showing the interior premises including a statement of
the total floor area occupied by the adult business. The diagram may not be
hand drawn. It must show orientation to the north or some other designated
street or object. It must be generated by a defined scale and show marked
dimensions of the premise to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
      (11)   A diagram of the off-street parking areas and entries to the
premises of the adult business, also showing the location of the lighting
system required by this Chapter.
   (d)   The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee. The amount of such fees shall be set by ordinance adopted by
the Board of Supervisors.
   (e)   The completeness of an application for an Adult Business Regulatory
Permit shall be determined by the Land Use Services Department Director (“the
Director”) within five business days of its submittal. If the Director
determines that the permit application is incomplete, the Director shall
immediately notify in writing the permit applicant of such fact and the reasons
therefor, including identifying any additional information necessary to render
the application complete. Such writing shall be deposited in the U.S. mail,
postage prepaid, immediately upon determination that the application is
incomplete. Within five business days following the receipt of an amended
application or supplemental information, the Director shall again determine
whether the application is complete in accordance with the provisions set forth
above. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided herein until such
time as the application is found to be complete.
   (f)   The fact that a permit applicant possesses other types of state or
city licenses or permits does not exempt the permit applicant from the
requirement of obtaining an Adult Business Regulatory Permit under this
Chapter.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 85.21.030 Issuance of Permit /Procedures.
   (a)   Upon the filing of a completed application for an Adult Business
Regulatory Permit, the Director shall immediately write or stamp the
application “Received” and, in conjunction with County staff, shall promptly
investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether
an Adult Business Regulatory Permit shall be granted. Investigation shall not
be grounds for the County to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed
application, nor is it grounds to extend the time period to conduct a hearing
pursuant to this Section.
   (b)   Within 21 days after the filing of a completed Adult Business
Regulatory Permit application, the investigation shall be completed. The
Director shall promptly notice a public hearing before the Planning Commission
with notice of such hearing to be made pursuant to Government Code §§ 65091 and
65905. Said public hearing shall be conducted within 30 days of the expiration
of the completed investigation period.
   (c)   In reaching a decision on the application, the Planning Commission
shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence in the Evidence Code.
   (d)   A written decision on the application for an Adult Business Regulatory
Permit shall be issued by the Planning Commission within four business days
after the public hearing required by this Section. The failure of the Planning
Commission to render any decision within the time frames established in any
part of this Section shall be deemed to constitute an approval subject to the
compliance with all operating standards of
Chapter 84.02. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be hand delivered
or mailed to the applicant at the address provided in the application, and
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Code.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provisions in this Section regarding the
occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may
request additional time beyond that provided for in this Section or may request
a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the County of the
pending application. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be
considered delay on the part of the County or constitute failure by the County
to provide for prompt decisions on applications.
   (f)   The Planning Commission shall grant or deny the application in
accordance with the provisions of this Section, and so notify the applicant as
follows:
      (1)   The Director shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the
application and date and sign such notation.
      (2)   If the application is denied, the Director shall attach to the
application a statement of the reasons for the denial.
      (3)   If the application is granted, the Director shall attach to the
application an Adult Business Regulatory Permit.
   (g)   The Planning Commission shall grant the application and issue the
Adult Business Regulatory Permit upon findings that the proposed business
meets, or will meet, all of the development, operational and environmental
performance standards of the San Bernardino County Code, unless the application
is denied based upon the noncompliance with one or more of the criteria set
forth in this Chapter.
   (h)   If the Planning Commission grants the application, the applicant may
begin operating the adult business for which the permit was sought, subject to
compliance with the development and operating standards of
Chapter 84.02; compliance with the environmental performance standards and
requirements of this Chapter. The permitee shall post the permit conspicuously
in the premises of the adult business.
   (i)   Findings. The Planning Commission shall deny the application if the
applicant fails to establish any of the following:
      (1)   The adult business complies with the County’s zoning requirements
as to its underlying zoning designation and other locational requirements.
      (2)   The adult business complies with the development, operating or
environmental performance standards found in
Chapter 84.02 of this Title.
      (3)   The permit applicant is at least 18 years of age.
      (4)   The required application fees have been paid.
      (5)   The application complies with §
85.21.020(c).
   (j)   A permittee, applicant or substantially related entity wherein the new
application is made by an individual or previous entity exercising management
or oversight or control of the adult business, cannot re-apply for an Adult
Business Regulatory Permit for a particular location within one year from the
date of prior denial.
   (k)   Any affected person may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission
in writing within ten days in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 86.08 of this Title.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 85.21.040 Inspection.
   Each owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of an
adult business or other person in charge of an adult business shall permit
representatives of the County Sheriff, Department of Public Health, Fire
Department, Land Use Services Department, business license division and other
County departments, to inspect the adult business for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the laws and operating standards applicable to adult businesses
at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspections shall be
conducted in a reasonable manner.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 85.21.050 Suspension or Revocation of an Adult Business Regulatory Permit.
   (a)   On determining that grounds for permit suspension or revocation exist,
the Director shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or
revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of
a hearing and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the
pertinent Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in
support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the
last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee
personally, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Hearings pursuant to
this Section shall be noticed in accordance with Government Code §§ 65091 and
65905 and conducted by the Planning Commission. Hearings pursuant to this
Section shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the
Planning Commission but, at a minimum, shall include the following:
      (1)   All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial,
documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be
represented by counsel.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of
evidence.
      (3)   Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable
time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the
permittee. Extensions of time or continuances sought by a permittee shall not
be considered delay on the part of the County or constitute failure by the
County to provide for prompt decisions on permit suspensions or revocations.
      (4)   The Planning Commission’s decision may be appealed in accordance
with
Chapter 86.08 of this Title.
   (b)   A permit may be suspended or revoked based on the following causes
arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee,
independent contractor, partner, operator or manager of the permittee:
      (1)   The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the adult
business fails to comply with all provisions of these regulations and this
Section relating to adult businesses, including the adult business operating
standards contained in
Chapter 84.02 and the zoning requirements of
Chapter 82.05 of this Title, and all other applicable building, fire,
electrical, plumbing, health, environmental performance standards and zoning
requirements of the San Bernardino Code.
      (2)   The permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required County
licenses or permits with respect to the business or the premises.
      (3)   The permittee has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the application for an Adult Business Regulatory
Permit.
      (4)   The permit is being used to conduct an activity different from that
for which it was issued.
      (5)   That an individual employed by, or performing in, the adult
business (whether classified as an employee or independent contractor) has been
convicted of two or more sex-related offenses that occurred in or on the
permitted premises within a 12-month period and was employed by, or performing
in, the adult business at the time the offenses were committed.
      (6)   That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to
exist, has been suspended or has not been active for six months or more.
      (7)   That the transferee/new owner of an adult business or Adult
Business Regulatory Permit failed to comply with the requirements of this
Chapter.
      (8)   The permittee, partner, director, operator, or manager has
knowingly allowed or permitted, or has failed to make a reasonable effort to
prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult
business; or a permittee has been convicted of violating any of the following
state laws on the premises of the adult business:
         (A)   Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
or masturbation.
         (B)   Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations
for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur.
         (C)   Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires
registration under Penal Code § 290.
         (D)   The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or
prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Penal Code §§
315, 316, 318 or subdivision (b) of § 647b.
         (E)   Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the Penal Code
relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors
including, but not limited to §§ 311 through 313.4.
         (F)   Any act constituting a felony involving the sale, use,
possession, or possession for sale of any controlled substance specified in
Health and Safety Code §§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058.
         (G)   An act or omission in violation of any of the requirements of
this Chapter if such act or omission is with the knowledge, authorization, or
approval of the permit holder or is as a result of the permit holder’s
negligent supervision of the employees or independent contractors of the adult
facility. This includes the allowance of activities that are or become a public
nuisance which includes the disruptive conduct of business patrons whether on
or immediately off the premises where such patrons disturb the peace, obstruct
traffic, damage property, engage in criminal conduct, violate the law and
otherwise impair the free enjoyment of life and property.
   (c)   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this
Section, if the Planning Commission finds and determines that there are grounds
for suspension or revocation, the Planning Commission shall impose one of the
following:
      (1)   Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six
months; or
      (2)   Revocation of the permit.
         The written decision shall be hand delivered or overnight mailed to
the permittee within five days of the public hearing.
   (d)   In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this Section, another
Adult Business Regulatory Permit to operate an adult business shall not be
granted to the permittee or an entity related to the permittee within 12 months
after the date of such revocation.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 85.21.060 Appeal Procedures.
   (a)   After approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a permit, any
affected person may appeal the decision to the Board of Supervisors in writing
within ten days after the written decision.
   (b)   Consideration of an appeal of the decision shall be conducted pursuant
to
Chapter 86.08 of this Title, and which hearing shall occur within 45 days of
the filing or initiation of the appeal.
   (c)   Upon the conclusion of the de novo public hearing, the Board of
Supervisors shall grant or deny the appeal. The Board of Supervisors’ decision
shall be final and conclusive and shall be rendered in writing within four
County business days of the hearing, such written decision to be mailed to the
party appealing the decision.
   (d)   In reaching its decision, the Board of Supervisors shall not be bound
by the formal rules of evidence.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any provisions in this Section regarding the
occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may
request additional time beyond that provided for in this Section or may request
a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the County of the
pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered
delay on the part of the County or constitute failure by the County to provide
for prompt decisions on applications.
   (f)   Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision to grant or
deny an appeal of a permit denial within the time frames established by this
Section shall be deemed to constitute an approval of the Adult Business
Regulatory Permit.
   (g)   The time for a court challenge to a decision of the hearing officer is
governed by Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8.
   (h)   Notice of the Board of Supervisors’ decision and its findings shall
include citation to Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8.
   (i)   Any applicant or permittee whose permit has been denied pursuant to
this Section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as
provided by Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 85.21.070 Transfer of Adult Business Regulatory Permit.
   (a)   A permit holder shall not operate an adult business under the
authority of an Adult Business Regulatory Permit at any place other than the
address of the adult business stated in the application for the permit.
   (b)   In the event of a transfer of ownership of the adult business, the new
owner shall be fully informed of the requirements of this Chapter and of
Chapter 84.02, including the operational and development standards herein.
   (c)   In the event of a transfer of the adult business or the adult business
permit, the transferee must provide the Director with the following information
within seven days of the transfer:
      (1)   If the transferee is an individual, the individual shall state his
or her legal name, including any aliases, and address, and shall submit
satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   If the transferee is a partnership, the partners shall state the
partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, and whether
the partnership is general or limited; and shall attach a copy of the
partnership agreement, if any.
      (3)   If the transferee is a corporation or L.L.C., the entity shall
provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation or organization,
evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the State of California,
the names and capacities of all officers and directors, managers or members
having supervisory or managerial control over the facility, the name of the
registered agent, and the address of the registered office for service of
process.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 85.21.080 Violations.
   (a)   Any owner, operator, manager or employee of an adult business
violating or permitting, counseling, or assisting the violation of any of the
provisions regulating adult businesses shall be subject to any and all civil
remedies, including permit revocation. All remedies provided herein shall be
cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall
constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such
violation is committed or continued.
   (b)   In addition to the remedies set forth in Subdivision (a) of this
Section, any adult business that is operating in violation of the provisions
regulating adult businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance
and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation.
   (c)   The restrictions imposed pursuant to this Section constitute a
licensing or permitting process, and do not constitute a criminal offense.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the San Bernardino County Code, the
County does not impose a criminal penalty for violations of the provisions of
this Chapter related to sexual conduct or activities.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 85.21.090 Applicability of Chapter to Existing Adult Businesses.
   (a)   Permitting Requirements. Any adult business operating in the County
prior to the effective date of this Chapter must apply for a permit under this
Chapter unless one has been previously approved.
   (B)   Interior Configuration Requirements. Any legal pre-existing adult
business that is required to, but does not, have interior configurations or
stages that meet at least the minimum requirements of
Chapter 84.02 shall have 90 days from the effective date of this Chapter to
conform its premises to said requirements.
   (c)   Other Requirements. Except as provided for in Subdivisions (a) and (b)
of this Section, an adult business shall comply with this Chapter and
Chapter 84.02 on the date that it takes effect.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
§ 85.21.100 Regulations Non-Exclusive.
   The provisions of this Chapter and
Chapter 84.02 regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and
compliance therewith shall not excuse non-compliance with any other provisions
of the County Code and/or any other regulations pertaining to the operation of
businesses as adopted by the County.
(Ord. 4239, passed - -2014)
DIVISION 6: DEVELOPMENT CODE ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 86.01: PLANNING AGENCY
Section
   
86.01.010   Establishment of Planning Agency.
   
86.01.020   Functions of Planning Agency.
   
86.01.030   Procedures.
§ 86.01.010 Establishment of Planning Agency.
   In compliance with the authority granted to local jurisdictions by the
State’s Government Code, a Planning Agency is hereby established.
   (a)   Board. The Board shall act as the Planning Agency for land use
applications that require a public hearing and legislative action, and for
those that are referred or appealed to the Board in compliance with
Table 85-1 (Review Authority),
Table 85-3 (Special Use Permits) and
Table 85-4 (Temporary Use Permits).
   (b)   Commission. The Commission shall act as the Planning Agency for land
use applications that require a public hearing and for those that are referred
or appealed to the Commission in compliance with
Table 85-1 (Review Authority),
Table 85-3 (Special Use Permits) and
Table 85-4 (Temporary Use Permits).
   (c)   Director. The Director shall act as the Planning Agency for land use
applications including those requiring a public hearing, staff review with
notice, and staff review without notice in compliance with
Table 85-1 (Review Authority),
Table 85-3 (Special Use Permits) and
Table 85-4 (Temporary Use Permits).
   (d)   Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may act in the place of
the Director for land use applications within the Director’s authority to
approve
   (e)   Compliance with
Division 5. As applicable and in compliance with
Division 5 (Permit Application and Review Procedures), other County Department
Heads when needed, as determined by the Director, shall act as the Planning
Agency for those land use applications requiring oversight by that department.
In these instances, the other County Department Heads, where applicable, shall
coordinate with the Director regarding the functions detailed by this Chapter
for the Director.
   (f)   Implementation of State Planning and Land Use Law. The Director shall
act as the Planning Agency when preparing required documents to implement State
Planning and Land Use Law (Government Code §§ 65000 et seq.), and other land
use planning related State laws.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.01.020 Functions of Planning Agency.
   (a)   Functions of Planning Agency. The Planning Agency shall be responsible
for performing all of the following functions:
      (1)   Prepare, periodically review, and revise as necessary the General
Plan.
      (2)   Implement the General Plan through actions including the
administration of community plans, land use zoning districts, specific plans,
and subdivision ordinances.
      (3)   Annually review the capital improvement program of the County and
the public works projects of other local agencies for their consistency with
the General Plan.
      (4)   Promote public interest in, comment on, and understanding of the
General Plan, and regulations relating to it.
      (5)   Consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public
utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations,
and citizens generally concerned with implementation of the General Plan.
      (6)   Promote the coordination of local plans and programs with the plans
and programs of other public agencies.
      (7)   Perform other functions as required by the Board, including
conducting studies and preparing plans other than those required or authorized
by Government Code §§ 65000 et seq.
   (b)   Compliance with the CEQA. The Planning Agency shall be responsible for
determining the adequacy of Environmental Impact Reports and other special
reports in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and
the County’s Environmental Review Procedures.
   (c)   Certification of Environmental Documents. The Planning Agency shall be
responsible for certification of Environmental Impact Reports and the filing of
either a Notice of Determination or Notice of Exemption on each approved
project.
   (d)   Review of Land Use Applications. The Planning Agency shall have the
authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove all land use
applications and make related environmental review determinations, including
the authority to impose mitigation measures as conditions of approval. The land
use applications include all designs, maps, plans, and other forms of
application for development, subdivision, or use of property.
   (e)   Commission’s Review of Need for EIR Preparation. The Planning Agency
shall only consider environmental review decisions in conjunction with the
consideration of a related project. However, the Commission may, when
necessary, consider separately the decision by the Director to require the
preparation of an Environmental Impact Report before the preparation.
   (f)   Director’s Duties. In addition to the above listed functions, the
Director, as part of the Planning Agency, shall have the following duties.
      (1)   Making investigations and reports on the design and improvements of
proposed subdivisions and other land use applications affecting the development
of real property and to make or recommend imposition of requirements or
conditions on the applications;
      (2)   The preliminary screening of projects to determine which projects
are exempt from, and which projects are subject to, the requirements of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and the preparation, filing, and
distribution of environmental documents as appropriate;
      (3)   Conducting Initial Studies and making determinations or
recommendations as to whether a Negative Declaration or Notice of Exemption
will be issued or whether an Environmental Impact Report will be required;
      (4)   Determining or recommending whether an Environmental Impact Report
on a multi-phased project that requires subsequent discretionary actions by the
County adequately describes the impacts of the phase of the project under
consideration;
      (5)   Reviewing reports to determine or recommend whether a proposed
project may have a significant adverse effect on the environment;
      (6)   Preparing documents for the implementation of State Planning and
Land Use Law (Government Code §§ 65000 et seq.) and other miscellaneous
planning related laws. These documents shall include administrative policies,
procedures, ordinances, resolutions, and land use application filing forms,
information, and requirements, and other public information documents; and
      (7)   Acting as or appointing the Zoning Administrator for purposes of
complying with Government Code §§ 65900 et seq.
   (g)   Zoning Administrator’s Duties. The duties of the Zoning Administrator
shall be in compliance with Government Code §§ 65900 et seq. and §
86.01.010(d) (Zoning Administrator), above.
   (h)   Appeal. Actions of the Director and the Zoning Administrator shall be
appealable to the Commission and then to the Board in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals). The appeal of some actions taken by the Director or
Zoning Administrator may only by the Planning Commission in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.01.030 Procedures.
   The procedures followed by the Planning Agency shall be specified by this
Development Code, including the associated administrative policies and
procedures for all application reviews.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.02: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE
Section
   
86.02.010   Establishment.
   
86.02.020   Membership.
   
86.02.030   Duties of the DRC.
   
86.02.040   Findings.
   
86.02.050   Meeting Dates and Procedures.
§ 86.02.010 Establishment.
   A Development Review Committee is hereby established to act in a technical
capacity for the Planning Agency. The Development Review Committee is referred
to in this Development Code as the DRC.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.02.020 Membership.
   (a)   Designated Members. The DRC shall consist of the following members or
their duly authorized designees:
      (1)   The Director, who shall serve as the DRC Chairperson;
      (2)   The Building Official;
      (3)   The Chief Engineer of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
District;
      (4)   The Chief of the Environmental Health Services Division;
      (5)   The County Fire Marshal;
      (6)   The County Surveyor;
      (7)   The Director of the Department of Airports;
      (8)   The Director of Public Works;
      (9)   The Director of Special Districts; and
      (10)   The Local Agency Formation Commission.
   (b)   Additional Responsibilities of the County Fire Marshal. On projects
which affect other fire agencies, departments, or organizations which are
independent of the authority, responsibilities, or jurisdiction of the County
Fire Marshal, the Fire Marshal shall coordinate and receive the comments of the
agencies, departments, or organizations and shall ensure that their comments
are considered in the examinations and recommendations of the DRC.
   (c)   Oversight by Commission Representative. In addition, the Commission
Chairperson, or other Commission member designated by the Chairperson, shall
attend and observe each meeting of the DRC. The Commission representative may
require that a project be referred to the Commission for action at a public
hearing.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.02.030 Duties of the DRC.
   It shall be the duty of the DRC to review and make recommendations to the
Planning Agency regarding any of the following matters:
   (a)   Tentative Maps. All Tentative Maps involving five or more parcels,
including those specifically exempted from the requirement for a Final Map.
   (b)   Planned Development Permits. All Planned Development Permits.
   (c)   Associated Land Use Applications. Any associated land use application
that is related to a project already being reviewed by the DRC, including
requests for a General Plan amendment or Variance.
   (d)   As Directed by the Planning Agency. Any other project or action deemed
by the Planning Agency to require the review and recommendation of the DRC.
   (e)   Review by the DRC. The DRC shall review and identify the technical
design features which are necessary to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare, including adequate traffic and pedestrian circulation, proper grading,
and proper erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation, or flood
damage to off-site property. In addition, the DRC shall consider the adequacy
of existing public facilities and services and any fire-hazard problems that
may pose a threat to life, property, or the environment.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.02.040 Findings.
   The DRC recommendation for approval, disapproval, or modifications to the
development project shall be based upon the applicable findings required and
provisions imposed by this Development Code and State law.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.02.050 Meeting Dates and Procedures.
   The Director shall establish regular meeting dates and rules of procedure
for the DRC. The dates and procedures shall be available to the public in
appropriate formats and locations to properly inform interested persons or
groups.
   (a)   Meetings Open to the Public. All DRC meetings shall be open to the
public and any applicant, developer, property owner, subdivider, official of
any agency, department organization, or other person interested in a
development project may attend any meeting and present appropriate testimony.
   (b)   Notification Required. The applicant, developer, engineer, subdivider,
or other applicant-designated representative shall be notified of the date,
time, and place of the meeting by written notification placed in the U.S. mail
at least ten days before the first DRC meeting at which the development project
is to be considered. The notification may be waived by the applicant,
developer, engineer, subdivider, or applicant-designated representative where
necessary to expedite review of a development project. Notice shall also be
given to any individual association, group, or organization that has requested
in writing notification of meetings and hearings regarding the specific project
or that have caused themselves to be properly placed on a mailing list for all
DRC agendas.
   (c)   Recommendation by Written Report. All agencies, departments, offices,
and officers shall submit to the DRC their recommendations relative to the
development projects or subdivisions being discussed at each meeting. Wherever
possible, these reports should be in writing and in sufficient detail that all
interested parties will be properly informed in detail as to the recommended
requirements, map revisions, and proposed conditions of approval.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.03: ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
Section
   
86.03.010   Establishment.
   
86.03.020   Membership.
   
86.03.030   Stipend and Expenses.
   
86.03.040   Duties of the ERC.
   
86.03.050   Meeting Dates and Procedures.
§ 86.03.010 Establishment.
   An Environmental Review Committee is hereby established to act in a
technical advisory capacity for the Planning Agency. The Environmental Review
Committee is referred to in this Development Code as the ERC.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.03.020 Membership.
   (a)   Designated Members.
      (1)   The ERC shall consist of membership as determined by the Director,
who shall serve as the ERC Chairperson unless otherwise designated by the
Director.
      (2)   When the Director deems it applicable, members of the DRC,
representatives of affected agencies, departments, or expert technical advisors
may also serve as members of the ERC.
   (b)   Oversight by Commission Representative. In addition, the Commission
Chairperson, or other Commission member designated by the Chairperson, shall
attend and observe each meeting of the ERC. The Commissioner may require that a
project be referred to the Commission for action at a public hearing.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.03.030 Stipend and Expenses.
   Any individual who is assigned by the Director to serve as a member of the
ERC and who is not an agent, designee, or representative of an agency,
department, or office of the County, or other governmental agency or local
jurisdiction, shall receive the same stipend and expenses allowed for the
Commission.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.03.040 Duties of the ERC.
   (a)   Act on All Referred Projects. The ERC shall act on all projects
referred to it by the Planning Agency.
   (b)   Make Recommendations Regarding Environmental Concerns. The ERC shall
review and make recommendations to the Planning Agency regarding environmental
concerns in compliance with the provisions of this Development Code.
   (c)   Consider Adequacy of EIR. The ERC shall also consider the adequacy of
any Environmental Impact Report, which is being reviewed by the ERC, including
the identification of any significant adverse effects, possible mitigation
measures, and alternatives to the proposed project.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.03.050 Meeting Dates and Procedures.
   The ERC shall meet when needed, as determined by the Director, and comply
with the following procedures.
   (a)   Meetings Open to Public. All ERC meetings shall be open to the public
and any applicant, developer, property owner, subdivider, official of any
agency, department, organization, or other person interested in a development
project may attend any meeting and present appropriate testimony.
   (b)   Notification Required. The applicant, developer, engineer, subdivider,
or other applicant-designated representative shall be notified of the date,
time, and place of the meeting by written notification placed in the U.S. mail
at least ten days before the first ERC meeting at which the development project
is to be considered. Notice shall also be given to any individual association,
group, or organization that has requested in writing notification of meetings
and hearings regarding the specific project or that have caused themselves to
be properly placed on a mailing list for all ERC agendas.
   (c)   Recommendation by Written Report. All agencies, departments, offices,
and officers shall submit to the ERC their recommendations relative to the
development projects or subdivisions being discussed at each meeting. Wherever
possible, these reports should be in writing and in sufficient detail that all
interested parties will be properly informed in detail as to the recommended
requirements, map revisions, proposed conditions of approval, and any proposed
environmental action or determination.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.04: FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
Section
   
86.04.010   Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 86.04.010 Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
   (a)   Appointment of Floodplain Administrator. The Director of Public Works
is hereby appointed as the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement
the flood management provisions of this County Code by granting or disapproving
floodplain development permits in compliance with its provisions.
   (b)   Coordination in Performance of Duties. The Floodplain Administrator,
or an appropriate designee, shall work in close coordination with the Director
in the oversight of floodplain development and performance of the
Administrator's designated duties.
   (c)   Duties and Responsibilities. The duties and responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator, or an appropriate designee, shall include all of the
following.
      (1)   Permit Review.
         (A)   Review all permits for floodplain development to determine that
the requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied, including determination
of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures.
         (B)   Require that all other required Federal and State approvals and
permits be obtained.
         (C)   Determine whether the site is reasonably safe from flooding.
         (D)   Ensure that the proposed development does not adversely affect
the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined
but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the County.
         (E)   Ensure that all Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs) for flood
control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits.
Building permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map
Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood
control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of
construction" definition.
      (2)   Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has
not been provided, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from
Federal, State, or other sources, in order to administer the development
standards and provisions established by the Floodplain Safety Overlay.
      (3)   Alteration or Relocation of Watercourses. Whenever a watercourse is
to be altered or relocated and is within a Floodplain Safety Overlay, or within
an area identified as subject to flooding in any County approved Flood Hazard
Study, the Floodplain Administrator, or an appropriate designee, shall:
         (A)   Provide Proper Notification. Notify adjacent communities and the
California Department of Water Resources before the alteration or relocation of
a watercourse and submit evidence of the notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration. The responsibility of providing the notification shall rest
with the Department for development projects and the Flood Control District for
their respective projects; and
         (B)   Require that Flood-Carrying Capacity is Maintained. Require that
the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the
watercourse is maintained.
      (4)   Base Flood Elevation Changes Due to Physical Alterations. The
Floodplain Administrator shall:
         (A)   Require applicants who propose to undertake development
activities that change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or
floodway designations to provide hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses
necessary to submit a Letter of Map Change to FEMA; such submissions shall be
made within 6 months of such data becoming available.
         (B)   The Letter of Map Change analyses shall be prepared by a
qualified California Licensed Civil Engineer in a format required by FEMA.
Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant. Provided FEMA issues a Conditional Letter of Map Revision,
construction of proposed flood control projects and land preparation for
development are permitted, including clearing, excavation, grading, and
filling. Permits for construction of buildings shall not be issued until the
applicant satisfies the FEMA requirements for issuance of a Letter of Map
Revision.
      (5)   Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever
the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and
include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate
limits.
      (6)   Determine Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage. For
applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures,
including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, additions,
rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial
damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures,
the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official,
shall:
         (A)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made.
         (B)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair
the damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, when applicable, to the market value of the building
or structure.
         (C)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage.
         (D)   Notify the applicant when it is determined that the work
constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that
compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the building
code is required and notify the applicant when it is determined that work does
not constitute substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage.
      (7)   Inspections. All development for which a floodplain development
permit is required shall be subject to inspection. For buildings and
structures, certification of the lowest floor elevation shall be prepared by a
California Licensed Land Surveyor or Civil Engineer and submitted to the
building official and the Floodplain Administrator.
      (8)   Interpret Exact Location of Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of
the boundary may appeal the interpretation in compliance with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings).
      (9)   Planning. Ensure that the County's General Plan is consistent with
floodplain management objectives.
      (10)   Non-Conversion of Enclosed Areas below the Lowest Floor. Ensure
that the areas below the base flood elevation are used solely for parking
vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and not be finished for
use as human habitation without first becoming fully compliant with the
floodplain development standards in effect at the time of conversion by:
         (A)   Determining which applicants for new construction and/or
substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are five feet or higher;
         (B)   Entering into a "Non-Conversion Agreement for Construction
within Flood Hazard Area" or equivalent with the property owner who has such a
structure. The agreement shall be recorded with the County Recorder as a deed
restriction. The non-conversion agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the
Floodplain Administrator and County Counsel; and
         (C)   Inspecting any area of a structure below the base flood
elevation.
      (11)   Prosecute Violations. Take action to prosecute violations of the
flood safety provisions of this County Code as specified in
Chapter 82.14 (Floodplain Safety Overlay).
      (12)   Maintain Certifications and Records. Obtain and permanently keep
and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the
administration of these regulations, including: Flood Insurance Studies and
Flood Insurance Rate Maps; documents from FEMA that amend or revise FIRMs;
records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether
proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial
damage; required certifications and documentation for developments within the
Floodplain Overlay to include certifications for lowest floor elevation;
notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the State related to
alterations of watercourses; assurance that the flood carrying capacity of
altered waterways will be maintained; documentation related to variances,
including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement
actions.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4469,
passed - -2024)
CHAPTER 86.05: DECISIONS BY THE REVIEW AUTHORITY
Section
   
86.05.010   Referral to Next Succeeding Review Authority.
§ 86.05.010 Referral to Next Succeeding Review Authority.
   (a)   Referral by Review Authority. A review authority may refer a request
for a land use decision to the review authority designated as the appeal body
for that type of land use application in compliance with §
85.01.030 (Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions).
   (b)   Recommendation by Commission. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Subdivision (a) above, the Commission shall make its recommendation to the
Board or shall state the reasons why it cannot do so.
   (c)   Request for Action by Appeal Body. An applicant for a land use
decision may waive their option for a decision by any review authority other
than the Commission and request that the application be reviewed by the appeal
body for that type of land use application in compliance with §
85.01.030 (Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions).
   (d)   Commission’s Action on Referrals. Any land use decision made by the
Commission as a result of a referral in compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter shall be made at a public hearing.
   (e)   Board’s Action on Legislative Acts. All land use decisions that
require a legislative act before their approval or disapproval shall be
referred to the Board for final action.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.06: TIME LIMITATIONS
Section
   
86.06.010   Purpose.
   
86.06.020   Effective Date of Permits.
   
86.06.030   Applications Deemed Approved.
   
86.06.040   Permits to Run with the Land.
   
86.06.050   Performance Guarantees.
   
86.06.060   Time Limits and Extensions.
   
86.06.070   Changes to an Approved Project.
   
86.06.080   Resubmittals.
   
86.06.090   Covenants of Easements.
§ 86.06.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides requirements for the implementation or “exercising” of
the permits and authorizations required by this Development Code, including
time limits and procedures for granting extensions of time.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.06.020 Effective Date of Permits.
   (a)   Effective Date for Planning Permits and Other Approvals. Except in the
case of an amendment (
Chapter 86.12) or development agreement (
Chapter 86.13), final action on any planning approval (e.g., appeal, permit,
Variance, or other entitlement) shall become effective on the eleventh day
following the date of application approval, where no appeal of the approval has
been filed in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
   (b)   When the Tenth Day Is Not a County Business Day. When the tenth day is
not a County business day, the decision shall instead become effective on the
second consecutive County business day following the tenth day.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009)
§ 86.06.030 Applications Deemed Approved.
   A planning permit application for a parcel that is deemed approved by
operation of law in compliance with Government Code § 65956 shall be subject to
all applicable provisions of this Development Code, which shall be satisfied by
the applicant before a Building Permit is issued or a land use not requiring a
Building Permit is established.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.06.040 Permits to Run with the Land.
   A Conditional Use Permit, Minor Use Permit, Site Plan Permit, Major or Minor
Variance, Planned Development Permit, or Special Use Permit approval that is
granted in compliance with
Division 5 (Permit Application and Review Procedures) shall be deemed to run
with the land through any change of ownership of the subject site, from the
effective date of the permit, except in any case where a permit expires and
becomes void in compliance with this Chapter. All applicable conditions of
approval shall continue to apply after a change in property ownership.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009)
§ 86.06.050 Performance Guarantees.
   (a)   Deposit of Security.
      (1)   As a condition of approval of a Conditional Use Permit, Minor Use
Permit, Major or Minor Variance, Planned Development Permit, Special Use
Permit, Temporary Special Event Permit, Temporary Use Permit, or upon a finding
that the County’s health, safety, and welfare warrant, the review authority may
require the execution of a covenant to deposit security, and the deposit of
security in a reasonable amount to ensure the faithful performance of one or
more of the conditions of approval of the Conditional Use Permit, Minor Use
Permit, Major or Minor Variance, Planned Development Permit, Special Use
Permit, Temporary Special Event Permit, or Temporary Use Permit in the event
that the obligor fails to perform.
      (2)   The applicant/owner may elect to provide adequate security for the
faithful performance of a condition(s) of approval imposed as part of the
approval process if the Director determines that the condition(s) may be
implemented at a later specified date (e.g., inability to install required
landscaping due to poor weather conditions).
      (3)   The security shall, as required by law or otherwise at the option
of the County, be in the form of cash, a certified or cashier’s check, letter
of credit, a performance bond or other form of surety executed by the applicant
and a corporate surety authorized to do business in California and approved by
the County.
      (4)   The security shall remain in effect until all of the secured
conditions have been performed to the satisfaction of the Director.
      (5)   Any security required in compliance with this Section shall be
payable to the County.
   (b)   Release of Security. Upon satisfactory compliance with all applicable
provisions of this Section, the security deposit shall be released.
   (c)   Failure to Comply.
      (1)   Upon failure to perform any secured condition, the County may
perform the condition, or cause it to be done, and may collect from the
obligor, and surety in case of a bond, all costs incurred, including
administrative, engineering, legal, and inspection costs.
      (2)   Any unused portion of the security shall be refunded to the obligor
after deduction of the cost of the work.
      (3)   To the extent that the Director can demonstrate that the obligor
willfully breached an obligation in a manner that the obligor knew, or should
have known, would create irreparable harm to the County, the entire amount of
the bond or deposit may be withheld.
      (4)   The Director’s determination may be appealed to the Board by the
obligor by filing an appeal with the Clerk of the Board within ten days after
the decision to withhold the bond, in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.06.060 Time Limits and Extensions.
   (a)   Time Limits.
      (1)   Specified Item Shall Be Exercised Within 36 Months. Unless a
condition of approval or other provision of this Development Code establishes a
different time limit, a Conditional Use Permit, Minor Use Permit, Major or
Minor Variance, Planned Development Permit, Tentative Parcel Map or Tentative
Tract Map not exercised within 36 months of the actual date of the decision
granting the permit or authorization shall expire and become void, except where
an extension of time is approved in compliance with Subdivision (b) (Extensions
of Time), below.
      (2)   Specified Item Shall Be Exercised Within 12 Months. Unless another
provision of this Development Code establishes a different time limit, a Site
Plan Permit, Special Use Permit, or Temporary Use Permit not exercised within
12 months of the actual date of the decision granting the permit or
authorization shall expire and become void, except where an extension of time
is approved in compliance with Subdivision (b) (Extensions of Time), below.
      (3)   Definition of “Exercised.” The permit or authorization shall not be
deemed “exercised” until the permittee has commenced actual construction or
alteration under a valid Building Permit, or has substantially commenced the
approved activity or allowed use on the site in compliance with the conditions
of approval, in cases where a Building Permit is not required.
      (4)   Run with the Land. After it has been exercised, a planning permit
or authorization shall remain valid and run with the land in compliance with §
86.06.040 (Permits to Run with the Land), as long as a Building Permit is
active for the project, and after a final building inspection or Certificate of
Occupancy has been granted.
      (5)   Phased Projects.
         (A)   Projects Other than Planned Development Permits. If a project
(other than a Planned Development Permit) is to be developed in approved
phases, each subsequent phase shall be exercised within 36 months from the date
that the previous phase was exercised, unless otherwise specified in the permit
or authorization, or the permit or authorization shall expire and become void,
except where an extension of time is approved in compliance with Subdivision
(b). (Extensions of time), below. If the project also involves the approval of
a Tentative Map, the phasing shall be consistent with the Tentative Map and the
permit or authorization shall be exercised before the expiration of the
Tentative Map, or the permit or authorization shall expire and become void
         (B)   Planned Development Permits. Notwithstanding the above
provisions of this Section, a conditionally approved Planned Development Permit
for a phased project shall be subject to a time limitation not to exceed that
specified by the condition of approval for the Development Plan approval. The
applicant, however, shall either record a tract map or obtain Building Permits
for at least one phase of the project within five years of the Development Plan
conditional approval and, as applicable, within each succeeding five-year
period. Each five-year period shall begin with the last County approved action
that was accomplished (e.g., recordation of a tract map, obtain a Building
Permit).
      (6)   First Amendment Protected Businesses.
         (A)   Time Limits for First Amendment Protected Businesses. The
Director shall accept as complete, or disapprove as incomplete, the application
for a Conditional Use Permit for a business protected by the First Amendment
within 30 days from the date on which an application is submitted to the
Director. The Director shall approve or disapprove the completed Conditional
Use Permit application within 90 days of its acceptance as complete by the
Director. The time limit established by this Section may be extended once for a
period not to exceed 90 days upon consent of the Director and the applicant.
         (B)   Compliance with Permit Streamlining Act. If the permit requested
is for a development project for construction or reconstruction subject to the
Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code §§ 65920 et seq.), the time limits
provided in the Permit Streamlining Act shall apply to the Conditional Use
Permit approval or disapproval.
         (C)   Time Limits for Appeals. Upon the filing of an appeal in
compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals), the Commission or the Board shall render its decision
on the appeal within 60 days.
   (b)   Extensions of Time. Upon written request by the applicant, the County
may extend the time for a planning permit or authorization to be exercised.
      (1)   Time for Filing of Request. The applicant shall file a written
request for an extension of time with the Director at least 30 days before the
expiration of the permit or authorization, together with the filing fee
required in compliance with the County Fee Ordinance.
       (2)   Action on Extension Request. A permit or authorization may be
extended as follows for no more than a total of 36 months for those
applications listed in §
86.06.060(a)(1) and (2) above, except as noted below, beyond the expiration of
the original approval.
         (A)   Evidence to Be Provided. The Director shall determine whether
the applicant has made a good faith effort to exercise the permit or
authorization. The burden of proof is on the applicant to establish, with
substantial evidence, that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant
(e.g., demonstrated problems with completing the acquisition of the parcel,
poor weather during periods of planned construction, etc.) have prevented
exercising the permit or authorization.
         (B)   Recommendations for Denial and Revocations. Recommendations for
denial of a request for extension, and revocations of permits, shall be
referred to the Zoning Administrator or the Planning Commission for public
hearing and determination.
         (C)   Exceptional or Extraordinary Circumstances. Under exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances, one or more extensions may be granted in addition
to that provided in §
86.06.060(b)(2). In addition to the existence of exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances, the applicant must show that unreasonable delay to the project,
if any, was not caused by the applicant.
         (D)   Findings. Requests for extensions shall only be granted if
findings can be made that the project is consistent with the provisions of the
General Plan and the San Bernardino County Code in effect at the time the
extension request is considered.
         (E)   Phased Projects. This Subdivision shall not be applied to extend
the time limits provided in §
86.06.060(a)(5)(B), above.
       (3)   Action on extension of a project subject to the Subdivision Map
Act. The expiration date of a Tentative Map may only be extended in compliance
with the Map Act § 66452.6.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.06.070 Changes to an Approved Project.
   Development of a new land use authorized through a planning permit or
authorization granted in compliance with this Development Code shall be
established only as approved by the review authority, and in compliance with
any conditions of approval, except where a change to the project is approved in
compliance with
Chapter 85.12 (Revisions to an Approved Action).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.06.080 Resubmittals.
   (a)   Resubmittal after Disapproval with Prejudice.
      (1)   The review authority may disapprove an application for a
discretionary planning permit or amendment, on the grounds that two or more
similar applications for the same parcel have been disapproved in the past two
years (e.g., disapproval with prejudice), or that another cause exists for
limiting the refiling of the application.
      (2)   For a period of 12 months following the date of the disapproval
with prejudice of a discretionary planning permit or amendment, no application
for the same or substantially similar planning permit or amendment shall be
filed for the same site, or any portion of the site, except where the Director
determines that substantial new evidence or proof of changed circumstances
warrants further consideration.
   (b)   Resubmittal after Disapproval Without Prejudice. There shall be no
limitation on subsequent applications for a site where a project was
disapproved without prejudice.
   (c)   Director’s determination, appeal. The Director shall determine whether
a new application is for a planning permit or amendment that is the same or
substantially similar to a previously approved or disapproved permit or
amendment, and shall either process or reject the application in compliance
with this Section. The Director’s determination may be appealed to the
Commission in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.06.090 Covenants of Easements.
   (a)   Applicability. When necessary to achieve the land use goals of the
County, the County may require a property owner holding property in common
ownership to execute and record a Covenant of Easement in favor of the County,
in compliance with Government Code §§ 65870 et seq. A Covenant of Easement may
be:
      (1)   Required to provide for emergency access, ingress and egress,
landscaping, light and air access, open space, parking, or for solar access;
and
      (2)   Imposed as a condition of approval by the review authority.
   (b)   Form of Covenant. The form of the Covenant shall be approved by the
County Counsel, and the Covenant of Easement shall:
      (1)   Describe the real property subject to the easement and the real
property to be benefitted by the easement;
      (2)   Identify the County approval or planning permit granted that relied
on or required the Covenant; and
      (3)   Identify the purposes of the easement.
   (c)   Recordation. A Covenant of Easement shall be recorded in the County
Recorder’s Office.
   (d)   Effect of covenant.
      (1)   From and after the time of its recordation, a Covenant of Easement
shall:
         (A)   Act as an easement in compliance with Civil Code §§ 801 et seq.,
except that it shall not merge into any other interest in the real property.
Civil Code § 1104 shall be applicable to the conveyance of the affected real
property; and
         (B)   Impart notice to all persons to the extent afforded by the
recording laws of the State.
      (2)   Upon recordation, the burdens of the Covenant shall be binding on,
and the Covenant shall benefit all successors-in-interest to the real property.
   (e)   Enforceability. A Covenant of Easement shall be enforceable by the
successors-in-interest to the real property benefitted by the Covenant and the
County. Nothing in this Section creates standing in any person, other than the
County, and any owner of the real property burdened or benefitted by the
Covenant, to enforce or to challenge the Covenant or any requested amendment or
release.
   (f)   Release of Covenant. A Covenant of Easement may be released by the
Director, or by another appropriate review authority in the event of an appeal,
at the request of any person, including the County, or an affected property
owner.
      (1)   Process for Release. The release of a Covenant of Easement shall
require that the review authority first:
         (A)   Conduct a noticed public hearing in compliance with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings); and
         (B)   Find that the Covenant on the site is no longer necessary to
achieve the land use goals of the County.
      (2)   Recordation. A notice of the release of the Covenant of Easement
shall be recorded by the Director in the County Recorder’s Office.
      (3)   Fees. The applicant for a release of a Covenant of Easement shall
pay the fee for the processing of the release in compliance with the Planning
Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.07: PUBLIC HEARINGS
Section
   
86.07.010   Purpose.
   
86.07.020   Notice of Hearing.
   
86.07.030   Scheduling of Hearing.
   
86.07.040   Hearing Procedure.
   
86.07.050   Recommendation by Commission.
   
86.07.060   Post-Decision Notice.
   
86.07.070   Effective Date of Decision.
§ 86.07.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides procedures for public hearings required by this
Development Code and State law. When a public hearing is required, advance
notice of the hearing shall be given, and the hearing shall be conducted, in
compliance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.07.020 Notice of Hearing.
   When this Development Code requires a public hearing before a decision on a
permit, or for another matter, the public shall be provided notice of the
hearing in compliance with Government Code §§ 65090, 65091, 65092, 65093, and
65094, and Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq., and as required by this
Chapter.
   (a)   Content of Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include all of the
following information, as applicable.
      (1)   Hearing Information. The date, time, and place of the hearing and
the name of the review authority; a brief description of the County’s general
procedure concerning the conduct of hearings and decisions (e.g., the public’s
right to appear and be heard); and the phone number and street address of the
Department, where an interested person could call or visit to obtain additional
information.
      (2)   Project Information. The date of filing of the application and the
name of the applicant; the County’s file number assigned to the application; a
general explanation of the matter to be considered; and a general description,
in text and/or by diagram, of the location of the property that is the subject
of the hearing.
      (3)   Statement on Environmental Document. If a proposed Negative
Declaration or final Environmental Impact Report has been prepared for the
project in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and
the County’s Environmental Review Procedures, the hearing notice shall include
a statement that the review authority will also consider approval of the
proposed Negative Declaration or certification of the final Environmental
Impact Report.
   (b)   Method of Notice Distribution. Notice of a public hearing required by
this Chapter for a planning permit, amendment, or appeal shall be given as
follows, as required by Government Code §§ 65090 and 65091.
      (1)   Mailing. Notice shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days
before the scheduled hearing to the following:
         (A)   Project Site Owners. The owners of the property being considered
in the application, or the owners’ agent, and the applicant;
         (B)   Local Agencies. Each local agency expected to provide roads,
schools, sewage, streets, water, or other essential facilities or services to
the property which is the subject of the application, whose ability to provide
those facilities and services may be significantly affected;
         (C)   Affected Owners. All owners of real property as shown on the
latest equalized assessment roll, within a specified radius of the exterior
boundaries of the parcel that is the subject of the hearing; and any other
person whose property might, in the judgment of the Director, be affected by
the proposed project; and
         (D)   Persons Requesting Notice. Any person who has filed a written
request for notice with the Director and has paid the required fee for the
notice in compliance with the Planning Fee Schedule.
      (2)   Alternative to Mailing. If the number of property owners to whom
notice would be mailed in compliance with §
86.07.020(b)(1), above is more than 1,000, the Director may choose to provide
the alternative notice allowed by Government Code § 65091(a)(3).
      (3)   Publication. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper
of general circulation within the local agency at least ten days before the
scheduled hearing.
      (4)   Additional Notice. In addition to the types of notice required
above, the Director may provide any additional notice with content or using a
distribution method (e.g., posting on the County’s web site) as the Director
determines is necessary or desirable.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.07.030 Scheduling of Hearing.
   After the completion of any environmental document required by the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the County’s Environmental
Review Procedures, and a Department staff report, a matter requiring a public
hearing shall be scheduled by the Director (when acting as the Zoning
Administrator), Commission, or Board agenda (as applicable) for a date reserved
for public hearings as soon as possible.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.07.040 Hearing Procedure.
   (a)   Time and Place of Hearing. A hearing shall be held at the date, time,
and place for which notice was given.
   (b)   Continued Hearing. Any hearing may be continued from time to time
without further notice; provided, the chairperson of the hearing body announces
the date, time, and place to which the hearing will be continued before the
adjournment or recess of the hearing.
   (c)   Deferral of Final Decision. The review authority may announce a
tentative decision, and defer their action on a final decision until
appropriate findings and/or conditions of approval have been prepared.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.07.050 Recommendation by Commission.
   After a public hearing on a proposed legislative act (e.g., amendment to the
General Plan, this Development Code, a development agreement, a specific plan,
a Planned Development, or an action referred to the Board by the Commission)
the recommendation and findings of the Commission shall be forwarded to the
Board. A copy of the recommendation shall be mailed to the applicant at the
address shown on the application.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.07.060 Post-Decision Notice.
   Post-decision notice shall be accomplished in compliance with §
85.03.110 (Post-Decision Notice).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.07.070 Effective Date of Decision.
   The decision of the Director or Commission is final and effective in
compliance with §
86.06.020 (Effective Date of Permits), unless an appeal is filed in compliance
with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals). The decision of the Board is final and effective on
the day of action, unless otherwise required by State law.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.08: APPEALS
Section
   
86.08.010   Appeal of a Land Use Decision.
   
86.08.020   Application for the Appeal of a Land Use Decision.
   
86.08.030   Time for Filing an Appeal.
   
86.08.040   Notice of Appeal.
   
86.08.050   Authority of Appeal Body.
   
86.08.060   Withdrawal of Appeal.
   
86.08.070   Judicial Review.
§ 86.08.010 Appeal of a Land Use Decision.
   Before its effective date, in compliance with §
86.06.020 (Effective Date of Permits), any land use decision made in compliance
with the provisions of this Development Code by a review authority other than
the Board may be appealed by the applicant or other affected party in the
following manner.
   (a)   Director’s Decision to Require an EIR. The Director’s decision to
require preparation of an Environmental Impact Report is subject to appeal to
the Commission for final decision.
   (b)   Commission’s Decisions.
      (1)   Land Use Decisions. The Commission shall consider appeals regarding
land use decisions made by any County agency, department, office, officer, or
official.
      (2)   Decisions Exempt from Appeal to the Board Following a Commission
Decision. The Commission may refer consideration of an appeal to the Board,
except for the following:
         (A)   The following matters may not be referred or appealed to the
Board:
            (I)   The determination as to the completeness of an application,
in compliance with Government Code § 65643;
            (II)   The determination to approve or disapprove an Accessory Wind
Energy Permit;
            (III)   The determination to approve or disapprove a Home
Occupation Permit;
            (IV)   The determination to approve or disapprove a Short-Term
Residential Rental Permit;
            (V)   The requirement for preparation of an Environmental Impact
Report;
            (VI)   Variances; or
            (VII)   The determination to approve or disapprove a reasonable
accommodation request.
         (B)   In these instances the Commission’s decision shall be the final
and conclusive decision.
         (C)   The Board will not accept nor consider an appeal of these
Commission decisions.
   (c)   Board’s Considerations.
      (1)   The Board shall consider appeals regarding land use decisions made
by the Commission, except as specified in §
86.08.010(b)(2), above.
      (2)   The Board shall only conduct hearings regarding an EIR or other
environmental action in conjunction with consideration of the subject land use
application and project for which the EIR was prepared or other environmental
action proposed.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4169, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4331,
passed - -2017)
§ 86.08.020 Application for the Appeal of a Land Use Decision.
   (a)   Appropriate Forms. Applications for an appeal of a land use decision
shall be made on forms supplied by the review authority to which the appeal is
being made.
   (b)   Appeal Submittals. Applications for appeals addressed to the
Commission shall be submitted to the Land Use Services Department. Applications
for appeals addressed to the Board shall be submitted to the Clerk of the
Board.
   (c)   Grounds for Appeal. Applications for appeals shall include a written
statement of the grounds upon which the appeal is based.
   (d)   Appeal Fees. A uniform fee, as established by the Board, shall be paid
to the County upon the filing of each appeal in compliance with the Planning
Fee Schedule.
   (e)   Contents of Appeal Application. The appeal application shall identify:
      (1)   The subject land use application;
      (2)   The specific decision, condition of approval, or other matter being
appealed;
      (3)   The date of the action;
      (4)   The justification for the appeal; and
      (5)   Any remedy or solution for which the appellant petitions.
   (f)   Appeal Shall Stay All Proceedings. A properly filed application for
appeal shall stay the proceedings in the matter appealed until a decision is
rendered on the appeal.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.08.030 Time for Filing an Appeal.
   The Director or, in the case of an appeal to the Board, the Clerk of the
Board, shall be notified by the appellant of an appeal of a land use
application decision before the date on which the land use application decision
becomes effective. The appellant shall submit at the time of the notification,
or on the next County business day following the notification, an application
for the appeal.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.08.040 Notice of Appeal.
   (a)   Notice of Appeal Required. Within 30 days of the acceptance of an
application for an appeal of a land use decision, the Director or the Clerk of
the Board shall set the matter for hearing and shall give notice of the date,
time, and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and to any
other party who has requested in writing to be so notified.
   (b)   Same Notice as Originally Required. In addition, notice shall also be
given in the same manner as notice was given for the land use decision being
appealed.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.08.050 Authority of Appeal Body.
   (a)   Action on Appeal. Upon hearing the appeal, the appeal body shall
consider the record and any additional evidence that may be offered, and may
affirm, reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, the decision appealed.
   (b)   Applicable Criteria, Findings, and Requirements. The appeal body is
subjected to all of the criteria, findings, and requirements imposed by this
Development Code upon the original decision maker (e.g., review authority).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.08.060 Withdrawal of Appeal.
   An appeal may be withdrawn before the time that the review authority issues
a decision. The applicant or the applicant’s representative shall notify the
Department in writing that they wish to withdraw the appeal.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.08.070 Judicial Review.
   No person shall seek judicial review of a County decision on a planning
permit or other matter in compliance with this Development Code until all
appeals to the Commission and Board have been first exhausted in compliance
with this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.09: ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
86.09.010    Purpose.
   
86.09.020    Permits and Licenses.
   
86.09.030    Authority for Enforcement.
   
86.09.040   Unlawful to Violate Development Code Provisions.
   
86.09.050    Violations of the Development Code Declared Public Nuisance.
   
86.09.060    Unlawful to Refuse or Fail to Comply with Conditions of Land Use
Approval.
   
86.09.070   Property Not in Compliance with Conditions of Land Use Approval
Declared a Public Nuisance.
   
86.09.080    Enforcement.
   
86.09.090    Criminal Actions.
   
86.09.100    Civil Actions.
   
86.09.110    Administrative Citation Actions.
   
86.09.120    Filing a Notice of Pendency.
   
86.09.130    Filing a Notice of Action.
   
86.09.140    Initial Investigation Procedures.
   
86.09.150    Inspections.
   
86.09.160    Stop Work Orders.
   
86.09.170    Revocation or Modification of Permits or Approvals.
   
86.09.180    Recovery of Costs.
   
86.09.190    Additional Permit Processing Fees.
   
86.09.200    Reinspection Fees.
   
86.09.210    Documentation.
§ 86.09.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes provisions that are intended to ensure compliance
with the requirements of this Development Code and any conditions of planning
permit approval, to promote the County’s planning efforts, and for the
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.020 Permits and Licenses.
   All departments, officials, and public employees of the County who are
assigned the authority or duty to issue authorizations, certificates, licenses,
or permits shall comply with the provisions of this Development Code.
   (a)   Permits in Conflict with Development Code. Authorizations,
certificates, licenses, or permits for uses or structures that would be in
conflict with the provisions of this Development Code shall not be issued.
   (b)   Permits Deemed Void. Any authorization, certificate, license, or
permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this Development Code shall be
void and of no effect.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.030 Authority for Enforcement.
   (a)   Responsibility of Director. The Director, the Deputy Director of the
Code Enforcement Division, and their designated employees and representatives
shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Development Code.
   (b)   Responsibility of Additional, Authorized County Representatives. The
Director shall be aided in this enforcement responsibility by the officers and
authorized representatives of the County agencies, departments, and offices
charged with the responsibility of administering, implementing, and ensuring
compliance with the provisions of this Development Code. Among these are the
following designated enforcement officers:
      (1)   Assistant Administrative Officer for Public and Support Services
Group.
      (2)   Chief, County Fire Department.
      (3)   Chief Engineer of the San Bernardino County Flood Control District.
      (4)   Chief of Environmental Health Services Division.
      (5)   County Agricultural Commissioner.
      (6)   County Surveyor.
      (7)   Director of Airports Department.
      (8)   Director of County Museums.
      (9)   Director of Public Works.
      (10)   Director of Special Districts Department.
      (11)   Floodplain Administrator.
   (c)    Responsibility of Other Authorities. The authorities responsible for
the enforcement shall be the same as the review authorities responsible for
permit approvals as specified in this Development Code.
   (d)   Authority to Inspect. All persons authorized to enforce the provisions
of this Development Code are authorized to enter upon any property or premises
within the unincorporated areas of the County of San Bernardino to ascertain
whether the property or premises is in compliance with this Development Code,
and to make any inspection as may be necessary in the performance of their
enforcement duties. These inspections may include the taking of photographs,
samples, or other physical evidence, and the making of video and/or audio
recordings. All such entries and inspections shall be done in a reasonable
manner. If an owner, lawful occupant, or the respective agent, employee, or
representative thereof refuses permission to enter and/or inspect, the County,
acting by and through such persons authorized to enforce this Development Code,
may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures
provided by California Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1822.50 through 1822.59, as
may be amended from time to time, or the successor provisions thereto.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012)
§ 86.09.040 Unlawful to Violate Development Code Provisions.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to violate or to cause or to allow a
violation of any provision of this Development Code. Any act or omission
constituting a violation of the Development Code includes the aiding, abetting,
allowing, or causing that act or omission.
   (b)   Each and every day, and during any portion of which, any violation of
this Development Code, or of the provisions of any code adopted and
incorporated by reference by this Development Code, is committed, continued, or
allowed, is a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.050 Violations of Development Code Declared Public Nuisance.
   (a)   Use of Land. Any use of land that is not allowed by this Development
Code (either as a matter of right or through the application of the appropriate
land use approval or permit) and/or which is conducted without first obtaining
all permits and/or licenses otherwise required pursuant to all applicable state
and/or federal laws and/or other provisions of the San Bernardino County Code
(and thereafter maintaining each such permit and/or license so as to remain
legally valid at all times) is hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance.
   (b)   Structure. Any structure which is designed, altered, constructed,
converted, demolished, enlarged, established, erected, maintained, moved,
operated or rehabilitated in any manner contrary to any provision of this
Development Code and/or without first obtaining all permits and/or licenses
otherwise required pursuant to all applicable State and/or federal laws and/or
other provisions of the San Bernardino County Code (and thereafter maintaining
each such permit and/or license so as to remain legally valid at all times) is
hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance. This Development Code specifies
regulations and additional land uses which apply to all unincorporated areas of
the County of San Bernardino. If other provisions of this Development Code
conflict with provisions regulating an applicable land use zoning district,
then the more restrictive provision shall prevail unless the less restrictive
provision expressly pre-empts the application of other provisions of this
Development Code.
    (c)   Use or Occupancy of Structure. Any structure used or occupied in a
manner not allowed by this Development Code (either as a matter of right or
through the application of the appropriate land use approval or permit) and/or
which is used or occupied without first obtaining all permits and/or licenses
otherwise required pursuant to all applicable state and/or federal laws and/or
other provisions of the San Bernardino County Code (and thereafter maintaining
each such permit and/or license so as to remain legally valid at all times) is
hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4098,
passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014)
§ 86.09.060 Unlawful to Refuse or Fail to Comply With a Condition of Land Use
Approval.
   (a)   It is unlawful for the owner, the owner’s agent or representative, or
other person in whose favor or for whose benefit, a land use approval of any
kind has been granted for the parcel of real property at issue, to refuse or to
fail to comply with the condition of approval or the conditions of approval,
either individually or collectively in any number.
   (b)   Each and every day, and during any portion of which, any failure or
refusal to comply with the condition or conditions of approval imposed on any
land use approval, authorization, permit, or variance, is committed, continued,
or allowed, is a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.070 Property Not in Compliance With a Condition of Land Use Approval
Declared Public Nuisance.
   Any property not in compliance with an applicable condition of approval
imposed upon any land use approval, authorization, permit, or variance is
hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.080 Enforcement.
   (a)   Notices, Orders, and Citations. This Development Code may be enforced
through the issuance of various notices and orders pertaining to any land use;
or to any addition, alteration, construction, conversion, enlargement,
installation, moving, reconstruction, rehabilitation of any structure; or to
any use of any structure; that is contrary to any provision of this Development
Code as provided herein, or as otherwise provided under various provisions of
the other Titles of the San Bernardino County Code. Such notices may include,
without limitation, notice of violation, notice to correct, notice to vacate,
and stop work orders. This Development Code may also be enforced through the
use of administrative citations issued pursuant to Government Code § 53069.4
and the provisions of the San Bernardino County Code adopted pursuant to the
authority conferred by Government Code § 53069.4; or through the use of
criminal citations issued pursuant to Penal Code § 836.5 and in the manner
specified by the San Bernardino County Code,
Title 1, Division 1, Chapter 2, § 11.0204.
   (b)   Enforcement Remedies Are Cumulative and Discretionary, Not Exclusive.
All remedies contained in this Development Code for the handling of violations
or enforcement of the provisions of this Development Code shall be
discretionary and cumulative, and not exclusive of any other applicable
provisions of the San Bernardino County Code or other applicable State law. The
County, at its sole discretion and acting through the officials designated in
this Chapter and in consultation with the Office of County Counsel, may enforce
this Development Code through the application of criminal, civil, and
administrative remedies as set forth in this Chapter. In the exercise of such
discretion in selecting an appropriate code enforcement remedy, the County
shall not be required to institute available code enforcement remedies in any
particular order, or to prefer the application of one remedy to another.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.090 Criminal Actions.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the San Bernardino County Code,
each person violating, causing, or allowing a violation of any provision of
this Development Code or any permit or condition of approval granted pursuant
thereto, shall be guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is specifically
declared to be a misdemeanor.
   (b)   Every violation of any provision of this Development Code, or of any
permit issued pursuant to this Development Code (including any of the
conditions of approval for such permit) that is prosecuted as an infraction
shall be punished, upon conviction or upon a plea of nolo contendere (commonly
called no contest), by: (1) a base fine not exceeding $100 for a first
violation; (2) a base fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the
same Code Section or permit (or any of the conditions of approval) occurring on
the same property and committed by the same person within one year; and (3) a
base fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same Code
Section or permit (or any of the conditions of approval) occurring on the same
property and committed by the same person within one year. Any court costs that
the court may otherwise be required to impose pursuant to applicable state law
or local ordinance shall be imposed in addition to the base fine.
Notwithstanding the above, a first or subsequent violation of this Development
Code may be charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
   (c)   A misdemeanor shall be punished, upon conviction or upon a plea of
nolo contendere (commonly called no contest), by a base fine of not less than
$500 and not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a
period of not more than six months, or by both such base fine and imprisonment.
Any court costs that the court may otherwise be required to impose pursuant to
applicable state law or local ordinance shall be imposed in addition to the
base fine.
   (d)   The conviction and punishment of any person of an offense as described
in this Section or the payment of a criminal fine by or on behalf of the person
convicted, shall not relieve that person from the responsibility for
correcting, removing, or abating the violation that resulted in the conviction;
nor prevent the enforced correction, removal or abatement thereof by the
County. The correction, removal, or abatement of a violation begun after the
issuance of a criminal citation or the filing of a criminal complaint shall not
be a defense to the infraction or misdemeanor so charged and, following a
conviction or plea of nolo contendere, shall not be grounds for the dismissal
of the action or the waiver, stay, or reduction of any fine established in this
Section.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009)
§ 86.09.100 Civil Actions.
   (a)   Injunctive Relief and Abatement. At the request of any person
authorized to enforce this Development Code, the County Counsel or District
Attorney may commence proceedings for the abatement, removal, correction and
enjoinment of any act or omission that constitutes or will constitute a
violation of this Development Code or any permit or land use approval granted
pursuant thereto, and an order requiring the violator(s) to pay civil penalties
and/or abatement costs. Where multiple violators are involved, they shall be
jointly and severally liable for the civil penalties and/or abatement costs.
   (b)   Civil Remedies and Penalties. Any person, whether acting as principal,
agent, employee, owner, lessor, lessee, tenant, occupant, operator, contractor,
or otherwise, who violates any provision of this Development Code or any permit
or any condition of land use approval granted pursuant thereto, shall be liable
for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation for each day or any
portion thereof, that the violation continues to exist. In determining the
amount of civil penalty to be imposed, both as to the daily rate and the
subsequent total amount for any given violation, the court shall consider all
relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of the harm
caused by the conduct constituting the violation, the nature and persistence of
such conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred or was
repeated, the assets, liabilities, and net worth of the violator, whether a
corporate entity or an individual, and any corrective action taken by the
violator.
   (c)   Attorney's Fees. In any civil action, administrative proceeding
(excluding administrative citations issued pursuant to §
86.09.110 Administrative Citation Actions), or special proceeding to abate a
public nuisance, whether by seeking injunctive relief and/or an abatement
order, or other order; attorney's fees may be recovered by the prevailing party
and shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the
County in that action or proceeding (Government Code § 25845).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4085,
passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4175, passed - -2012)
§ 86.09.110 Administrative Citation Actions.
   As an alternative to the criminal or civil enforcement of this Development
Code, i.e., Title 8 of the San Bernardino County Code, and, further, as an
alternative to all other administrative enforcement procedures provided by this
Development Code, all violations of this Development Code may be subject to
enforcement through the use of administrative citations in accordance with
Government Code § 53069.4 and this Section, and in the same manner and under
the same authority as provided at §11.0208 of the San Bernardino County Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4175, passed - -2012)
§ 86.09.120 Filing of a Notice of Pendency.
   Whenever the County institutes a judicial action or proceeding to enforce
the Development Code, a Notice of Pendency of the action or proceeding may be
filed with the County Recorder’s Office. The notice shall be filed at the time
of the commencement of the action or proceeding, and upon recordation of the
notice as provided in this Section, shall have the same effect as a notice
recorded in compliance with the Code of Civil Procedure § 409.
   (a)   The County Recorder shall record and index the Notice of Pendency of
action or proceeding in the Grantor/Grantee Index.
   (b)   Any Notice of Pendency of action or proceeding filed in compliance
with this Section may, upon motion of a party to the action or proceeding, be
vacated upon an appropriate showing of need therefore by an order of a judge of
the court in which the action or proceeding is pending.
      (1)   A certified copy of the “Order to Vacate Notice of Pendency” may be
recorded with the County Recorder’s Office, and upon the recordation, the
Notice of Pendency of the action or proceeding shall not constitute
constructive notice of any of the matters contained therein nor create any duty
of inquiry in any person thereafter dealing with the property described
therein.
      (2)   An “Order to Vacate Notice of Pendency” shall not be appealable,
but the party aggrieved by the order may, within 20 days after service of
written notice of the order, or within additional time not exceeding 20 days as
the court may, within the original 20 days allow, but in no event later than 60
days after entry of the order, petition the proper reviewing court to review
the order by Writ of Mandate.
      (3)   No “Order to Vacate Notice of Pendency” shall be effective, nor
shall it be recorded with the County Recorder’s Office, until the time within
which a petition for the filing of a Writ of Mandate has expired in compliance
with this Section.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.130 Filing Notice of Action.
   Whenever an enforcement action is initiated and prior to filing a Notice of
Pendency, the Code Enforcement Division or other County department initiating
the action, may pursuant to Government Code § 27280, file with the County
Recorder’s Office a notice of action identifying the enforcement action taken
for violation of the Development Code or other applicable law.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.140 Initial Investigation Procedures.
   This Section describes the procedures for initiating enforcement action in
cases where the Director has determined that real property within the
unincorporated area of the County is being used, maintained, or allowed to
exist in violation of the provisions of this Development Code. It is the
objective of these provisions to encourage the voluntary cooperation of
responsible parties in the prompt correction of violations, so that the other
enforcement measures provided by this Chapter may be avoided.
   (a)   Notice. Subject to Subdivision (c) of this Section upon investigation
and a determination that a violation of any of the provisions of this
Development Code or any condition(s) imposed on any approval, authorization,
permit, or Variance is found to exist, the Director shall notify the record
owner or any person having possession or control of the property by mail, of
the existence of the violation(s), the Department’s intent to charge the
property owner for all administrative costs associated with enforcement, and of
the owner’s right to a hearing on any objections they may have. The notice
shall be in a form approved by the County Counsel.
   (b)   Notice of Violation. The Director shall provide the record owner of
the subject site and/or any person in possession or control of the site with a
written Notice of Violation, which shall include the following information:
      (1)   A description of each violation, and citations of applicable
Development Code provisions being violated;
      (2)   A time limit for correcting the violation(s) in compliance with
Subdivision (c), below;
      (3)   A statement that the County intends to charge the property owner
for all administrative costs associated with the abatement of the violation(s)
in compliance with §
86.09.180 (Recovery of Costs), and/or initiate legal action as described in §
86.09.080 (Enforcement).
   (c)   Time Limit for Correction.
      (1)   The Notice of Violation shall state that the violation(s) shall be
corrected within 30 days from the date of the notice to avoid further
enforcement action by the County, unless the responsible party contacts the
Code Enforcement Division within that time to arrange for a longer period for
correction.
      (2)   The 30-day time limit may be extended by the Director upon a
showing of good cause.
      (3)   The Director may also require through the Notice of Violation that
the correction occur within less than 30 days if the Director determines that
the violation(s) constitutes a hazard to public health or safety.
   (d)   Use of Other Enforcement Procedures. The enforcement procedures of §
86.09.080 (Enforcement), may be employed by the Director after or instead of
the provisions of this Section where the Director determines that this Section
would be ineffective in securing the correction of the violation(s) within a
reasonable time.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.150 Inspections.
   (a)   Pre-approval Inspections. Every applicant seeking an authorization,
permit, or any other action in compliance with this Development Code shall
allow the County officials handling the application access to any premises or
property which is the subject of the application.
   (b)   Post Approval Inspections. If the authorization, permit, or other
action in compliance with this Development Code is approved, the owner or
applicant shall allow appropriate County officials access to the premises in
order to determine continued compliance with the approved authorization or
permit and/or any conditions of approval imposed on the approval,
authorization, permit, or Variance.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.160 Stop Work Orders.
   (a)   Any construction in violation of this Development Code or any
conditions imposed on any approval, authorization, permit, or Variance shall be
subject to the issuance of a “Stop Work Order.”
   (b)   Any violation of a Stop Work Order shall constitute a misdemeanor and
a public nuisance, and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties
established by the County Code and this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.170 Revocation or Modification of Permits or Approvals.
   (a)   Purpose. Discretionary permits or approvals issued in compliance with
this Development Code may be revoked or modified in compliance with this
Section.
   (b)   Procedures. This Section provides procedures for securing revocation
or punitive modification of previously approved permits or approvals.
   (c)   Revocations. The County’s action to revoke a permit or approval shall
have the effect of terminating the permit and denying the privileges granted by
the original approval.
   (d)   Modifications. County modification of a permit or approval instead of
revocation may include any operational aspect of the project, including
buffers, duration of the permit or entitlement, hours of operation, landscaping
and maintenance, lighting, parking, performance guarantees, property
maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, or any other aspect/
condition determined to be reasonable and necessary to ensure that the permit
is operated in a manner consistent with the original findings for approval.
   (e)   Hearings and Notice.
      (1)   The appropriate review authority shall hold a public hearing to
revoke or modify a permit or approval granted in compliance with the provisions
of this Development Code.
      (2)   At least ten days before the public hearing, notice shall be
“delivered” in writing to the applicant for the permit or approval being
considered for revocation, and/or owner of the property for which the permit
was granted. The only exception to the ten-day notice provision shall be for
Temporary Use Permits which, because of their short term nature, shall only
require a 24-hour notice.
      (3)   Notice shall be deemed “delivered” two days after being mailed,
certified and first class, through the United States Postal Service, postage
paid, to the owner as shown on the County’s current equalized assessment roll
and to the project applicant, if not the owner of the subject property.
   (f)   Action by Reviewing Authority.
      (1)   Permits. A Conditional Use Permit, Minor Use Permit, or other
County planning permit or approval (except a Variance, see Subdivision (f)(2),
below) may be revoked or modified by the reviewing authority (e.g., Director,
Commission, or Board) that originally approved the permit, if the reviewing
authority first makes any one of the following findings:
         (A)   Circumstances under which the permit or approval was granted
have been changed by the applicant to an extent that one or more of the
findings that justified the original approval can no longer be made, and the
public health, safety, and welfare require the revocation or modification;
         (B)   The permit or other approval was granted, in whole or in part,
on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the
application, or in the applicant’s testimony presented during the public
hearing, for the permit or approval;
         (C)   One or more of the conditions of the original permit or approval
have not been substantially fulfilled or have been violated;
         (D)   The approved use or structure has ceased to exist or has been
suspended for at least 12 months;
         (E)   An improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is in
violation of any applicable code, law, ordinance, regulation, or statute; or
         (F)   The improvement/use allowed by the permit has become detrimental
to the public health, safety, or welfare or the manner of operation constitutes
or is creating a nuisance.
      (2)   Variances. A Major or Minor Variance may be revoked or modified by
the review authority which originally approved the Major or Minor Variance, if
the review authority first makes any one of the following findings, in addition
to any one of the findings in Subdivision (f)(1), above:
         (A)   Circumstances under which the original approval was granted have
been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings
contained in the original approval can no longer be made in a positive manner,
and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the Major
or Minor Variance; or
         (B)   One or more of the conditions of the Major or Minor Variance
have not been met, or have been violated, and the grantee has not substantially
exercised the rights granted by the Major of Minor Variance.
   (g)   Amortization. If a revocation is ordered, the Commission may provide
for a reasonable period of time to amortize any lawful existing uses on the
site. Extensions of this time period may be granted for good cause shown on an
application to the applicable review authority by any affected person.
   (h)   Action Is Appealable. The revocation or modification of a permit or
Variance is appealable in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
   (i)   Enforcement. The County department or agency that issues the permit
shall have the primary responsibility for enforcing compliance with the permit.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.180 Recovery of Costs.
   This Section establishes procedures for the recovery of administrative
costs, including staff and County Counsel time expended on the enforcement of
the provisions of this Development Code, other than administrative citation
cases, to correct a violation. The intent of this Section is to recover County
administrative costs reasonably related to enforcement.
   (a)   Record of Costs.
      (1)   The Department shall maintain records of all administrative costs
incurred by responsible County departments, associated with the processing of
violations and enforcement of this Development Code, and shall recover the
costs from the property owner in compliance with this Section.
      (2)   Staff time shall be calculated at an hourly rate as established and
revised from time to time by the Board.
   (b)   Summary of Costs and Notice.
      (1)   At the conclusion of the case, the Director shall send a summary of
costs associated with enforcement to the owner and/or person having possession
or control of the property by certified and first class mail.
      (2)   The summary shall include a notice in a form approved by the County
Counsel, advising the responsible party of their right to request a hearing on
the charges for County cost recovery within ten days of the date of the notice,
and that if no request for hearing is filed, the responsible party will be
liable for the charges.
      (3)   In the event that no request for hearing is timely filed or, after
a hearing the Director affirms the validity of the costs, the property owner or
person in control shall be liable to the County in the amount stated in the
summary or any lesser amount as determined by the Director.
      (4)   The costs shall be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the
County, in any court of competent jurisdiction, or by tax assessment, or by a
lien on the property, at the County’s election.
   (c)   Attorney’s Fees. In any action or administrative proceeding to abate a
nuisance, the prevailing party in the action or proceeding shall be entitled to
recover reasonable attorney’s fees; however, the amount of attorney’s fees
awarded to a prevailing party shall not exceed the amount of attorney’s fees
incurred by the County in the action or proceeding. Further, an award of
attorney’s fees in compliance with this Section shall only be allowed where the
County elects, at the initiation of the action or proceeding, to seek recovery
of its own attorney’s fees.
   (d)   Request for Hearing on Costs. Any property owner, or other person
having possession and control of the subject property, who receives a summary
of costs shall have the right to a hearing before the Director on their
objections to the proposed costs.
      (1)   A written request for hearing shall be filed with the Department
within ten days of the service by mail of the Department’s summary of costs, on
a form provided by the Department.
      (2)   Within 30 days of the filing of the request, and on ten days
written notice to the owner, the Director shall hold a hearing on the owner’s
objections, and determine their validity.
      (3)   In determining the validity of the costs, the Director shall
consider whether total costs are reasonable in the circumstances of the case.
Factors to be considered include:
         (A)   Whether the present owner created the violation(s);
         (B)   Whether there is a present ability to correct the violation(s);
         (C)   Whether the owner promptly corrected the violation(s);
         (D)   The degree of cooperation provided by the owner; and
         (E)   Whether reasonable minds can differ as to whether a violation(s)
exists.
      (4)   The Director’s decision shall be appealable as provided by
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.190 Additional Permit Processing Fees.
   Any person who establishes a land use, or alters, constructs, demolishes,
enlarges, erects, maintains, or moves any structure without first obtaining any
authorization or permit required by this Development Code, shall pay the
additional permit processing fees in compliance with the County Fee Ordinance
for the correction of the violations, before being granted an authorization or
permit for a use or structure on the site.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.200 Reinspection Fees.
   (a)   Amount and Applicability of Reinspection Fee.
      (1)   A reinspection fee shall be imposed on each person who receives a
Notice of Violation, notice and order, or letter of correction of any provision
of this Development Code or the County Code, adopted Building Code, or State
law.
         (A)   The fee amount shall be established in compliance with the
current Fee Ordinance.
         (B)   The fee may be assessed for each inspection conducted when the
particular violation, for which a Notice of Violation, notice and order, or
letter of correction was issued, was not fully abated or corrected as directed
by, and within the time and manner specified in, the notice or letter.
      (2)   The fee shall not apply to the original verification inspection to
document the violations and shall apply to the first compliance inspection made
after the issuance of a notice or letter, unless the correction has been made.
   (b)   Continuation of the Original Case.
      (1)   If a notice or letter has been previously issued for the same
violation and the property has been in compliance with the provisions of this
Development Code or the County Code for less than 90 days, the violation shall
be deemed a continuation of the original case, and all inspections or
reinspections, including the first inspection for the repeated offense, shall
be charged a reinspection fee.
      (2)   This fee is intended to compensate for administrative costs for
unnecessary County inspections, and is not a penalty for violating this
Development Code or the County Code.
      (3)   Any reinspection fees imposed shall be separate and apart from any
fines or penalties imposed for violation of this Development Code or the County
Code, or costs incurred by the County for the abatement of a public nuisance.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 86.09.210 Documentation.
   It is highly recommended that the property owner initiate a Certificate of
Land Use Compliance application to document any existing use where an
application was not processed but determined to be a legal use and where the
zoning or land use designation has changed and where a court decision
determined a use to be legally established. This process records a document
with the County Recorder’s Office and is readily available to future property
owners, the public and agencies. It is also recommended that the property owner
initiate a General Plan and Development Code Interpretation application
whenever it is unclear to the owner, or may be to a future owner, what a
specific use is determined to be considered under the Development Code.
(Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
CHAPTER 86.10: AGRICULTURAL PRESERVES/LAND CONSERVATION CONTRACT ACTIONS
Section
   
86.10.010   Purpose.
   
86.10.020   Procedures.
§ 86.10.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides procedures to disestablish, establish, expand, or
reduce an Agricultural Preserve boundary and/or cancel or establish a Land
Conservation Contract in compliance with the California Land Conservation Act
of 1965 for the management and preservation of agricultural lands within the
County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.10.020 Procedures.
   (a)   When a Public Hearing Is Required. All of the activities identified in
§
86.10.010 (Purpose), above require a public hearing by both the Commission and
the Board except for a County-initiated Land Conservation Contract, which shall
be heard by the Board without a hearing by the Commission.
   (b)   Procedure. Public hearing.
   (c)   Review Authority. Board, with Commission recommendation.
   (d)   Request for Approval of a Contract. Before action on a request for an
approval of a Land Conservation Contract, the review authority shall make the
finding that the operation on site and the contract are consistent with the
General Plan, any applicable community plan or specific plan, and this
Development Code.
   (e)   Request for Non-Renewal of a Contract.
      (1)   No findings are required when a request is made for a non-renewal
of a Land Conservation Contract.
      (2)   The request shall be processed in compliance with Government Code §
51245.
      (3)   Non-renewal of a contract shall be accomplished through “Staff
action without notice” procedures with the Director as the review authority.
   (f)   Request for Cancellation of a Contract. Before action on a request for
cancellation of a Land Conservation Contract:
      (1)   The land owner shall pay a cancellation fee equal to twelve and
one-half percent of the cancellation value of the land plus any deferred tax
amount; and
      (2)   The review authority shall make the findings identified in
Government Code § 51282.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.11: AIRPORT COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLANS
Section
   
86.11.010   Purpose.
   
86.11.020   Procedures.
   
86.11.030   Findings.
   
86.11.040   Consistency with the Plan.
§ 86.11.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides procedures to prepare, review, adopt, or amend an
Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.11.020 Procedures.
   (a)   Airports Within County Jurisdiction.
      (1)   Review by Commission and Board Required. Airport Comprehensive Land
Use Plans and amendments to the plans shall be reviewed by the Commission and
acted upon by the Board.
      (2)   Process Same as for General Plan. An Airport Comprehensive Land Use
Plan shall be prepared, adopted, and amended in the same manner as a general
plan, except that an Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan may be amended as
often as deemed necessary by the Board.
      (3)   Process for Repeal. An Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan shall be
repealed in the same manner as is required for amendment of the plan.
      (4)   Procedure. Public hearing.
      (5)   Review Authority. Board, with Commission recommendation.
   (b)   Airports Within Incorporated Cities but Impact Unincorporated Areas.
      (1)   Review by Commission and Board Required. Airport Comprehensive Land
Use Plans and any amendments to the plan that are prepared and adopted by other
jurisdictions but impact unincorporated areas of the County shall be reviewed
by the Commission and approved by resolution of the Board.
      (2)   Procedure. Public hearing.
      (3)   Review Authority. Board, with Commission recommendation.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.11.030 Findings.
   (a)   Findings for Adoption or Amendment. Before taking an action to adopt
or amend an Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Planning Agency shall
first make all of the following findings.
   (b)   The Proposed Plan or Amendment:
      (1)   Is consistent with the General Plan;
      (2)   Specifies through text and/or diagrams, the distribution, location,
and extent of the uses of land within the area covered by the plan; and
      (3)   Specifies through text and/or diagrams, the criteria and standards
by which development will proceed.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.11.040 Consistency with the Plan.
   No local public works project may be approved, no land use application may
be approved, and no land use designation may be amended within an area covered
by an Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan unless it is in compliance with the
adopted Airport Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.12: AMENDMENTS
Section
   
86.12.010   Purpose.
   
86.12.020   Initiation of Amendment.
   
86.12.030   Processing, Notice, and Hearings.
   
86.12.040   Commission Action on Amendment.
   
86.12.050   Board Action on Amendment.
   
86.12.060   Findings and Decision.
   
86.12.070   Effective Dates.
§ 86.12.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides procedures for the amendment of the General Plan, this
Development Code, Community Plans, and Area Plans, whenever the Board
determines public necessity and general welfare require an amendment.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.12.020 Initiation of Amendment.
   An amendment may be initiated by the Director, the Commission, or the Board
in the following manner:
   (a)   General Plan, Community Plan, and Area Plan Amendments. In the case of
the General Plan, Community Plan, or Area Plan, an amendment may also be
initiated by the filing of an amendment application with the Department by the
owner or authorized agent of property for which the amendment is sought. If the
property is under more than one ownership, all owners or their authorized
agents shall join in filing the application.
   (b)   Development Code Amendments. In the case of this Development Code, an
amendment may also be initiated by the filing of an amendment application with
the Department by any interested party. The Board may also adopt an urgency
measure as an interim ordinance in compliance with Government Code § 65858.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.12.030 Processing, Notice, and Hearings.
   (a)   Application Filing and Processing. If initiated by the filing of an
amendment application, the application shall be processed in compliance with
Chapters
85.02 (Basic Review Procedures) and
85.03 (Application Procedures). The application shall be accompanied by the
information identified in the Department handout for amendment applications,
and any applicable fees. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide
evidence in support of the findings required by §
86.12.060 (Findings and Decision), below.
   (b)   Timing of General Plan, Community Plan, or Area Plan Amendments. Each
element of the General Plan or a Community Plan or an Area Plan may be amended
up to four times in a single calendar year.
   (c)   Adoption of General Plan, Community Plan, or Area Plan Amendments.
Amendments to land use zoning districts constitute an amendment of the General
Plan and shall be adopted by resolution and ordinance. Amendments to the
General Plan, a Community Plan, or an Area Plan text or maps, other than the
Land Use Zoning Maps, shall be adopted by resolution only.
   (d)   Public Hearings Required. The Commission and Board shall each conduct
one or more public hearings regarding the amendment.
   (e)   Notice and Hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided,
and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.12.040 Commission Action on Amendment.
   The Commission may take any one of the following actions on a proposed
amendment.
   (a)   Private Party Initiated. In the case of a private party initiated
amendment, the Commission shall either disapprove the application or recommend
to the Board that the proposed or a modified amendment be made. In the case of
disapproval, the decision of the Commission shall become final unless appealed
to the Board in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
   (b)   Director Initiated. In the case of a Director initiated amendment, the
Commission shall either recommend to the Board that no amendment, a modified
amendment, or the proposed amendment be made.
   (c)   Commission Initiated. In the case of a Commission initiated amendment,
the Commission shall either table the matter or recommend to the Board that the
amendment be made.
   (d)   Board Directed or Initiated. In the case of a Board directed or
initiated amendment, the Commission shall either recommend to the Board that no
amendment, a modified amendment, or the proposed amendment be made.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.12.050 Board Action on Amendment.
   (a)   Approval or Disapproval. Upon receipt of the Commission’s
recommendation, the Board shall conduct a public hearing and either approve,
approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment based on the
findings identified in §
86.12.060 (Findings and Decision), below.
   (b)   Referral to Commission. If the Board proposes to adopt a modification
to the amendment not previously considered by the Commission, the proposed
modification shall be first referred to the Commission for its recommendation,
in compliance with Government Code §§ 65356 and 65857.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.12.060 Findings and Decision.
   An amendment to the General Plan, this Development Code, a Community Plan,
or an Area Plan may be approved only if all of the following findings are made,
as applicable to the type of amendment.
   (a)   Findings for General Plan, Community Plan, or Area Plan Amendments.
      (1)   If the amendment pertains only to changing a portion of the text of
the plan, the Board shall first make both of the following findings:
         (A)   The proposed amendment is internally consistent with all other
provisions of the respective plan, the General Plan or an applicable specific
plan; and
         (B)   The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public
interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the County.
      (2)   If the General Plan amendment proposes to change a land use zoning
designation from one zone to another, the Board shall first make the two
findings above plus all of the following additional findings:
         (A)   The proposed land use zoning district change is in the public
interest, there will be a community benefit, and other existing and allowed
uses will not be compromised;
         (B)   The proposed land use zoning district change will provide a
reasonable and logical extension of the existing land use pattern in the
surrounding area;
         (C)   The proposed land use zoning district change does not conflict
with provisions of this Development Code;
         (D)   The proposed land use zoning district change will not have a
substantial adverse effect on surrounding property; and
         (E)   The affected site is physically suitable in terms of design,
location, shape, size, operating characteristics, and the provision of public
and emergency vehicle (e.g., fire and medical) access and public services and
utilities (e.g., fire protection, police protection, potable water, schools,
solid waste collection and disposal, storm drainage, wastewater collection,
treatment, and disposal, etc.), to ensure that the proposed or anticipated uses
and/or development would not endanger, jeopardize, or otherwise constitute a
hazard to the property or improvements in the vicinity in which the property is
located.
   (b)   Findings for Development Code Amendments. The Board shall first make
all of the following findings:
      (1)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the General Plan and any
applicable community plan or specific plan;
      (2)   The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public
interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the County; and
      (3)   The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other
applicable provisions of this Development Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.12.070 Effective Dates.
   (a)   General Plan, Community Plan, or Area Plan. A General Plan, Community
Plan, or Area Plan amendment shall become effective on the 30th day following
the adoption of a resolution, and an ordinance (in the case of a General Plan
amendment only) by the Board.
   (b)   Development Code. A Development Code amendment shall become effective
on the 30th day following the adoption of an ordinance by the Board.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.13: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT
Section
   
86.13.010   Purpose
   
86.13.020   Applications
   
86.13.030   Procedures
   
86.13.040   Action by the Commission and Board
   
86.13.050   Amendment or Cancellation
   
86.13.060   Recordation
   
86.13.070   Agreement Review
   
86.13.080   Modification or Termination
§ 86.13.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Compliance with Government Code § 65864. This Chapter establishes
procedures and requirements for the adoption and amendment of development
agreements in compliance with Government Code §§ 65864 et seq.
   (b)   Development Agreement Defined. A development agreement is a contract
between the County and an applicant for a development project.
   (c)   Assurances to the Applicant. A development agreement is intended to
provide assurance to the applicant that an approved project may proceed subject
to the policies, regulations, rules, and conditions of approval applicable to
the project at the time of approval, regardless of any changes to County
policies, regulations, and rules after project approval.
   (d)   Assurances to the County. In return, the County is provided assurance
that the project would further important County-wide goals and policies which
have been officially recognized by the Board, and provide the County with
significant, tangible benefits beyond those that may be required by the County
through normal project conditions of approval.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.13.020 Applications.
   (a)   Contents of application. An application for a development agreement
shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapters
85.02 (Basic Review Procedures) and
85.03 (Application Procedures). The application shall be accompanied by the
detailed data/ materials identified in the Department handout for development
agreements. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in
support of the findings required by §
86.13.040(a)(1) (Findings Required), below.
   (b)   Fees. The applicant shall pay the fees and charges imposed for the
filing and processing of each application and document provided for or required
under these regulations in compliance with the Planning Fee Schedule. Fees and
charges shall be paid before a determination by the County that the application
is complete.
   (c)   Qualified as an Applicant. Only a qualified applicant may file an
application to enter into a development agreement.
      (1)   A qualified applicant is a person who has legal or equitable
interest in the real property which is the subject of the development
agreement, as determined at the sole discretion of the County.
      (2)   The term applicant shall also include an authorized agent of the
property owner.
      (3)   The Director may require an applicant to submit proof of interest
in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act for the
applicant.
      (4)   Before processing the application, the Director shall obtain the
opinion of the County Counsel as to the sufficiency of the applicant’s interest
in the real property to enter into the development agreement.
   (d)   Proposed Form of Agreement.
      (1)   Each application shall be accompanied by the form of development
agreement proposed by the applicant.
      (2)   This requirement may be met by designating the County’s standard
form of development agreement, if the County has developed a standard form
development agreement, and including specific proposals for changes in or
additions to the language of the standard form.
   (e)   Review of Application.
      (1)   The Director shall endorse on the application the date it is
received. When application fees have been paid in compliance with the Planning
Fee Schedule, the Director shall review the application and may reject it if it
is incomplete or inaccurate for processing. If the Director finds that the
application is complete, the Director shall accept it for filing. The Director
shall review the application and determine the additional requirements
necessary to complete the development agreement.
      (2)   After receiving the required information, the Director shall
prepare a staff report and recommendations and shall state whether or not the
development agreement proposed, or in an amended form, will be consistent with
the General Plan and any applicable community plan or specific plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.13.030 Procedures.
   (a)   Director to Give Notice. The Director shall give notice of the
County’s intention to consider adoption of the development agreement and of any
other public hearing required by law or these regulations.
   (b)   Notice Requirements. Notice for the public hearings to consider
adoption of a development agreement shall be given in compliance with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings).
   (c)   Failure to Receive Notice. Failure of any person to receive notice,
who is otherwise entitled to notice in compliance with State law or these
regulations, does not affect the authority of the County to enter into a
development agreement.
   (d)   Rules Governing Conduct of Hearing. The public hearing shall be
conducted in compliance with the procedural standards adopted in compliance
with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings).
      (1)   Each person interested in the matter shall be given an opportunity
to be heard.
      (2)   The applicant has the burden of proof at the public hearing on the
proposed development agreement.
   (e)   Irregularity in Proceedings.
      (1)   No action, inaction, or recommendation regarding the proposed
development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court
by reason of any error, informality, irregularity, neglect, or omission
(“error”) as to any matter pertaining to application, finding, hearing, notice,
petition, recommendation, record, report, or any matters of procedure.
      (2)   The only allowable exception to this rule will be if, after an
examination of the entire case, including the evidence, the court is of the
opinion that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the
error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that
a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or
existed.
      (3)   There is no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury
was done if error is shown.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.13.040 Action by the Commission and Board.
   (a)   Determination by the Commission. After the hearing by the Commission,
the Commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the Board.
      (1)   Findings required. The proposed development agreement may be
recommended for approval only if all of the following findings are first made.
The recommendation shall include the Commission’s findings and determination
that the proposed development agreement and the associated development project:
         (A)   Are in compliance with the general land uses, objectives,
policies, and programs specified in the General Plan, any applicable community
plan or specific plan, and this Development Code;
         (B)   Are compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations
prescribed for, the land use and land use zoning district in which the real
property is located;
         (C)   Are in conformity with public convenience, general welfare, and
good land use practice;
         (D)   Will not be detrimental to the health, safety, and general
welfare; and
         (E)   Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or
the preservation of property values.
      (2)   Include Reasons. The recommendation shall include the reasons for
the Commission’s recommendation.
   (b)   Decision by the Board.
      (1)   After the Board completes the public hearing, it may accept,
modify, or disapprove the Commission’s recommendation. It may, but need not,
refer matters not previously considered by the Commission during its hearing
back to the Commission for report and recommendation. The Commission shall hold
a public hearing on matters referred back to it by the Board.
      (2)   The Board shall not approve the development agreement unless it
first makes all of the findings required by §
86.13.040(a)(1) (Findings Required), above.
   (c)   Approval of Development Agreement. If the Board approves the
development agreement, it shall do so by the adoption of an ordinance. After
the ordinance approving the development agreement takes effect, the County may
enter into the development agreement.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.13.050 Amendment or Cancellation.
   (a)   Initiation of Amendment or Cancellation. Either party may propose an
amendment to or cancellation of, in whole or in part, the development agreement
previously entered into.
   (b)   Procedure.
      (1)   The procedure for proposing and adoption of an amendment to or
cancellation of a development agreement is the same as the procedure for
entering into a development agreement in the first instance.
      (2)   Where the County initiates the proposed amendment to or
cancellation of a development agreement, it shall first give notice to the
property owner of its intention to initiate the proceedings at least ten
calendar days in advance of the giving of notice of intention to consider the
amendment or cancellation required by §
86.13.030(b) (Notice Requirements), above.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.13.060 Recordation.
   (a)   Recordation of Agreement Within Ten Days. Within ten calendar days
after the County enters into the development agreement, the Clerk of the Board
shall have the development agreement recorded with the County Recorder’s
Office.
   (b)   Recordation of Notice to Amend or Cancel Agreement. If the parties to
the agreement or their successors-in-interest amend or cancel the development
agreement as provided in Government Code § 65868 or if the County terminates or
modifies the development agreement as provided in Government Code § 65865.1 for
failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions
of the agreement, the Clerk of the Board shall have notice of the action
recorded with the County Recorder’s Office.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.13.070 Agreement Review.
   The County shall review each development agreement in compliance with
Government Code § 65865.1.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.13.080 Modification or Termination.
   (a)   Proceedings upon Modification or Termination. If, upon a finding under
§
86.13.070 (Agreement Review), above, the Board determines to proceed with
modification or termination of the development agreement, the County shall give
notice to the property owner of its intention to do so. The notice shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The date, time, and place of the hearing;
      (2)   A statement as to whether or not the County proposes to modify or
terminate the development agreement; and
      (3)   Other information which the County considers necessary to inform
the property owner of the nature of the proceeding.
   (b)   Hearing on Modification or Termination.
      (1)   At the date, time, and place set for the hearing on modification or
termination, the property owner shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
      (2)   The Board may refer the matter back to the Commission for report
and recommendation.
      (3)   The Board may impose those conditions to the action it takes as it
considers reasonable and necessary to protect the interests of the County.
      (4)   The decision of the Board shall be final.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 86.14: SPECIFIC PLAN ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT
Section
   
86.14.010   Purpose.
   
86.14.020   Intent.
   
86.14.030   Applicability.
   
86.14.040   Initiation and Presubmittal Requirements.
   
86.14.050   Preparation and Content.
   
86.14.060   Application Filing, Processing, and Review.
   
86.14.070   Adoption of Specific Plan.
   
86.14.080   Implementation and Amendments.
   
86.14.090   Adopted Specific Plans.
§ 86.14.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Process. This Chapter provides a process for preparing, processing,
reviewing, adopting, and amending a specific plan.
   (b)   Compliance. When required by §
86.14.030 (Applicability), below, the General Plan, or this Development Code to
systematically implement the General Plan for any part of the County, a
specific plan shall be prepared, processed, approved and implemented, or
disapproved in compliance with this Chapter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.14.020 Intent.
   An adopted specific plan shall replace the base land use zoning district for
the subject property, and the development standards/guidelines identified in
the specific plan shall take precedence over the general standards/guidelines
contained in this Development Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.14.030 Applicability.
   (a)   Authority to Adopt and Amend. An application for a specific plan shall
be considered by the Commission and the Board.
   (b)   Specific Plan Required. A specific plan, which is designed to provide
for flexibility and encourage innovate use of land resources and development of
a variety of housing and other development types shall be required whenever it
would assist in the comprehensive master planning of a specific site(s).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.14.040 Initiation and Presubmittal Requirements.
   A specific plan may be initiated in the following manner:
   (a)   Board. By a resolution adopted by the Board, with or without a
recommendation from the Commission; and
   (b)   Property Owner. By an application being filed by the owner(s) of
property that would be the subject of the specific plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.14.050 Preparation and Content.
   If property-owner initiated, the application shall be accompanied by the
information identified in the Department handout for specific plan
applications. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in
support of the findings required by §
86.14.070(a) (Board’s Action), below.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.14.060 Application Filing, Processing, and Review.
   If property-owner initiated, the draft specific plan shall be filed with the
Department, and shall be accompanied by the fee in compliance with the Planning
Fee Schedule. The draft plan shall be processed in the same manner as required
for general plans by State law, and as follows:
   (a)   Director’s Evaluation.
      (1)   After the filing of a draft specific plan, the Director shall
review the draft plan to determine whether it is in compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
      (2)   If the draft plan is not in compliance, it shall be returned to the
applicant with written specification(s) as to why it does not comply, and with
suggested revisions to ensure compliance.
      (3)   When a draft plan is returned by the applicant to the Department
and the Director determines it is complete and in compliance with this Chapter,
the plan shall be deemed to be accepted for processing.
   (b)   Staff Report. A written staff report shall be prepared for the draft
specific plan which shall include detailed recommendations for changes to the
text and/or diagrams of the specific plan, as necessary to make it acceptable
for adoption; and
   (c)   Public Hearings. A proposed specific plan shall be subject to public
hearings before both the Commission and Board before its adoption, as follows:
      (1)   Commission.
         (A)   The Director shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed
specific plan.
         (B)   The hearing shall receive public notice and be conducted in
compliance with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings).
         (C)   After the hearing, the Commission shall forward a written
recommendation, with appropriate findings to the Board in compliance with §
86.14.070(a) (Board’s Action), below.
      (2)   Board.
         (A)   After receipt of the Commission’s recommendation, the Board
shall conduct a public hearing on the specific plan. The hearing shall receive
public notice and be conducted in compliance with Chapter 7 (Public Hearings).
         (B)   After the hearing, the Board may adopt the specific plan,
disapprove the plan, or adopt the plan with changes, with appropriate findings
in compliance with §
86.14.070(a) (Board’s Action), below; provided, changes to the plan that were
not considered by the Commission shall be referred to the Commission for its
recommendation, in compliance with State law.
         (C)   Failure of the Commission to report within 45 days after the
referral, or a longer period set by the Board, shall be deemed a recommendation
for the approval of the changes.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.14.070 Adoption of Specific Plan.
   (a)   Board’s Action. The Board may adopt a specific plan only if all of the
following findings can first be made:
      (1)   The proposed development is generally in compliance with the
actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan;
      (2)   The design, location, shape, size, operating characteristics, and
the provision of public and emergency vehicle access and public services and
utilities (e.g., drainage, fire protection, sewers, water, etc.), would ensure
that the proposed development would not endanger, jeopardize, or otherwise
constitute a hazard to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or
welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and land
use zoning district in which the property is located;
      (3)   The proposed development would:
         (A)   Ensure quality development by encouraging greater flexibility
with more creative and aesthetically pleasing designs for major developments;
         (B)   Ensure the timely provision of essential public services and
facilities consistent with the demand for the services and facilities; and
         (C)   Promote a harmonious variety of housing choices and commercial
and industrial activities; attain a desirable balance of residential and
employment opportunities; and result in a high level of amenities and the
preservation of the natural and scenic qualities of open space.
      (4)   The subject property is physically suitable for the proposed land
use zoning district designation(s);
      (5)   The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the County’s
Environmental Review Procedures; and
      (6)   There would be no potential significant negative effects upon
environmental quality and natural resources that would not be properly
mitigated and monitored, unless a Statement of Overriding Considerations is
adopted by the Board.
   (b)   Adoption. The specific plan shall be adopted by ordinance in
compliance with State law.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.14.080 Implementation and Amendments.
   (a)   Development Within Specific Plan Area. After the adoption of a
specific plan, a public works project, a tentative map or parcel map, for which
a tentative map was not required, and an amendment to this Development Code may
be approved/adopted within an area covered by a specific plan only if it is
first found to be in compliance with the specific plan.
   (b)   Specific Plan Fee Surcharge. The Board may impose a specific plan fee
surcharge on development entitlements within the specific plan area in
compliance with State law.
   (c)   Amendments.
      (1)   An adopted specific plan may be amended through the same procedure
specified by this Chapter for the adoption of a specific plan.
      (2)   The specific plan may be amended as often as deemed necessary by
the Board, in compliance with State law.
   (d)   Modifications.
      (1)   A development standard(s) identified in an adopted specific plan
may be modified only by action of the Board.
      (2)   The Board may grant one or more modifications only if both of the
following findings can first be made:
         (A)   The modification(s) is necessary to properly implement a
physically and economically viable project; and
         (B)   The modification(s) would ensure compliance with the general
purpose and intent of the adopted specific plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.14.090 Adopted Specific Plans.
   (a)   Available for Review. All adopted specific plans are available for
review at the Department.
   (b)   Adopted plans. The following specific plans have been adopted by the
Board.
      (1)   Agua Mansa Industrial Corridor Specific Plan.
      (2)   Bloomington Business Park Specific Plan.
      (3)   Glen Helen Specific Plan.
      (4)   Kaiser Commerce Center Specific Plan.
      (5)   Hacienda at Fairview Valley Specific Plan.
      (6)   Speedway Commerce Center II Specific Plan.
      (7)   Valley Corridor Specific Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4229, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4319,
passed - -2017; Am. Ord. 4448, passed - -2022; Am. Ord. 2050, passed - -2022)
CHAPTER 86.15: POST-DISASTER REBUILDING
Section
   
86.15.010   Purpose.
   
86.15.020   Applicability of Provisions.
   
86.15.030   Definitions.
   
86.15.040   General Provisions.
   
86.15.050   Modifications of the Provisions of this Development Code.
   
86.15.060   Permits and Procedures.
   
86.15.070   CEQA Exemption.
   
86.15.080   Appeals.
§ 86.15.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Expeditious Repair and Reconstruction. This Chapter establishes the
land use regulations for the expeditious repair and reconstruction of
structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has
been declared by the Board.
   (b)   No Exemptions from Health and Safety Requirements. The Chapter allows
modifications to some sections of this Development Code but does not allow
exemption from the health and safety requirements of this Development Code.
   (c)   Extreme Hazard Areas Are Not Included. In addition, structures located
in an Extreme Hazard Area are not included.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.15.020 Applicability of Provisions.
   The provisions of this Chapter are applicable for a period of 180 days
following each disaster for which a local emergency has been declared by the
Board. The Board may extend the provisions as necessary.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.15.030 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply:
   EXTREME HAZARD AREA. A mapped area established by separate action of the
Board, or other authorized official, as a moratorium area which contains
hazards to health and safety, caused by the disaster, requiring in-depth study
before allowing rebuilding of any kind.
   IN-KIND. The same as the prior structure in terms of height, number of
units, shape, size, in the same general location, and to be occupied by the
same general use.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. The demolition and replacement of a damaged structure with
a new structure which is not in-kind.
   RECONSTRUCTION. The demolition and replacement in-kind of a damaged
structure by a new structure, with no alteration or expansion.
   REPAIR. The fixing in-kind of a damaged structure, with no alteration or
expansion.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.15.040 General Provisions.
   (a)   No Exemptions for Illegal Structures. Structures illegally constructed
or occupancies illegally established before the disaster shall not be
reconstructed or reestablished.
   (b)   Compliance with Development Code Required. The provisions of this
Development Code shall be met unless specifically modified or exempted.
   (c)   If Conflicts Occur. Where the provisions of this Chapter conflict with
other provisions of this Development Code, the provisions of this Chapter shall
prevail.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.15.050 Modifications of the Provisions of this Development Code.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   Criteria to Receive Modifications. In order to be eligible for
modifications of the provisions of this Development Code and expedited
application processing, an application shall meet all of the following
criteria:
         (A)   The application shall be for the reconstruction or repair of
damage caused by the disaster;
         (B)   The application shall have been filed after the occurrence of
the disaster;
         (C)   The application site is not within an Extreme Hazard Area;
         (D)   The application does not violate applicable County, State, or
Federal law; and
         (E)   Various kinds of information or proof of the previous use and
structure may be required. This information may include: aerial photos, copies
of Building Permits, County Assessor’s records, original construction plans,
photographs, property deeds, reports/studies, and surveys. Adequate proof that
the damage to the structure was the result of the disaster may also be
required.
      (2)   Conforming Structures and Uses.
         (A)   Conforming single-family residential, duplex, triplex, and
agricultural structures may be reconstructed in-kind after the issuance of
applicable permits. Conforming single-family structures may be altered and
expanded so long as they meet all applicable Development Code requirements.
         (B)   Conforming structures and uses subject to a Conditional Use
Permit, Minor Use Permit, or Site Plan Permit.
            (I)   Conforming structures, occupied by conforming uses which are
subject to a Conditional Use Permit, Minor Use Permit, or Site Plan Permit, and
for which approved plot plans are available for review, may be reconstructed or
repaired in-kind after the issuance of applicable permits.
            (II)   Conforming structures, occupied by conforming uses which are
subject to a Conditional Use Permit, Minor Use Permit, Site Plan Permit, and
where no approved plot plans are available for review, may be reconstructed or
repaired in-kind after the issuance of a Site Plan Permit and all other
applicable permits.
      (3)   Nonconforming Uses and Structures.
         (A)   Single-family residential, duplex, and triplex structures
located in residential land use zoning districts not in compliance with the
provisions of this Development Code may be reconstructed or repaired in-kind
after the issuance of applicable permits.
         (B)   Nonconforming multi-family residential structures located in
residential land use zoning districts may be reconstructed or repaired in-kind
after the issuance of a Site Plan Permit (as modified by the provisions of §
86.15.060(a), below) and all other applicable permits.
         (C)   Nonconforming commercial, industrial, and institutional
structures located in nonresidential land use zoning districts may be
reconstructed or repaired in-kind after the issuance of a Site Plan Permit (as
modified by the provisions of §
86.15.060(a), below) and all other applicable permits.
         (D)   Except as listed above, all other provisions of this Development
Code shall apply.
   (b)   New Construction. All new construction shall be in compliance with the
provisions of this Development Code.
   (c)   Temporary Uses.
      (1)   Residential.
         (A)   On-Site. Temporary residential quarters are allowed on the site
of residential unit(s) made uninhabitable by the disaster. The unit(s) may only
substitute for the unit(s) previously on the property and may be placed after
issuance of a Temporary Use Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.15. Under these circumstances, the Temporary Use Permit may be
issued before the issuance of a permit to reconstruct the permanent unit(s),
but a Building Permit shall be applied for within 180 days after issuance of
the Temporary Use Permit. Individual mobile units require individual approved
Setdown Permits.
         (B)   Other Sites. Temporary mobile housing may be allowed on sites in
any zoning/land use district with a Temporary Use Permit approved by the
Building Official and subject to the special findings for a Temporary Use
Permit identified in §
86.15.060(b), below). Individual mobile units require individual approved
Setdown Permits.
      (2)   Commercial, Commercial Agricultural, Industrial, Institutional
Uses. Temporary nonresidential structures for commercial, commercial
agricultural, industrial, or institutional uses, either singly or in groups,
shall be allowed in any land use zoning district except residential, on the
same site or on a different site than the original structure, with a Temporary
Use Permit approved by the Building Official and subject to the special
findings for a Temporary Use Permit identified in §
86.15.060(b), below). Individual mobile units require individual approved
Setdown Permits.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008)
§ 86.15.060 Permits and Procedures.
   (a)   Site Plan Permits Post-Disaster.
      (1)   Site Plan Permit Process May Be Modified. Processing of a Site Plan
Permit may be modified under the provisions of this Chapter to allow the
proposed reconstruction or repair to comply as nearly as possible with the
applicable development standards of this Development Code.
      (2)   Finding. Issuance of a Site Plan Permit under post-disaster
circumstances shall include the finding that the site plan has been designed to
meet the current requirements of this Development Code as closely as feasible,
including access, landscaping, loading, open space, parking, setbacks, and
walls.
   (b)   Temporary Use Permit Post-Disaster.
      (1)   Issuance of Temporary Use Permit Before Building Permit. A
Temporary Use Permit processed under the provisions of this Chapter may be
issued before the issuance of a Building Permit to reconstruct the permanent
unit(s), but a Building Permit shall be applied for within 180 days after
issuance of the Temporary Use Permit.
      (2)   Findings. Approval of temporary mobile housing or temporary
nonresidential structures shall first require that all of the following
findings can be made:
         (A)   The site for the proposed use is adequate in terms of shape and
size to accommodate the proposed use and all required landscaping, loading,
open spaces, parking, setbacks, walls and fences, yards, and other required
features;
         (B)   The site for the proposed use has adequate access;
         (C)   The proposed use will not have a substantial adverse effect on
abutting property or the allowed use of the abutting property;
         (D)   The proposed use is in compliance with the goals and policies of
the General Plan and any applicable community plan or specific plan; and
         (E)   The lawful conditions stated in the approval are deemed
reasonable and necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.15.070 CEQA Exemption.
   All applications and permits approved under the provisions of this Chapter
are exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) in compliance with Public Resources Code §§ 21080 (b)(2) and (3) and §
21172 and § 15269 of the CEQA Guidelines.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 86.15.080 Appeals.
   All land use decisions provided for by this Chapter shall be appealable in
compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
DIVISION 7: SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 87.01: SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
87.01.010   Purpose.
   
87.01.020   Authority.
   
87.01.030   Applicability.
   
87.01.040   Definitions.
   
87.01.050   Responsibility for Administration.
   
87.01.060   Advisory Agency.
   
87.01.070   Authority for Subdivision Decisions.
   
87.01.080   Type of Subdivision Approval Required.
   
87.01.090   Applications Deemed Approved.
   
87.01.100   Exceptions to Subdivision Standards.
   
87.01.110   Appeals.
   
87.01.120   Enforcement of Subdivision Regulations.
§ 87.01.010 Purpose.
   This Division constitutes the San Bernardino County Subdivision Ordinance.
These provisions are intended to supplement, implement, and work with the
Subdivision Map Act, Government Code §§ 66410 et seq. (hereafter referred to as
the “Map Act”). This Division is not intended to replace the Map Act, and must
be used in conjunction with the Map Act in the preparation of subdivision
applications, and the review, approval, and improvement of proposed
subdivisions.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.020 Authority.
   This Division is adopted in compliance with the Map Act as a “local
ordinance,” as the term is used in the Map Act. All provisions of the Map Act
and future amendments to the Map Act not incorporated into this Division shall,
nevertheless, apply to all subdivision maps and proceedings under this
Division.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.030 Applicability.
   (a)   Subdivision Approval Required. Each subdivision of land within the
County shall be authorized through the approval of a map or other entitlement
in compliance with this Division.
   (b)   Conflicts with Map Act. In the event of any conflicts between the
provisions of this Division and the Map Act, the Map Act shall control.
   (C)   Compliance with Other Regulations Required. The approval or
conditional approval of a subdivision map shall not authorize an exception or
deviation from any zoning regulation in this Development Code, or as an
approval to proceed with any development in violation of other applicable
provisions of the County Code or other applicable ordinances or regulations of
the County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.040 Definitions.
   Definitions of the technical terms and phrases used in this Division are
located in
Division 10 (Definitions).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.050 Responsibility for Administration.
   The Director and County Surveyor are authorized and directed to administer
and enforce the provisions of this Division and applicable provisions of the
Map Act for subdivisions within the County, except as otherwise provided by
this Division.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.060 Advisory Agency.
   (a)   Advisory Agency Established. The advisory agency for subdivision
review as used in the Map Act shall be the Department.
   (b)   Authority and Duties. The advisory agency shall perform the following
duties, and as further detailed in §
87.01.070 (Authority for Subdivision Decisions):
      (1)   Approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove Tentative Maps;
      (2)   Recommend to the Commission for review and action on those projects
being referred to the Commission.
      (3)   Recommend to the Board the approval, conditional approval, or
disapproval of requests for exceptions to the County’s design and improvement
standards, in compliance with §
87.01.100 (Exceptions to Subdivision Standards);
      (4)   Recommend modifications of the requirements of this Division;
      (5)   Review and make recommendations concerning proposed subdivisions
within incorporated cities in compliance with the Map Act when the advisory
agency has elected to do so; and
      (6)   Perform additional duties and exercise additional authorities as
specified by law and by this Division.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.070 Authority for Subdivision Decisions.
   
Table 87-1 (Subdivision Review Authority) identifies the County official or
authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of
subdivision application and other decision required by this Division.
Table 87-1
Subdivision Review Authority
                 Applicable       Role of Review Authority(1)
Type of Decision Development Code Director County Surveyor Commission Board
                 Section
Table 87-1
Subdivision Review Authority
Type of        Applicable   Role of Review Authority(1)
Decision       Development  Director    County Surveyor Commission Board
               Code Section
Tentative Map,                                          Decision/  Decision/
Vesting        87.04        Decision(2)                 Appeal(3)  Appeal
Tentative Map
Parcel Map     87.06                    Decision        Appeal     Appeal
Final Map      87.06                    Recommend                  Decision
Certificate of 87.04.020    Decision                    Appeal     Appeal
Compliance
Official Map   87.04.050    Recommend   Recommend       Recommend  Decision
Lot Line       87.04.040    Decision                    Appeal     Appeal
Adjustment
Parcel Merger  87.04.050    Decision                    Appeal     Appeal
Reversion to   87.04.060    Decision                    Appeal     Appeal
Acreage
Notes:
(1)   “Recommend” means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a
higher decision-making body; “Decision” means that the review authority makes
the final decision on the matter; “Appeal” means that the review authority may
consider and decide upon appeals to the decision of an earlier decision-making
body, in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
(2)   The Director may choose to not make a decision on a Tentative Map and may
instead refer the matter to the Commission for hearing and a decision. See §
87.02.040(a) (Evaluation of application).
(3)   The Commission may choose to not make a decision on a Tentative Map and
may instead refer the matter to the Board for hearing and a decision.
 
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.080 Type of Subdivision Approval Required.
   Any subdivision of an existing parcel into two or more parcels shall require
approval by the County in compliance with this Division. In general, the
procedure for subdivision first requires the approval of a Tentative Map, and
then the approval of a Parcel Map (for a subdivision that results in four or
fewer parcels) or a Final Map (for a subdivision that results in five or more
parcels) to complete the subdivision process. The County’s review of a
Tentative Map evaluates the compliance of the proposed subdivision with County
standards, and the appropriateness of the proposed subdivision design. Parcel
and Final Maps are precise surveying documents that detail the location and
dimensions of all parcel boundaries in an approved subdivision and, after
approval, are recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
   (a)   Tentative Map Requirements. The filing and approval of a Tentative Map
is required for:
      (1)   A subdivision or resubdivision of four or fewer parcels, as
authorized by Map Act § 66428; and
      (2)   A subdivision or resubdivision or of five or more parcels, and all
other types of subdivisions required to have Tentative Map approval by Map Act
§ 66426.
   (b)   Parcel and Final Map Requirements. A Parcel or Final Map (see
Chapter 87.03) shall be required as follows:
      (1)   Parcel Map. The filing and approval of a Parcel Map (
Chapter 87.06) shall be required for a subdivision creating four or fewer
parcels, with or without a designated remainder in compliance with Map Act
Article 2, Chapter 1, except for the following subdivisions:
         (A)   Public Agency or Utility Conveyances. Any conveyance of land,
including a fee interest, an easement, or a license, to a governmental agency,
public entity, public utility or a subsidiary of a public utility for rights-
of-way, unless the Director determines based on substantial evidence that
public policy necessitates a Parcel Map, in an individual case, in compliance
with Map Act § 66428;
         (B)   Rail Right-of-Way Leases. Subdivisions of a portion of the
operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation as defined by the Public
Utilities Code § 230, which are created by short-term leases (terminable by
either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing); or
         (C)   Waived Parcel Map. A subdivision that has been granted a waiver
of Parcel Map requirements in compliance with §
87.03.030 (Waiver of Parcel Map).
      (2)   Final Map. The filing and approval of a Final Map (
Chapter 87.03) shall be required for a subdivision of five or more parcels,
except a subdivision that is otherwise required to have a Parcel Map by Map Act
§ 66426.
   (c)   Exemptions from Subdivision Approval Requirements. The types of
subdivisions identified by Map Act §§ 66411, 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2, and
66426.5, or other applicable Map Act provision as not being subject to the
requirements of the Map Act, and/or not being considered to be divisions of
land for the purposes of the Map Act, shall be exempt from the subdivision
approval requirements of this Division.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.090 Applications Deemed Approved.
   A subdivision application deemed approved in compliance with Government Code
§§ 65956 or 66452.1, 66452.2 or 66452.4, shall be subject to all applicable
provisions of this Development Code, and any conditions imposed by the review
authority, which shall be satisfied by the subdivider before a Building Permit
is issued. A Parcel or Final Map filed for record after its Tentative Map is
deemed approved shall remain subject to all the mandatory requirements of this
Division and the Map Act, including Map Act §§ 66473, 66473.5, and 66474.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.100 Exceptions to Subdivision Standards.
   An exception to a provision of
Chapter 87.06 (Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements) may be
requested by a subdivider in compliance with this Section. An exception shall
not be used to waive or modify a provision of the Map Act, or a provision of
this Division that is duplicated or paraphrased from the Map Act.
   (a)   Application. An application for an exception shall be submitted on
forms provided by the Department together with the required filing fee. The
application shall include a description of each standard and requirement for
which an exception is requested, together with the reasons why the subdivider
believes the exception is justified.
   (b)   Filing and Processing. A request for an exception shall be filed and
processed as follows.
      (1)   An exception shall be processed and acted upon in the same manner
as the Tentative Map, concurrently with the Tentative Map if the exception
request was filed at the same time.
      (2)   The approval of an exception shall not constitute approval of the
Tentative Map and the approval or disapproval of an exception shall not extend
the time limits for the expiration of the map established by §
87.02.120 (Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration).
      (3)   An exception request may be filed after the approval of a Tentative
Map, but shall be considered by the Tentative Map review authority using the
same procedures as the original Tentative Map.
   (c)   Approval of Exception Requests. The Board shall have the authority to
approve or disapprove exception requests in compliance with this Section. The
Board shall not grant relief from a specified requirement or standard unless
all of the following findings are first made:
      (1)   Due to special circumstances or conditions affecting this property,
the strict application of
Chapter 87.06 would create an unnecessary hardship;
      (2)   The exception is consistent with the intent of the requirements of
Chapter 87.06 and does not constitute a grant of special privilege;
      (3)   The exception would not result in significant increased adverse
environmental impacts compared to the strict application of the requirements of
Chapter 87.06; and
      (4)   The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare or injurious to other property
in the territory in which the property is situated.
      (5)   The exception will not affect the consistency of the proposed
subdivision with the General Plan, any applicable community plan, or any
applicable specific plan.
   (d)   Conditions of Approval. In granting an exception, the Board shall
secure substantially the same objectives of the regulations for which the
exception is requested and shall impose whatever conditions it deems necessary
to protect the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare, and to
mitigate any environmental impacts in compliance with California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.110 Appeals.
   A decision of the Director or Commission made in compliance with this
Division may be appealed in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals) and Map Act § 66452.5.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.01.120 Enforcement of Subdivision Regulations.
   (a)   Violations. A person who violates any provision of this Division shall
be subject to the penalties specified by Map Act Division 2, Chapter 7, Article
1 and/or, where applicable, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction as
specified in
Chapter 86.09 of this Development Code (Enforcement).
   (b)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   Prohibition on Transfers. 
         (A)   No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or portion of
a parcel of real property, or commence construction of any building for sale,
lease, or financing on a parcel, except for model homes, or allow occupancy,
for which a Parcel or Final Map is required by this Division and the Map Act,
until a map in full compliance with this Division has been filed for record by
the County Recorder.
         (B)   Conveyance of any part of a division of real property for which
a Final or Parcel Map is required by this Division shall not be made by parcel
or block number, initial or other designation, until the map has been filed for
record by the County Recorder.
      (2)   Prohibition on Issuance of Permits.
         (A)   No officer, board, commission, agency, department, or special
district of the County shall issue any permit or grant any approval necessary
to develop any real property that has been divided, or that has resulted from a
division, in violation of the provisions of this Division if it finds or is
informed by the Director that development of the real property is contrary to
the public health and safety. Before making a finding that the development of
the real property is contrary to the public health and safety, the Director
shall conduct a review.
         (B)   At the review, the Director shall consider all information and
evidence submitted. The decision of the Director may be appealed in compliance
with Map Act § 66452.5 to the Commission by any aggrieved person, or by a
County officer, board, department, or agency. The authority to disapprove the
permit or requested approval shall apply whether the applicant was the owner of
the real property at the time of the violation, or whether the applicant, if
the current owner of the real property, was with or without actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the violation, at the
time of the acquisition of their interest in the real property. If any County
officer, board, commission, agency, department, or special district issues any
permit or grants approval for the development of real property, it may request
a report from the Director and impose any additional conditions as would have
been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner
of record acquired the property.
         (C)   For parcels created before March 4, 1972, notice of the review
shall be given by registered mail to the owner of the real property as shown on
the latest equalized assessment roll book. The review shall be held not less
than 14 days nor more than 30 days after receipt by the owner of the notice of
review.
      (3)   Statement of Limitations. This Section does not apply to any parcel
of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contract for sale or lease, or sold
or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law regulating the design and
improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was
established.
   (c)   Remedies. If construction activity on property subject to a Parcel or
Final Map is occurring contrary to the Map Act, a requirement of the Map, or
any other Federal, State, or local law, rule, or ordinance, the Director may
order the activity stopped by written notice served on any person responsible
for the activity, in addition to the remedies outlined in Map Act Division 2,
Chapter 7, Article 2. The responsible person shall immediately stop the
activity until authorized by the Director to proceed. For the purposes of this
Section, construction activities include, but are not limited to, grading,
earth moving, and/or tree removal.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 87.02: TENTATIVE MAP FILING AND PROCESSING
Section
   
87.02.010   Purpose.
   
87.02.020   Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents.
   
87.02.030   Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing.
   
87.02.040   Evaluation of Application.
   
87.02.050   Review and Decision.
   
87.02.060   Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval.
   
87.02.070   Conditions of Approval.
   
87.02.080   Effective Date of Tentative Map Approval.
   
87.02.090   Changes to Approved Tentative Map or Conditions.
   
87.02.100   Effect of Tentative Map Approval, Completion of Subdivision
Process.
   
87.02.110   Vesting Tentative Maps.
   
87.02.120   Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration.
   
87.02.130   Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps.
§ 87.02.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval
or disapproval of Tentative Maps, consistent with the requirements of the Map
Act.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.020 Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents.
   (a)   Submittal Requirements. When a Tentative Map is required by §
87.01.080 (Type of Subdivision Approval Required), Tentative Map submittal
shall include the application forms, all information and other materials
prepared as required by the Department and the County Surveyor, and a Tentative
Map prepared in the format required by the Department and the County Surveyor.
   (b)   Filing of Phased Projects. If the subdivider wishes to file multiple
Parcel or Final Maps for a development project that will be phased, then one of
the following shall first be completed:
      (1)   The subdivider, at the time the Tentative Map is filed, shall
inform the Department of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple Parcel or
Final Maps on the Tentative Map; or
      (2)   After the filing of the Tentative Map, the Department and the
subdivider concur in the filing of multiple Final Maps.
      (3)   A subdivider filing multiple Parcel or Final Maps shall show the
boundary limits of each phase and designate the sequence of filing for
recordation of each phase to the satisfaction of the Development Review
Committee.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.030 Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing.
   (a)   General Filing and Processing Requirements. A Tentative Map
application shall be submitted to the Department for processing, and shall be:
      (1)   Reviewed for completeness and accuracy (refer to §
85.03.020 [Applications for Land Use Decisions]);
      (2)   Referred to affected agencies;
      (3)   Reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA) where applicable; and
      (4)   Evaluated in compliance with §
87.02.040 (Evaluation of Application) below.
   (b)   Referral to Affected Agencies. The procedure provided by this
Subdivision is in addition to the procedures in
Chapter 85.01 (Permit Application Filing and Processing).
      (1)   Required Referrals. The Director shall refer a Tentative Map
application for review and comment to agencies that will be expected to provide
service to the proposed subdivision, including, as appropriate, County agencies
and departments, cities, special districts, and local agencies, public
utilities, and State agencies.
      (2)   Anticipated Type of Response. The agencies that receive a Tentative
Map application are expected to respond to the Department with an evaluation of
the proposal, a list of items (e.g., hydrology study, title report, traffic
study, etc.) that may need to be filed and considered during the evaluation
phase, and a list of proposed conditions of Tentative Map approval.
      (3)   Time Limits for Referral and Response. As required by Map Act §§
66453 through 66455.7, referral shall occur within five days of the Tentative
Map application being determined to be complete. An agency wishing to respond
to a referral shall provide the Department with its recommendations within 15
days after receiving the Tentative Map application.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.040 Evaluation of Application.
   The following shall occur after completion of the initial processing and the
application being deemed complete.
   (a)   Evaluation of Application. The Director:
      (1)   Shall review and evaluate each Tentative Map as to its compliance
and consistency with applicable provisions of this Development Code, the
General Plan, any applicable community plan, any applicable specific plan, and
the Map Act, in compliance with Map Act § 66474.2;
      (2)   Shall determine the extent to which the proposed subdivision
complies with the findings in §
87.02.060 (Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval);
      (3)   Shall determine that the project is “noncontroversial.” For the
purpose of this Section, “noncontroversial” shall mean:
         (A)   That no member of the Development Review Committee objects to
the project or any portion of the project;
         (B)   No specific written request has been received requesting public
hearing review of the project from a person notified; and
         (C)   In the opinion of the Director, there has been no substantial
objection to the proposed project from members of the public.
      (4)   May refer the project to the Commission for action if the Director
determines the project to be controversial.
   (b)   Preparation of an Evaluation. The Director shall prepare an evaluation
in compliance with Map Act § 66452.3 describing the conclusions of the map
application review. Copies of the evaluation shall be mailed to the subdivider
(and each tenant of the subject property, in the case of a condominium
conversion [§
87.04.030]) at least three days before any hearing or action on the Tentative
Map by the review authority in compliance with §
87.02.050 or
87.02.060.
      (1)   County Department Evaluations and Recommendations. Wherever
possible, the evaluations and recommendations of the County departments shall
be presented to the Planning Agency by the Chair of the Development Review
Committee or designee.
      (2)   Required Action in the Case of Waste Discharge Violations. The
Development Review Committee shall advise the Planning Agency as to whether the
discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into an existing community
sewer system will result in the violation of existing requirements prescribed
by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board in compliance with Water
Code §§ 13000 et seq. In the event that the Planning Agency finds that the
proposed waste discharge would result in or add to violation of the
requirements of the Water Quality Control Board, it may disapprove the
Tentative Map(s), or take other action as may be allowed by the policies of the
Board of Supervisors.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.050 Review and Decision.
   (a)   Review Authority. The Director shall be the review authority for all
Tentative Maps, except as follows, and shall use the following procedures for
reviewing and making decisions on Tentative Maps.
      (1)   Tentative Tract Maps and Vesting Tentative Maps. The Director shall
review each Tentative Map proposing five or more parcels, each Vesting
Tentative Map, and any other Tentative Tract Map that requires the recordation
of a Final Map in compliance with the Staff Review with Notice Procedures in §
85.02.030 (Staff Review with Notice). The applications for these maps shall
also be reviewed by the Development Review Committee (DRC) for its
recommendations. The Director may refer a Tentative Map to the Commission for
action where the Director first determines that:
         (A)   There have been substantial public objections to the proposal;
         (B)   The proposal is filed concurrently with an application subject
to public hearing review procedures; or
         (C)   Any member of the Development Review Committee objects to the
proposal.
      (2)   Tentative Parcel Map. A Tentative Map proposing four or fewer
parcels shall be reviewed in compliance with the procedures for Staff Review
with Notice in §
85.02.030 (Staff Review with Notice).The applications for these maps shall also
be reviewed by the DRC for its recommendations when the subdivision is of a
type described in Map Act § 66426(a), (b), (c), or (d). The Director may refer
a Tentative Parcel Map to the Commission when the Director determines that the
proposal is controversial, or when the proposal is filed concurrently with an
application that is otherwise required by this Development Code to have a
public hearing.
      (3)   Tentative Map Referred to the Commission. When a Tentative Map is
referred to the Commission for action, a public hearing shall be required in
compliance with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings).
   (b)   Review of Tentative Map.
      (1)   Actions of Review Authority. After completion of the evaluation
required by §
87.02.040 (Evaluation of Application), the review authority shall:
         (A)   Review and evaluate each Tentative Map as to its compliance and
consistency with applicable provisions of this Development Code, the General
Plan, any applicable community plan, any applicable specific plan, and the Map
Act. The evaluation shall be based on the information provided by an initial
study or environmental impact report (EIR), where applicable, and any public
testimony received; and
         (B)   Approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the Tentative Map
in compliance with Map Act § 66452.1 and Public Resources Code § 21151.5 within
50 days after certification of the EIR, adoption of a negative declaration, or
a determination by the local agency that the project is exempt from the
requirements of Public Resources Code Division 13 (commencing with § 21000).
      (2)   Findings Required. Tentative Map approval shall require that the
review authority first make all of the findings required by §
87.02.060 (Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval). The review authority may
require conditions of approval in compliance with §
87.02.070 (Conditions of Approval).
      (3)   Appeal of Decision. A decision by the review authority to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove a Tentative Map may be appealed to the
Board, in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals) and Map Act § 66452.5.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.060 Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval.
   In order to approve or recommend the approval of a Tentative Map and
conditions of approval, or to disapprove a Tentative Map, the review authority
shall first make the findings required by this Section. In determining whether
to approve a Tentative Map, the County shall apply only the ordinances,
policies, and standards in effect at the date the Department determined that
the application was complete in compliance with §
87.02.030 (Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing), except where the County
has initiated General Plan, community plan, specific plan, area plan or
Development Code changes, and provided public notice as required by Map Act §
66474.2.
   (a)   Required Findings for Approval.
      (1)   Mandatory Findings. The review authority shall approve a Tentative
Map only after first making all of the following findings, as required by Map
Act §§ 66474 and 66474.6. The findings shall apply to each proposed parcel as
well as the entire subdivision, including any parcel identified as a designated
remainder in compliance with Map Act § 66424.6.
         (A)   The proposed map, subdivision design, and improvements are
consistent with the General Plan, any applicable community plan, and any
applicable specific plan;
         (B)   The site is physically suitable for the type and proposed
density of development;
         (C)   The design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements are
not likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and
avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;
         (D)   The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is not
likely to cause serious public health or safety problems;
         (E)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
not conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through
or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. This finding may also be
made if the review authority finds that alternate easements for access or use
will be provided, and that they will be substantially equivalent to ones
previously acquired by the public. This finding shall apply only to easements
of record, or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby granted to the review authority to
determine that the public at large has acquired easements of access through or
use of property within the proposed subdivision;
         (F)   The discharge of sewage from the proposed subdivision into the
community sewer system will not result in violation of existing requirements
prescribed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board;
         (G)   The design of the subdivision provides, to the extent feasible,
passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities; and
         (H)   The proposed subdivision, its design, density, and type of
development and improvements conforms to the regulations of this Development
Code and the regulations of any public agency having jurisdiction by law.
      (2)   Additional Specific Findings. The following additional specific
findings shall be made by the review authority before approval or conditional
approval of a Tentative Map, as applicable to the application.
         (A)   If the proposed subdivision is a conversion of residential real
property into a condominium, a community apartment project, or a stock
cooperative, the review authority shall first make the additional finding that
the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements of Map Act §§ 66427.1
(a) and 66452 before approving the proposed subdivision. Those requirements
include the following:
            (I)   Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium, community
apartment project, or stock cooperative project has received written
notification of intention to convert at least 60 days before the filing of a
Tentative Map in compliance with § 66452.
            (II)   Each of the tenants, and each person applying for the rental
of a unit in the residential real property, has, or will have, received all
applicable notices and rights required in compliance with §§ 66451 and 66452.
            (III)   Each of the tenants received ten-days’ written notification
that an application for a public report will be, or has been, submitted to the
State Department of Real Estate, and that the report will be available on
request.
         (B)   If the proposed subdivision is within an Agricultural Preserve,
it shall comply with Map Act § 66474.4 and the findings in that Section,
whether or not the land is currently under contract.
      (3)   Findings Under an EIR. Notwithstanding the finding required by
Subdivision (a)(1)(C), above, the review authority may approve a Tentative Map,
or a Parcel Map for which a Tentative Map was not required, if an Environmental
Impact Report (EIR) was prepared for the project and a finding is made in
compliance with the Public Resources Code § 21081, that specific economic,
social, or other considerations make the mitigation measures or project
alternatives identified in the EIR infeasible.
   (b)   Supplemental Findings. In addition to the findings identified in
Subdivision (a) above, the review authority shall not approve a Tentative Map
unless it can also make the following findings, when they are applicable to the
specific subdivision proposal.
      (1)   Construction of Improvements. In the case of a Tentative Map for a
subdivision that will require a subsequent Parcel Map, the construction of
improvements for the subdivision within a specified time after the recordation
of the Parcel Map is in the interest of the public health and safety, and it is
necessary as a prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.
      (2)   Waiver of Parcel Map. The findings required by §
87.03.030 (Waiver of Parcel Map), if waiver of a Parcel Map has been requested
with the Tentative Map application.
   (c)   Situations Requiring Disapproval Unless Prerequisites Satisfied. A
Tentative Map shall not be approved in the following cases.
      (1)   Residential Conversion Without Required Advance Tenant Notice. In
the case of a conversion of residential real property to a condominium project,
community apartment project, or stock cooperative, the review authority shall
not approve the Tentative Map unless evidence is provided by the subdivider, as
required by Map Act §§ 66452.8 and 66452.9, that proper notification has been
given to each of the tenants of the proposed conversion notifying of the
subdivider’s intent to convert.
      (2)   Residential Conversion Without Required Favorable Votes. In the
case of a conversion of a stock cooperative or a community apartment project to
a condominium, the review authority shall not approve a Tentative Map unless
evidence is provided by the subdivider, as required by Map Act § 66452.10, that
the required number of owners in the cooperative or project, as specified in
the bylaws or other organizational documents, have voted in favor of the
conversion.
      (3)   Agricultural Preserve Parcels Too Small for Agriculture. In the
case of land that is subject to a contract in compliance with the California
Land Conservation Act of 1965 (Government Code § 51296) or if the land is
located within an agricultural preserve without being subject to a contract,
the review authority shall not approve a Tentative Map, or a Parcel Map for
which a Tentative Map was not required, if it finds that a parcel(s) proposed
within the subdivision would be too small to sustain its agricultural use.
         (A)   For the purposes of this Section, land shall be presumed to be
in parcels too small to sustain their agricultural use if the land is:
            (I)   Less than ten acres in the case of prime agricultural land,
except as allowed in Subdivision (3)(c) below; or
            (II)   Less than 40 acres in size in the case of land that is not
prime agriculture land unless otherwise provided by this Development Code.
         (B)   The review authority may approve a subdivision with parcels
smaller than those listed above if the findings in Map Act §§ 66474.4(c)(1) or
66474.4(c)(2), along with the other applicable findings in this Section are
first made, or the land within the subdivision is subject to a contract when
one of the following has occurred in compliance with Map Act § 66474.4(e):
            (I)   The Local Agency Formation Commission has approved the
annexation of the land to a city and the city will not succeed to the contract
as provided in Government Code §§ 51243 and 51243.5.
            (II)   Written notice of nonrenewal of the contract has been served
on or after March 7, 1985, as provided in Government Code § 51245, and, as a
result of that notice, there are no more than three years remaining in the term
of the contract.
            (III)   The Board has granted tentative approval for cancellation
of the contract in compliance with Government Code § 51282.
         (C)   In compliance with Government Code § 66474.4(c), the Board has
made the finding that parcels smaller than ten acres in size within
Agricultural Preserves and designated RL (Rural Living) in the Crafton area
east of Redlands can sustain agricultural uses allowed under Land Conservation
Contracts; provided, the Planning Agency makes all of the following additional
findings before the approval of any proposed subdivision:
            (I)   The subdivision is compatible with and would not adversely
effect the existing agricultural uses or support services within the preserve;
            (II)   The subdivision will not serve to encourage land uses which
will conflict with commercial agricultural uses; and
            (III)   The proposed subdivision has no parcels less than five
acres in area unless the parcels are within a planned development or are for
“well lot” purposes only. The average parcel size of all parcels within a
planned development subdivision is not less than five acres.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.070 Conditions of Approval.
   Along with the approval of a Tentative Map, the review authority may adopt
any conditions of approval deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of this
Development Code, including conditions regarding the matters described in
Subdivision (a), below; provided, that all conditions shall be consistent with
the requirements of the Map Act.
   (a)   Dedications and Improvements.
      (1)   As a condition of approval of a map of five or more parcels, the
Director may require dedications and improvements as necessary to ensure that
the parcels to be created:
         (A)   Are provided with adequate public services and utilities,
including any appropriate cable television services, to meet the needs of
future residents or users;
         (B)   Are of adequate design in all respects in compliance with this
Development Code;
         (C)   Act to mitigate any potential environmental impacts identified
in the Environmental Impact Report (EIR) or by other means; and
         (D)   Provide for proper grading and erosion control, including the
prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property.
      (2)   All improvements shall comply with adopted County standards.
   (b)   Access.
      (1)   Except as provided below, parcels created by a subdivision of land
shall abut upon a recorded dedicated public right-of-way of a width as
established by the County Master Plan of Highways or County Highway Right-of-
Way Standards, or shall be ensured of access to the County road system by an
approved access which connects a parcel(s) to a maintained public street or
State highway.
      (2)   The review authority may waive the requirements for approved access
to subdivisions having parcel sizes of 40 gross acres or more when all of the
following findings are first made:
         (A)   The applicant is or will be subject to severe hardship unless
the waiver is approved;
         (B)   There is an existing traveled roadway which has been in
existence for at least five years which roadway is at least 20 feet in width at
all points; and
         (C)   The roadway has the capability for normal motor vehicle use to
each parcel in the proposed subdivision.
      (3)   Private road easements may be approved for access to each parcel if
it is determined that public street access cannot be provided due to certain
title limitations or topographical conditions.
      (4)   Road easements of record established before the effective date of
this Division shall be recognized as legal access to each parcel of the
proposed subdivision.
      (5)   Existing traveled roads for which a court has determined that a
prescriptive right by users exists for public use shall be recognized as legal
access to each parcel of the proposed subdivision.
   (c)   Applicable Ordinances, Policies, and Standards. In determining whether
to approve or disapprove an application for a Final Map, the County shall apply
only those ordinances, policies, and standards in effect on the date the
proposal for the subdivision was accepted as complete, in compliance with Map
Act § 66474.2.
   (d)   Conditions Modifying Subdivision Design – Time for Compliance. When
modifications in design require a change in the conditions of approval of a
Tentative Map, the subdivider shall, at least 30 days before the submission of
a Final Map, submit the appropriate number of copies of the Tentative Map as
modified to the Department for distribution to, and review for confirmation by,
the Development Review Committee representatives.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.080 Effective Date of Tentative Map Approval.
   The approval of a Tentative Map shall become effective for the purposes of
filing a Parcel or Final Map, including compliance with conditions of approval,
in compliance with §
86.06.020 (Effective Date of Permits).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.090 Changes to Approved Tentative Map or Conditions.
   A subdivider may request changes to an approved Tentative Map or its
conditions of approval before recordation of a Parcel or Final Map in
compliance with this Section. Changes to a Parcel or Final Map after
recordation are subject to §
87.03.120 (Amendments to Recorded Parcel or Final Maps).
   (a)   Limitation on Allowed Changes. Changes or amendments to a Tentative
Map that may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this Section
include major adjustments to the location of proposed lot lines and
improvements, and reductions in the number of approved parcels (but no increase
in the number of approved parcels), and any changes to the conditions of
approval, consistent with the findings required by Subdivision (d) (Findings
for Approval), below. All proposed changes not covered by this Section shall
require the filing and processing of a new Tentative Map.
   (b)   Application for Changes. The subdivider shall file an application and
filing fee with the Department, using the forms furnished by the Department,
together with the following additional information:
      (1)   A statement identifying the Tentative Map number, the features of
the map or particular conditions to be changed and the changes requested, the
reasons why the changes are requested, and any facts that justify the changes;
and
      (2)   Any additional information deemed appropriate by the Department.
   (c)   Processing. Proposed changes to a Tentative Map or conditions of
approval shall be processed using the same procedures as the original Tentative
Map, except as otherwise provided by this Section.
   (d)   Findings for Approval. The review authority shall not modify the
approved Tentative Map or conditions of approval unless it first finds that the
change is necessary because of one or more of the following circumstances, and
that all of the applicable findings for approval required by §§
87.02.070(a) and (b), above, can still be made:
      (1)   There was a material mistake of fact in the deliberations leading
to the original approval;
      (2)   There has been a change of circumstances related to the original
approval; or
      (3)   A serious and unforeseen hardship has occurred, not due to any
action of the applicant subsequent to the enactment of this Development Code.
   (e)   Effect of Changes on Time Limits. Approved changes to a Tentative Map
or conditions of approval shall not be considered as approval of a new
Tentative Map, and shall not extend the time limits provided by §
87.02.120 (Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.100 Effect of Tentative Map Approval, Completion of Subdivision
Process.
   (a)   Effect of Approval on Prior Approvals. The approval or conditional
approval by the review authority of any revised or new Tentative Map shall
annul all previous subdivision designs and approvals thereof.
   (b)   Compliance with Conditions, Improvement Plans. After approval of a
Tentative Map in compliance with this Chapter, the subdivider shall proceed to
fulfill the conditions of approval within any time limits specified by the
conditions and the expiration of the map and, where applicable, shall prepare,
file, and receive approval of improvement plans in compliance with
Chapter 87.06 (Subdivision Design and Improvement Requirements), before
constructing any required improvements.
   (c)   Parcel or Final Map Preparation, Filing, and Recordation.
      (1)   A Parcel Map for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall be
prepared, filed, processed, and recorded in compliance with
Chapter 87.03 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps), to complete the subdivision, unless
a Parcel Map has been waived in compliance with §
87.03.030 (Waiver of Parcel Map).
      (2)   A Final Map for a subdivision of five or more parcels shall be
prepared, filed, processed, and recorded in compliance with
Chapter 87.03 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps), to complete the subdivision.
      (3)   Project phasing and the filing of multiple Parcel or Final Maps
shall be in compliance with §
87.02.020 (Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents).
      (4)   Upon the filing and recordation of any map, including amended maps
and certificates of corrections or any record of survey pursuant to the
Business and Professions Code, the County Recorder shall transmit an electronic
copy of the map to the County Surveyor. The County Surveyor shall maintain a
geographic index for all recorded documents transmitted pursuant to this
Section.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.110 Vesting Tentative Maps.
   The preparation, filing, processing, and approval or disapproval of a
Vesting Tentative Map shall comply with Map Act §§ 66452 and 66498.1 et seq.
and the provisions of this Section.
   (a)   Filing Criteria for Vesting Tentative Maps.
      (1)   Whenever a provision of the Map Act, as implemented and
supplemented by this Division, requires the filing of a Tentative or Parcel Map
for a residential development, a Vesting Tentative Map may be filed instead in
compliance with this Section.
      (2)   If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting
Tentative Map statute, the filing of a Vesting Tentative Map shall not be a
prerequisite to any approval for any proposed permit for construction, or work
preparatory to construction.
   (b)   Content of Application. The content and form of Vesting Tentative Maps
shall be governed by the provisions of this Subdivision.
      (1)   At the time a Vesting Tentative Map is filed, it shall have printed
conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”
      (2)   A Vesting Tentative Map shall be filed in the same form and have
the same contents, accompanying data, and reports as identified in §
87.02.020 (Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents), except as
specified in this Section.
   (c)   Procedures. The following provisions shall govern the filing,
processing, and review of Vesting Tentative Maps.
      (1)   A Vesting Tentative Map shall be processed and reviewed using the
same procedures as identified in this Division for a Tentative Map in
compliance with §§
87.02.030 (Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing) and
87.02.050 (Review and Decision), except as specified in this Section.
         (A)   Before filing a Vesting Tentative Map, the subdivider shall have
a pre-application conference with the Development Review Committee (DRC) to
determine if any additional information should be filed with the Vesting
Tentative Map application. The applicant shall submit to the DRC before the
pre-application conference all information that is required of a Tentative Map
application. This information will be reviewed by the DRC and additional
information may be required by the Committee to be submitted with the Vesting
Tentative Map application. Preliminary environmental review of the proposed
project shall be completed before the pre-application conference.
         (B)   The minutes of the pre-application conference shall dictate the
filing requirements for the Vesting Tentative Map, and shall accompany the
filing of the map. The information required by the DRC for formal submittal of
the proposed project may include the following:
            (I)   Drainage plan for control of on- and off-site storm runoff,
channels, water courses, existing culverts, and drainpipes including existing
and proposed facilities for the control of storm waters, data as to the amount
of runoff and the approximate grade, and dimensions of proposed facilities for
the control of storm waters.
            (II)   Building envelopes.
            (III)   Proposed land use and types of all structures.
            (IV)   Detailed circulation information (existing and proposed).
This information may include area wide traffic data sufficient for the County
to determine future circulation needs.
            (V)   Detailed grading plans.
            (VI)   Geological studies.
            (VII)   Any information required by the DRC shall be clearly
detailed and listed with an anticipated review period so that it can be acted
upon within a reasonable time. The agency or department which requires any
additional information shall approve the acceptability of this information from
the applicant before the filing of the Vesting Tentative Map.
            (VIII)   The DRC may require the filing and concurrent review of
other related development applications where it is necessary for the review and
implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map.
         (C)   An approving action on a Vesting Tentative Map shall not occur
before the effective date of approval of the associated discretionary permit(s)
or action(s).
         (D)   Upon filing a Vesting Tentative Map, the subdivider shall pay
the fees required in compliance with the County Fee Ordinance for the filing
and processing of a Vesting Tentative Map.
         (E)   The approval or conditional approval of a Vesting Tentative Map
shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the
same extensions, established by this Division for the expiration of the
approval or conditional approval of a Tentative Map in compliance with §
87.02.120 (Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration).
         (F)   At any time before the expiration of a Vesting Tentative Map,
the subdivider may apply for an amendment to the Vesting Tentative Map in
compliance with §
87.02.090 (Changes to Approved Tentative Map or Conditions). No application for
amendment shall be required when the review authority first finds that the
amendment is a minor modification that is in substantial compliance with the
original approval and no new conditions of approval are required.
         (G)   For a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent
with the land use zoning district or any applicable community or specific plan
in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The
review authority may disapprove a Vesting Tentative Map or approve it
conditioned on the subdivider first obtaining the necessary change in the land
use zoning district or applicable community or specific plan to eliminate the
inconsistency. If the change in the pertinent ordinance is obtained, the
approved or conditionally approved Vesting Tentative Map shall confer the right
to proceed with the development as approved or conditionally approved.
         (H)   Fees for development permits (e.g., Building and Grading
Permits) filed in compliance with an approved Vesting Tentative Map or a
recorded Vesting Final/Parcel Map shall be the fees in effect at the time of
issuance of the permit.
   (d)   Development Rights of Vesting Tentative Maps.
      (1)   When the review authority approves or conditionally approves a
Vesting Tentative Map, that approval shall confer a vested right to proceed
with the development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies,
and standards in effect on the date the application for the subdivision has
been determined to be complete in compliance with Map Act § 66474.2. If §
66474.2 is repealed, that approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with
development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and
standards in effect at the time the Vesting Tentative Map is approved or
conditionally approved.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Subdivision (1), above, the review authority may
condition or disapprove a permit, approval, extension, entitlement, or require
an amendment to the map if it first determines any of the following:
         (A)   A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision
or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health
or safety, or both.
         (B)   The condition or disapproval is required in order to comply with
State or Federal law.
      (3)   The review authority may alter any condition of a Vesting Tentative
Map through an amendment in compliance with §
87.02.090 (Changes to Approved Tentative Map or Conditions) in order to protect
against conditions dangerous to public health and safety or to comply with
State or Federal law.
      (4)   The rights conferred by this Section shall expire if a Final or
Parcel Map is not recorded before the expiration of the Vesting Tentative Map
in compliance with §
87.02.120 (Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration). If the Final or Parcel
Map is recorded, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:
         (A)   An initial time period of 12 months. Where several Final Maps
are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single Vesting
Tentative Map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the
Final Map for that phase is recorded.
         (B)   The initial time period identified in Subdivision (A), above
shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete
application for a Grading Permit or for design or architectural review, if
processing exceeds 30 days from the date a complete application is filed.
         (C)   A subdivider may apply for one 12-month extension at any time
before the initial time period identified in Subdivision (A), above, expires.
If the extension is disapproved, the subdivider may appeal that disapproval to
the Board in compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals) and Map Act § 66452.5 within 15 days.
         (D)   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a Building
Permit during the periods of time specified in this Subdivision, the rights
referred to in this Subdivision shall continue until the expiration of that
permit, or any extension of that permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.120 Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration.
   (a)   Valid for 36 Months. An approved Tentative Map is valid for 36 months
after its effective date, except as otherwise provided by Map Act § 66452.6. At
the end of 36 months, the approval shall expire and become void unless:
      (1)   A Parcel or Final Map, and related security and improvement
agreements, have been timely filed with the County Surveyor in compliance with
Chapter 87.03 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps); or
      (2)   An extension of time has been granted in compliance with §
87.02.130, below.
   (b)   Expiration of an Approved Map. Expiration of an approved Tentative Map
or Vesting Tentative Map shall terminate all proceedings. The application shall
not be reactivated unless a new Tentative Map application is filed.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.02.130 Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps.
   When a subdivider has not completed all Tentative Map or Vesting Tentative
Map conditions of approval and timely filed a Parcel or Final Map with the
County within the time limits established by §
87.02.120, time extensions may be granted in compliance with this Section, §
86.06.060 (Time Limits and Extensions), and Map Act §§ 66452.6 and 66463.5.
   (a)   Filing of Extension Request. An extension request shall be in writing
and shall be filed with the Department on or before the date of expiration of
the approval or previous extension, together with the required filing fee.
   (b)   Findings for Approval of Extension. Extensions to the initial time
limit may be granted only after first finding all of the following:
      (1)   There have been no changes to the provisions of the General Plan,
any applicable community plan, any applicable specific plan, or this
Development Code applicable to the project since the approval of the Tentative
Map;
      (2)   There have been no changes in the character of the site or its
surroundings that affect how the policies of the General Plan, any applicable
community plan, any applicable specific plan, or other standards of this
Development Code apply to the project; and
      (3)   There have been no changes to the capacities of community
resources, including but not limited to water supply, sewage treatment or
disposal facilities, roads, or schools so that there is no longer sufficient
remaining capacity to serve the project.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 87.03: PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS
Section
   
87.03.010   Purpose.
   
87.03.020   Parcel Maps.
   
87.03.030   Waiver of Parcel Map.
   
87.03.040   Parcel Map Form and Content.
   
87.03.050   Filing and Processing of Parcel Maps.
   
87.03.060   Parcel Map Approval.
   
87.03.070   Final Maps.
   
87.03.080   Final Map Form and Content.
   
87.03.090   Filing and Processing of Final Maps.
   
87.03.100   Final Map Approval.
   
87.03.110   Composite Development Plans.
   
87.03.120   Amendments to Recorded Parcel or Final Maps.
§ 87.03.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing,
processing, approval, conditional approval, or disapproval, and recordation of
Parcel and Final Maps, consistent with the requirements of the Map Act.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.020 Parcel Maps.
   As required by §§
87.01.080 (Type of Subdivision Approval Required), and
87.02.100 (Effect of Tentative Map Approval, Completion of Subdivision
Process), a Parcel Map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision
process for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels, except when the requirement
for a Parcel Map is waived as identified in §
87.03.030. A Parcel Map shall be prepared, filed, and processed as identified
in §§
87.03.040 et seq.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.030 Waiver of Parcel Map.
   A subdivider may request the waiver of the requirement for a Parcel Map, and
the waiver may be granted, in compliance with the Map Act § 66428, provided
that the review authority shall first find that the proposed subdivision
complies with all applicable requirements of this Development Code and the Map
Act as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control,
appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply
availability, environmental protection, and all other applicable requirements
of this Development Code and the Map Act. A Composite Development Plan,
prepared in compliance with §
87.03.110 (Composite Development Plans), may still be required by the Director.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.040 Parcel Map Form and Content.
   A Parcel Map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a licensed land
surveyor or civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying by the State
of California. Parcel Map submittal shall include all information and other
materials prepared as required by the County Surveyor policies, adopted
standards, and the Map Act. The Parcel Map shall be based upon a field survey.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.050 Filing and Processing of Parcel Maps.
   (a)   Filing with the County Surveyor. The Parcel Map, together with all
data, information, and materials required by §
87.03.040 shall be submitted to the County Surveyor in compliance with the time
limitations specified in §
87.02.120 (Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration). The Parcel Map shall be
considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable
provisions of the Map Act and this Development Code.
   (b)   Filing and Review of Advance Copy of Parcel Map.
      (1)   Filing with County Surveyor. Where the filing of a Parcel Map is
required in compliance with this Division after the approval or conditional
approval of the Tentative Parcel Map application, the subdivider may cause the
real property included within the map to be surveyed and a Parcel Map prepared
in compliance with the approved Tentative Parcel Map application. An advance
copy of the Parcel Map shall be filed with the County Surveyor.
      (2)   Contents of Advance Copy. The advance copy of the Parcel Map shall
be accompanied by all documents required by the County Surveyor. The mapping
standards issued by the County Surveyor list the submittal requirements for a
Parcel Map.
      (3)   Review of Advance Copy for Condition Compliance. The County
Surveyor shall be the primary coordinator in seeing that the conditions of
approval of the Tentative Map have been fulfilled. The County Surveyor shall
transmit maps to and request written reports from the County departments and
public utilities, including any cable television systems, which have submitted
recommendations on the Tentative Map. Within 20 days after receipt of an
advance copy of the Parcel Map, the County department or utility shall issue a
preliminary written report regarding the compliance or noncompliance of the
advance copy of the Parcel Map to the matters under its jurisdiction.
   (c)   Filing of Official Copy of Parcel Map. If the advance copy of the
Parcel Map has been found satisfactory by the County Surveyor, the subdivider
shall cause the Parcel Map to be officially filed with the County Surveyor at
least 20 days before the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved
Tentative Map or any approved extension of time granted in compliance with §
87.02.130 (Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps). The Parcel Map shall not be
officially filed until the engineer or surveyor has received notification from
the County Surveyor that all provisions of the Tentative Map approval, the Map
Act, this Development Code, the County Code, and applicable County standards
have been complied with. The filing of the official copy of the Parcel Map with
the County Surveyor shall constitute the timely filing of the Parcel Map.
   (d)   Review of Parcel Map.
      (1)   After the issuance of a receipt for the Parcel Map, the County
Surveyor shall examine it as to sufficiency of affidavits and acknowledgements,
correctness of surveying data, mathematical data and computations, and other
matters which may require checking to ensure compliance with the provisions of
the Map Act, this Division, and County Surveyor standards.
      (2)   If the Parcel Map does not conform as required above, the
subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary
changes and resubmit the Parcel Map, together with all required data, if the
Tentative Map has not expired.
   (e)   Improvement Agreements and Security Requirements. The filing and
recording of a Parcel Map shall be subject to the requirements of §
87.07.040 (Improvement Agreements, Lien Agreements and Securities).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.060 Parcel Map Approval.
   After determining that the Parcel Map is technically correct and in full
compliance with this Section, the County Surveyor may approve the Parcel Map in
compliance with Map Act § 66463(b) or, if deemed appropriate, forward it to the
Board for approval or disapproval. After approval, the Parcel Map shall be
transmitted by the County Surveyor to the office of the County Recorder for
recordation in compliance with Map Act § 66450.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.070 Final Maps.
   As required by §
87.01.080 (Type of Subdivision Approval Required), a Final Map shall be filed
and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of five or
more parcels. A Final Map shall be prepared, filed, and processed in compliance
with §§
87.03.080 et seq.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.080 Final Map Form and Content.
   A Final Map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a licensed land
surveyor or civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying by the State
of California. Final Map submittal shall include all information and other
materials prepared as required by the County Surveyor policies, adopted
standards, and the Map Act.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.090 Filing and Processing of Final Maps.
   (a)   Filing with County Surveyor. The Final Map, together with all data,
information, and materials required by §
87.03.080 shall be submitted to the County Surveyor in compliance with the time
limitations specified in §
87.02.120 (Tentative Map Time Limits and Expiration) and Subdivision (e) (Time
Limit for Filing Final Map), below. The Final Map shall be considered submitted
when it is complete and fully complies with all applicable provisions of the
Map Act and this Development Code.
   (b)   Filing and Review of Advance Copy of Final Map.
      (1)   Filing with County Surveyor. After receipt of the action of the
review authority approving or conditionally approving the Tentative Map, the
subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any part
thereof, to be surveyed and a Final Map prepared in compliance with the
approved or conditionally approved Tentative Map application. An advance copy
of the Final Map shall be filed with the County Surveyor.
      (2)   Contents of Advance Copy. The advance copy of the Final Map shall
be accompanied by all documents required by the County Surveyor. The mapping
standards issued by the County Surveyor list the submittal requirements for a
Final Map.
      (3)   Review of Advance Copy for Condition Compliance. The County
Surveyor shall be the primary coordinator in seeing that the conditions of
approval of the Tentative Map have been fulfilled. The County Surveyor shall
transmit maps to and request written reports from the County departments and
public utilities, including any cable television systems, which have submitted
recommendations on the Tentative Map. Within 20 days after receipt of an
advance copy of the Final Map, the County department or utility shall issue a
preliminary written report regarding the compliance or noncompliance of the
advance copy of the Final Map to the matters under its jurisdiction.
   (c)   Filing of Official Copy of Final Map. If the advance copy of the Final
Map has been found satisfactory by the County Surveyor, the subdivider shall
cause the Final Map to be officially filed with the County Surveyor at least 20
days before the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved Tentative
Map or any approved extension of time granted in compliance with §
87.02.130 (Extensions of Time for Tentative Maps). The Final Map shall not be
officially filed until the engineer or surveyor has received notification from
the County Surveyor that all provisions of the Tentative Map approval, the Map
Act, this Development Code, the County Code, and applicable County standards
have been complied with. The filing of the official copy of the Final Map with
the County Surveyor shall constitute the timely filing of the Final Map.
   (d)   Review of Final Map.
      (1)   After the issuance of a receipt for the Final Map, the County
Surveyor shall examine it as to sufficiency of affidavits and acknowledgements,
correctness of surveying data, mathematical data and computations, and other
matters which may require checking to ensure compliance with the provisions of
the Map Act, this Division, and County Surveyor standards.
      (2)   If the Final Map is found to be in substantial compliance with the
Tentative Map and is in correct form, the matters shown on the map are
sufficient, and the County Surveyor is satisfied that all of the conditions of
approval have been met, the County Surveyor shall endorse approval of the Final
Map. The County Surveyor shall combine with the Final Map the agreements,
easements, and securities as required by this Division. The material shall be
transmitted to the Board for its consideration of the Final Map.
   (e)   Time Limit for Filing Final Map. If the subdivider fails to file the
Final Map with the County Surveyor and the required accompanying data with the
appropriate County departments within 36 months after the date of first
approval by the review authority or within any authorized extension of time,
the Tentative Map approval or conditional approval shall become void. In this
case, a new filing fee shall be paid, and an application for a new Tentative
Map approval shall be filed.
      (1)   If 120 days before the submittal of a Final Map, the subdivider has
failed to comply with the Tentative Map conditions which require the subdivider
to construct or install off-site improvements on land in which neither the
subdivider nor the County has sufficient title or interest, including an
easement or license, then at the time the Final Map is filed with the local
agency, to permit the improvements to be made, the subdivider shall enter into
an agreement with the County through its Department of Public Works to pay all
costs of the County in acquiring the property.
      (2)   The County shall have 120 days from the filing of the Final Map, in
compliance with Map Act § 66457, to obtain interest in the land to allow the
improvement(s) to be made by negotiation or proceedings in compliance with the
Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1230.010 et seq., including proceedings for
immediate possession of the property under the Code of Civil Procedure §§
1255.410 et seq.
      (3)   In the event the County fails to meet the 120-day time limitation,
the condition for construction of off-site improvements shall be conclusively
deemed to be waived.
      (4)   Before approval of the Final Map, the County may require the
subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the improvements, in
compliance with Subdivision (f) (Improvement Agreements and Security
Requirements), below, at the time as the County acquires an interest in the
land which will allow the improvements to be made.
      (5)   “Off-site improvements,” as used in this Subdivision, do not
include improvements which are necessary to ensure replacement or construction
of housing for persons and families of low or moderate income, as defined in
Health and Safety Code § 50093.
   (f)   Improvement Agreements and Security Requirements. If at the time of
approval of the Final Map by the Board, any improvements required by local
ordinance or as a condition of the approval of the Tentative Map have not been
completed in compliance with County standards applicable at the time of the
approval or conditional approval of the Tentative Map, the Board, as a
condition precedent to approval of the Final Map, shall require the subdivider
to enter into an agreement with the Board in compliance with §
87.07.040 (Improvement Agreements, Lien Agreements and Securities).
   (g)   Multiple Final Maps.
      (1)   Multiple Final Maps may only be filed if the subdivider included a
statement of intention with the Tentative Map that the subdivider would submit
multiple phased Final Maps.
      (2)   Project phasing and the filing of multiple Final Maps shall be in
compliance with §
87.02.020 (Tentative Map Preparation, Application Contents).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.100 Final Map Approval.
   After determining that the Final Map is in compliance with §
87.03.080, and is technically correct, the County Surveyor shall execute the
County Surveyor’s certificate on the map in compliance with Map Act § 66442,
and forward the Final Map to the County Clerk for Board action, as follows.
   (a)   Review and Approval by Board. The Board shall approve or disapprove
the Final Map at the meeting at which it receives the map from the County
Surveyor or at its regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the
map, unless that time limit is extended with the mutual consent of the County
Surveyor and the subdivider.
      (1)   Criteria for Approval. The Board shall approve the Final Map if it
conforms to all of the requirements of the Map Act, all provisions of this
Development Code that were applicable at the time that the Tentative Map was
approved, and is in substantial compliance with the approved Tentative Map.
      (2)   Approval by Inaction. If the Board does not approve or disapprove
the Final Map within the prescribed time or any authorized extension, and the
map conforms to all applicable requirements, it shall be deemed approved, and
the County Clerk shall certify its approval on the map.
   (b)   Map with Dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is
required on the Final Map, the Board shall accept, accept subject to
improvement, or reject any or all offers of dedication, at the same time as it
takes action to approve the Final Map. If the Board rejects the offer of
dedication, the offer shall remain open and may be accepted by the Board at a
later date in compliance with Map Act § 66477.2. Any termination of an offer of
dedication shall be processed in compliance with Map Act § 66477.2 using the
same procedures as specified by the Streets and Highway Code Part 3 of Division
9.
   (c)   Map with Incomplete Improvements. If improvements required by this
Development Code, conditions of approval, or other applicable laws have not
been completed at the time of approval of the Final Map, the Board shall
require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the County as specified
in Map Act § 66462, and §
87.07.040 (Improvement Agreements, Lien Agreements and Securities), as a
condition precedent to the approval of the Final Map.
   (d)   Recording of Final Map.
      (1)   After action by the Board and after the required signatures and
seals have been affixed, the Clerk of the Board shall transmit the Final Map
back to the County Surveyor.
      (2)   The County Surveyor shall establish an appointment with the County
Recorder for filing.
      (3)   The County Recorder shall oversee the recording of the Final Map.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.110 Composite Development Plans.
   In addition to the information required to be included in a Parcel or Final
Map (§§
87.03.040 and
87.03.080, respectively), a Composite Development Plan may be required to be
submitted and recorded as follows, as provided by Map Act § 66434.2 to provide
additional and more detailed information.
   (a)   Applicability. The Director may require the filing of a Composite
Development Plan at the time a Parcel or Final Map is accepted for recordation.
The Composite Development Plan shall be filed with the Building and Safety
Division concurrent with the recordation of the Final or Parcel Map.
   (b)   Content. A Composite Development Plan shall be prepared and shall
include the information required by the Department handout on Composite
Development Plans, as required by the Composite Development Plan Standards
established by the County Surveyor and adopted by the Board, and as required by
the conditions of approval.
   (c)   Filing and Review. A Composite Development Plan shall be filed as
follows.
      (1)   Filing Advance Copy. At least three weeks before the recordation of
the Parcel or Final Map, the Composite Development Plan shall be submitted for
coordination of review to the County Surveyor.
      (2)   Filing Official Copy of Composite Development Plan. Concurrent with
the filing for recordation of the Parcel or Final Map the Composite Development
Plan, as approved by the Director and County Surveyor in compliance with this
Section, shall be filed with the Building and Safety Division.
   (d)   Amendments to Plan.
      (1)   Should an error be made on the Parcel or Final Map which affects
the Composite Development Plan approved in compliance with this Section, the
Parcel or Final Map and the Composite Development Plan may be amended as
approved by the County Surveyor and the Director. A Revision to an Approved
Action application is required for all other changes to a Composite Development
Plan in compliance with
Chapter 85.12.
      (2)   The Director is authorized to approve amended Composite Development
Plans when they do not adversely impact the conditions of other departments and
the amendment is in substantial compliance with the conditions of approval of
the Tentative or Parcel Map.
      (3)   Any request to modify or deviate from the standards that are shown
on a Composite Development Plan shall be made in compliance with the provisions
for Variances, except as otherwise provided by this Section.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.03.120 Amendments to Recorded Parcel or Final Maps.
   A recorded Parcel or Final Map may be amended to correct errors in the
recorded map or to change characteristics of the approved subdivision in
compliance with Map Act Chapter 3, Article 7.
   (a)   Type of Corrections Allowed in Compliance with Map Act § 66469. In the
event that errors in a Parcel or Final Map are discovered after recordation, or
that other corrections are necessary, the corrections may be accomplished by
either the filing of a certificate of correction or an amending map, in
compliance with Map Act Chapter 3, Article 7. For the purposes of this Section,
“errors” include errors in course or distance (but not changes in courses or
distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the Parcel or Final
Map), omission of any course or distance, errors in legal descriptions, or any
other map error or omission as approved by the County Surveyor that does not
affect any property right, including but not limited to parcel numbers,
acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps. Other
corrections may include indicating monuments set by engineers or surveyors
other than the one that was responsible for setting monuments, or showing the
proper character or location of any monument that was incorrectly shown, or
that has been changed.
      (1)   Application and Review Process. An application to amend a recorded
Parcel or Final Map in compliance with Map Act § 66469 shall be filed with the
County Surveyor. The County Surveyor shall determine if the changes requested
may be approved with a certificate of correction or an amending map. The County
Surveyor may request additional information based upon that determination and
shall approve the certificate of correction or the amending map if the required
findings can be made.
      (2)   Findings. A Parcel of Final Map may be amended, if the County
Surveyor first finds all of the following to be true:
         (A)   The changes requested only involve minor map annotation
corrections;
         (B)   The amendment(s) does not impose any additional burden on the
fee owners of the real property;
         (C)   The amendment(s) does not alter any right, title, or interest in
the real property reflected on the map; and
         (D)   The map, as amended, is still in compliance with Map Act §
66474.
   (b)   Type of Corrections Allowed in Compliance with Map Act § 66472.1. In
the event that there are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the
conditions of a recorded Parcel or Final Map no longer appropriate or
necessary, the following procedures shall be followed to amend the map.
      (1)   Application and Review Process. An application to amend a recorded
Parcel or Final Map in compliance with Map Act § 66472.1 shall be filed with
the Director. The Director shall refer the application to the County Surveyor
for comment. Once approved by both the Director and the County Surveyor, the
application shall be sent to the Board for approval of either a certificate of
correction or an amending map. The Board shall approve the application if the
required findings can be made.
      (2)   Findings. A Parcel of Final Map may be amended, if the Board first
finds all of the following to be true:
         (A)   There are changes in circumstances that make any or all of the
conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary;
         (B)   The amendment(s) does not impose any additional burden on the
fee owners of the real property;
         (C)   The amendment(s) does not alter any right, title, or interest in
the real property reflected on the map; and
         (D)   The map, as amended, is still in compliance with Map Act §
66474.
   (c)   Recordation. After approval, the certificate of correction or amending
map shall be submitted to the County Recorder for recordation.
   (d)   Amendment of an Approved Subdivision. In the event that a subdivider
wishes to amend (e.g., change or modify) the characteristics of an approved
subdivision (e.g., a recorded Parcel or Final Map), including but not limited
to the number or configuration of parcels, location of streets or easements, or
the nature of required improvements, the construction of which has been
deferred through the approval of an agreement in compliance with §
87.07.040 (Improvement Agreements, Lien Agreements and Securities), the
subdivider shall file a new Tentative, Parcel, or Final Map in compliance with
this Division or comply with the requirements of Map Act § 66499.20-1/2.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 87.04: ADDITIONAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
Section
   
87.04.010   Purpose.
   
87.04.020   Certificates of Compliance.
   
87.04.030   Condominiums and Condominium Conversions.
   
87.04.040   Lot Line Adjustment.
   
87.04.050   Official Maps.
   
87.04.060   Parcel Merger.
   
87.04.070   Reversion to Acreage.
   
87.04.080   Resident Initiated Mobile Home Park Conversion.
§ 87.04.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes requirements consistent with the Map Act for
Certificates of Compliance, Condominiums and Condominium Conversions, Lot Line
Adjustments, Official Maps, Parcel Mergers, and Reversion to Acreage.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.04.020 Certificates of Compliance.
   (a)   General Provisions.
      (1)   The County shall process and approve or disapprove applications for
Certificates of Compliance as provided by Map Act §§ 66499.34 and 66499.35, and
as outlined by this Section.
      (2)   Filing Criteria.
         (A)   A recorded Certificate of Compliance may be requested by any
person owning real property to have the Director determine whether the property
complies with the provisions of this Development Code.
         (B)   A Certificate of Compliance may be required by the Department
with the recordation of a Notice of Merger.
         (C)   A recorded Certificate of Compliance shall be required of all
Lot Line Adjustments.
         (D)   When contiguous deeds or surveys have ambiguities in which the
property boundary can not be ascertained as determined by the County Surveyor
and an agreement is reached to establish the line by all parties, a Boundary
Line Agreement and a Certificate of Compliance shall be recorded.
         (E)   When determined by the County Surveyor, a Certificate of
Compliance may be required for the remainder parcels on Parcel or Final Maps.
   (b)   Application. An application for the approval of a Certificate of
Compliance or Conditional Certificate of Compliance shall be filed with the
Director and include the information required by the Director, together with
the processing fee specified by the County Fee Ordinance.
   (c)   Review by Director. The Director shall review the completed
application using the Staff Review without Notice procedures in the light of
public records and applicable law. If the Director is able to determine from
this review that the parcel is clearly in compliance with the provisions of
this Division and the Map Act, a Certificate of Compliance shall be issued for
the parcel and delivered to the County Recorder for recordation. If the
Director is unable to determine from this review that the parcel is clearly in
compliance, the procedures identified in Map Act § 66499.35 shall apply.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.04.030 Condominiums and Condominium Conversions.
   Condominiums and condominium conversions shall comply with the following
requirements in addition to the standards identified in
Chapter 84.16 (Multi-Family Residential Design Standards).
   (a)   Condominiums. When a residential structure is proposed at the time of
construction as a condominium, community apartment project, or stock
cooperative, a Tentative Map for the project shall be filed in the same form,
have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and shall be
processed, approved or disapproved in the same manner in compliance with
Chapter 87.02 (Tentative Map Filing and Processing).
Chapter 87.03 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps) determines whether a Parcel or Final
Map shall also be filed.
   (b)   Condominium Conversions. A condominium conversion is the conversion of
real property to a common interest development as defined by Civil Code § 1351.
      (1)   Approvals Required. A conversion shall require the approval of a
Tentative Map, and Parcel or Final Map, except where a Parcel Map, or Tentative
and Final Map are waived in compliance with Map Act § 66428(b) or § 66428.1 for
the conversion of a mobile home park (See §
87.04.080 [Resident Initiated Mobile Home Park Conversion], below). If a Parcel
or Final Map is waived, a Tentative Map shall still be required. A Record of
Survey shall be filed for a field survey required in Map Act § 66428.1 in
compliance with Business and Professions Code § 8765(c).
      (2)   Application Filing and Processing. A Tentative Map for a
condominium conversion shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents
and accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed, approved or
disapproved in the same manner as identified in
Chapter 87.02 (Tentative Map Filing and Processing), except as otherwise
provided by the following provisions of this Section.
      (3)   Application Contents. Condominium conversion applications shall
include the same information and materials as Tentative Map applications,
except for conversions of residential projects, which shall also include the
following information and materials.
         (A)   Tentative Map. The Tentative Map for a condominium, community
apartment project, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to
a stock cooperative need not show the buildings or the manner in which the
airspace above the property shown on the map are to be divided. However, the
applicant shall provide an illustration of how subdivision will occur to enable
verification of the accuracy of the legal descriptions on deeds for the
transfer of ownership of the units by the County Surveyor.
         (B)   Verification of Stock Cooperative Vote. If the development being
converted to a condominium is a stock cooperative, the application shall also
include verification of the vote required by Map Act § 66452.10.
         (C)   Relocation Assistance Program. A program proposed by the
applicant that will assist tenants displaced through the conversion in
relocating to equivalent or better housing.
         (D)   Vacancy Rate Assessment. An assessment of the vacancy rate in
multi-family housing within the County.
      (4)   Evaluation. The evaluation on the Tentative Map for the condominium
conversion (§
87.04.030) shall be provided to the subdivider and each tenant of the subject
property at least three days before any action by the Director or any hearing
on the Tentative Map by the Commission or Board.
      (5)   Public Notice. The following notice shall be provided in addition
to that required by
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings) if the project is to be heard by the Commission
or Board:
         (A)   Tenant Notice. The subdivider shall give notice to all existing
or prospective tenants as identified in Map Act §§ 66452.8 and 66452.9, and
shall provide the Department satisfactory proof that the notice was given; and
         (B)   Public Hearing Notice. Notice of the public hearing(s) on the
Tentative Map shall be provided to all tenants of the subject property, as
required by Map Act § 66451.3.
      (6)   Approval of Conversion, Required Findings.
         (A)   Time Limit, Stock Cooperatives. The approval or disapproval of
the conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative shall occur
within 120 days of the application being found complete in compliance with §
87.02.030 (Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing). The 120-day time limit
may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the County.
         (B)   Conversion Findings, Residential Projects. Approval of a
Tentative or Final Map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of
residential real property into a condominium project, community apartment
project, or stock cooperative shall not be granted unless the review authority
first finds all of the following to be true:
            (I)   All of the findings identified in Map Act § 66427.1 and §
87.02.060 (a)(2) (Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval -- Additional specific
findings), above;
            (II)   The conversion will not result in a major displacement of
existing tenants unable to find comparable housing, and the location of the
conversion and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained
will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare; and
            (III)   The proposed conversion complies with all of the applicable
standards identified in
Chapter 84.16 (Multi-Family Residential Design Standards).
      (7)   Completion of Subdivision Process. The filing, approval, and
recordation of a Parcel or Final Map in compliance with
Chapter 87.03 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps) shall be required to complete the
subdivision process, except where a Parcel Map, or Tentative and Final Map are
waived for the conversion of a mobile home park in compliance with Map Act §
66428.1 (See §
87.04.080 [Resident Initiated Mobile Home Park Conversion], below). Where the
maps have been waived, a Certificate of Compliance shall be recorded to
complete the conversion action.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.04.040 Lot Line Adjustment.
   A Lot Line Adjustment is permissible in compliance with Map Act § 66412(d),
and the following.
   (a)   Application.
      (1)   A Lot Line Adjustment is between four or fewer existing adjoining
parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel,
and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed are not created.
      (2)   An application for a Lot Line Adjustment shall be filed with the
Director and shall include the information required by the Department, together
with the processing fee specified by the County Fee Ordinance. No Tentative,
Parcel, or Final Map shall be required for a Lot Line Adjustment. Survey
monuments and a field survey may be required to facilitate the preparation of
the legal description to ensure the accuracy of the description or the
elimination of the encroachments.
   (b)   Lot Line Adjustment Procedures.
      (1)   Approval. After consultation with the County Surveyor, the Director
shall approve a Lot Line Adjustment; provided that all criteria identified in
Map Act § 66412(d) are met to the Director’s satisfaction.
      (2)   Findings. The Director shall make all of the following findings
before approval of a Lot Line Adjustment:
         (A)   The proposed Lot Line Adjustment is consistent with the General
Plan, this Development Code, and any applicable community or specific plan; and
         (B)   The proposed Lot Line Adjustment will not adversely affect
public health and safety.
      (3)   Post-Approval Actions. The Director shall submit a Certificate of
Compliance or a conditional Certificate of Compliance, along with new Grant
Deeds and appropriate Trust Deeds which describe the new boundaries of the
parcels to the County Recorder for recordation.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.04.050 Official Maps.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide procedures for
Official Maps.
   (b)   Applicability.  Official Maps shall be required as described in
Government Code § 66499.52.
   (c)   Procedures. Official Maps shall be reviewed and processed using the
procedures outlined in
Chapter 87.02 (Tentative Map Filing and Processing) of this Division, the
procedures pertaining to the processing and approval of Parcel Maps or Final
Maps in
Chapter 87.03 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps), and the provisions of Map Act
Division 3.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.04.060 Parcel Merger.
   Parcel Mergers may be mandatory mergers initiated by the County or voluntary
mergers initiated by the property owner.
   (a)   Procedures for Mandatory Merger of Contiguous Parcels. Two or more
parcels may be merged as follows.
      (1)   Process. When the County initiates a merger of substandard lots,
noticing shall be done in compliance with the procedures outlined in Map Act
Chapter 3, Article 1.5.
      (2)   Requirements. A mandatory merger of substandard lots may be
initiated by the County. A lot may be merged with a contiguous lot held by the
same owner. If any one of the contiguous lots or units held by the same owner
does not conform to the standards for minimum lot size or dimension specified
by the applicable land use district the following requirements shall be
satisfied:
         (A)   At least one of the affected lots is not developed with any
structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit
was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an
accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single
structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a
contiguous lot involved in the proposed merger; and
         (B)   At least one of the affected lots must have one or more of the
following conditions:
            (I)   The lot comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the
time of the determination of merger;
            (II)   The lot was not created in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;
            (III)   The lot does not meet current standards for sewage disposal
and/or domestic water supply;
            (IV)   The lot does not meet slope stability and/or density
standards, as specified by this Code, Specific Plan or the General Plan;
            (V)   The lot has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular
and emergency equipment access and maneuverability;
            (VI)   The development of the lot would create health or safety
hazards;
            (VII)   The lot is inconsistent with the General Plan and any
applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.
      (2)   Findings. The Director shall find that all of the following are
true before recording a Notice of Merger.
         (A)   The parcels to be merged at the time of merger are under common
ownership;
         (B)   The parcels as merged will be consistent with or be more closely
compatible with the applicable land use zoning district regulations and any
other planning policies relating to the subject property and parcel
configuration;
         (C)   The parcels as merged will not be deprived of legal access as a
result of the merger and access to the adjoining parcels will not be restricted
by the merger; and
         (D)   All current and any delinquent taxes have been paid on all
affected parcels.
         (E)   One or more of the conditions described in § 66451.11(b) have
been met.
   (b)   Procedures for Voluntary Merger of Contiguous Parcels.
      (1)   Description and Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to allow
property owners to request a voluntary merger of contiguous parcels that are
under the same ownership, pursuant to Map Act §§ 66499.20 1/2 or 66499.20 3/
4 pertaining to the reversion to acreage.
      (2)   Process. The property owner shall file an application for a parcel
merger. The review authority shall be the Director and review of the
application shall be subject to the provisions for Staff Review without Notice
procedures. The merger of the subject parcels become effective when the
Director causes a Notice of Merger specifying the names of the record owners
and a description of the real property to be filed for record with the County
Recorder.
      (3)   Findings. The Director shall find that all of the following are
true before recording a Notice of Merger.
         (A)   The parcels to be merged at the time of merger are under common
ownership;
         (B)   The parcels as merged will not be deprived of legal access as a
result of the merger and access to the adjoining parcels will not be restricted
by the merger; and
         (C)   All current and any delinquent taxes have been paid on all
affected parcels.
   (c)   Post-Approval Actions.
      (1)   If the merger is processed in compliance with Map Act Chapter 3,
Article 1.5, the Director shall submit a Notice of Merger to the County
Recorder for recordation in compliance with Map Act § 66451.19.
      (2)   If the merger is processed in compliance with Map Act §§ 66499-3/
4 or 66499-1/2, the County Surveyor shall follow the procedures for the
approval and recordation of a Parcel Map in compliance with §
87.03.060 (Parcel Map Approval) or for the approval and recordation of a Final
Map in compliance with §
87.03.100 (Final Map Approval).
   (d)   Requirements for Unmerger of Parcels. The unmerger of parcels within
the County shall comply with Map Act Chapter 3, Article 1.7.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.04.070 Reversion to Acreage.
   (a)   General Provisions.
      (1)   A Reversion to Acreage shall be initiated, processed, reviewed, and
approved or disapproved in compliance with Map Act Chapter 6, Article 1.
      (2)   An application for reversion submitted by a property owner shall
include all information required by the Department, and shall include the fee
required by the County Fee Ordinance.
      (3)   A Parcel Map may be filed to revert to acreage land previously
subdivided that consists of four or less contiguous parcels, in compliance with
Map Act § 66499.20-1/4.
   (b)   Procedures.
      (1)   The Commission shall hold a public hearing on all petitions for,
and Board initiations of, Reversions to Acreage.
      (2)   In the case of a Reversion to Acreage by Parcel Map, the Commission
may approve the Reversion to Acreage only if it first makes all of the findings
required by Subdivision (c), below.
      (3)   For a Reversion to Acreage by Final Map, the Commission shall
render its decision in the form of a written recommendation to the Board. The
recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation and shall be
transmitted to the Board. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Commission,
the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board may approve a Reversion to
Acreage only if it first makes all of the findings required by Subdivision (c)
below.
   (c)   Findings. Before approval, the review authority shall first find that
all of the findings required by Map Act § 66499.16 are true.
   (d)   Post-Approval Actions. After the hearing before the Commission and/or
the Board and approval of the Reversion to Acreage, the Parcel or Final Map
shall be delivered to the County Surveyor. The Reversion to Acreage shall be
effective upon the Parcel or Final Map being filed for record by the County
Recorder.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.04.080 Resident Initiated Mobile Home Park Conversion.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to facilitate resident
purchase of mobile home parks. This Section allows the waiver of certain
subdivision requirements and expedites local government processing for mobile
home park conversions to condominiums or stock cooperatives. These conversions
will preserve an important source of affordable housing.
   (b)   Applicability. For the purposes of this Section, an application for
subdivision shall be considered “resident initiated” when signed by a resident
organization formed by the tenants of the subject mobile home park for the
purpose of purchasing the mobile home park. The proposed conversion shall be
supported by a minimum of two-thirds of the current residents of the park. The
resident organization shall have a legally binding contract, which, if the
conditions of the contract are met, would result in the acquisition of an
interest in the mobile home park. A pre-application conference may be requested
by the applicant(s) before formation of the resident organization or before
entering into a legally binding contract; provided the Director determines in
writing that it is reasonable to believe that the contract may be entered into
within a 12-month period.
   (c)   Exclusions. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The purchase of a mobile home park by a non-profit corporation
which is subject to the provisions of Business and Professions Code § 11010.8;
or
      (2)   Special Occupancy Parks (e.g. Recreation Vehicle Parks) as defined
in Mobile Home Parks Act § 2008, of the Code of Regulations Title 25.
   (d)   Waiver of Tentative and Final Map Requirements. Notwithstanding other
provisions of this Division, the requirement for the filing of a Tentative Map
and the preparation, filing, and recordation of a Final Map for a mobile home
park conversion to a condominium or stock cooperative on a single parcel, may
be waived by the Director in compliance with Map Act § 66428.1; provided the
following procedures are followed by a resident organization desiring to
convert their park and the necessary findings are made by the Director.
      (1)   Pre-Application Conference. Before filing an application for mobile
home park conversion, the resident association shall have a pre-application
conference with the Development Review Committee. The conference shall be
scheduled in compliance with the policy established by the Board for the
Housing Incentive Program. The purpose of this conference is to determine that
the proposal qualifies under the provisions of this Section. The following
information shall be submitted with the application for the conference.
         (A)   Previously approved plot plan for the mobile home park. If none
exists, a plot plan shall be filed in compliance with the requirements
established by and available at the Department.
         (B)   A supplemental report to include the following information:
            (I)   Name of consultants, if any.
            (II)   Disclosure of all known fees and costs for the conversion
process.
            (III)   Documentation demonstrating that a minimum of two-thirds of
the residents of the mobile home park support the proposed conversion.
            (IV)   Declarations from those residents supporting the conversion
that their principal place of residence is within the subject mobile home park.
            (V)   The location of the park and results of a field inspection
done by the applicant(s) or consultant regarding the status of the compliance
of the park with the County health and safety standards in effect at the time
the park was created. Any on-site dedications or public improvements to be
required shall be identified by the committee.
            (VI)   Proposed tentative schedules to expedite meeting and
coordinating any requirements of the Planning Agency and the Department of Real
Estate, including but not limited to the public report. The schedule shall
include an outline of the permits and noticing required to allow this
conversion and the estimated time at which the permits are obtained.
            (VII)   Evidence showing that the 60-day Notice of Intent to file
the conversion application [as required by Map Act § 66427.1(a)] has been met.
            (VIII)   Initial report on the impact of the conversion on the
residents of the mobile home park. This report is needed to determine whether
an impact report as required in Map Act § 66427.4 is needed. The report shall
specify whether any residents of the park are to be involuntarily displaced and
any proposed measures to mitigate the displacement. A resident, who is offered
an opportunity to remain in the park after the conversion through continuation
of the tenancy at generally the same terms as existed before proposed
conversion, shall not be considered involuntarily displaced. At the pre-
application conference the Development Review Committee shall indicate whether
an impact report needs to be filed with the formal application for the
conversion. If it is required, the Development Review Committee shall identify
in detail any additional items to be required as mitigation measures to assist
any displaced residents. No current resident shall be involuntarily displaced
without proper notice, assistance, or compensation, to be worked out on a case-
by-case basis. The noticing, assistance, or compensation may include the
following:
               (i)   The project shall comply with the Mobile Home Residency
Law, Civil Code §§ 798 et seq.
               (ii)   The project applicants may be required to provide
relocation assistance in compliance with Federal, State, or local laws.
         (C)   The Planning representative of the Development Review Committee
shall field check the park before the scheduled meeting. The Development Review
Committee shall establish if the proposed mobile home park conversion meets the
intent and is capable of meeting the provisions of this Section. The Director
shall attempt to inform the applicant(s) at the earliest opportunity if a
public hearing is to be required. If the proposed mobile home park conversion
is acceptable, the Development Review Committee shall identify the information
the applicant needs to file to proceed with the proposal. The information shall
include the following:
            (I)   Development Review Committee pre-application conference
minutes. These minutes shall include the proposed tentative schedules required
by Subdivision (d)(1)(B)(VI), above.
            (II)   If the parcel upon which the park lies was created before
January 1, 1960, a Parcel Map application shall be required. The application
shall be processed concurrently with any other information filed in compliance
with the pre-application conference.
            (III)   Mobile Home Park Conversion Impact Report, if required at
the pre-application conference to meet the requirements of Map Act § 66427.4.
The report shall be given to each resident within the mobile home park.
            (IV)   Mobile home park plot plan if no plot plan was previously
approved.
            (V)   Any special information which was identified by the
Development Review Committee. Among the information may be information to
assist in the environmental review of the proposal.
            (VI)   Certificate of Compliance application.
         (D)   The review and processing of any application in compliance with
this Section shall be subject to the same review and time requirements and
appeal procedures as are provided in this Division for Tentative Maps. In any
case where waiver of the Tentative and Final Map is granted, the Director shall
cause to be filed for record with the County Recorder a Certificate of
Compliance in compliance with this Division. The Director may require a public
hearing in compliance with
Chapter 86.07 (Public Hearings). Should a public hearing be required the
noticing provisions of Map Act § 66451.3 shall be met.
      (2)   Findings for Approval. A mobile home park conversion shall be
approved or conditionally approved only if all of the following are first found
to be true:
         (A)   The mobile home park complies with the requirements established
by State law and County ordinance for these uses at the time the mobile home
park was constructed. The regulations shall include those regarding area,
improvement and design, flood water drainage control, public roads, sanitary
disposal facilities, water supply and distribution systems, environmental
protection, and other requirements of the Map Act and this Division;
         (B)   Any measures necessary to mitigate the impact of the conversion
on current residents of the park have been required as conditions of approval;
and
         (C)   Applicable noticing requirements of the Map Act have been, or
will be met.
      (3)   Conditions of Approval. The following conditions may be required by
the Director as conditions of approval for the proposed conversion:
         (A)   Subdivisions allowed by this Section may include conditions
requiring a Compliance Survey inspection to the satisfaction of the Director.
However, the survey shall be limited to require improvements relating only to
items of a health and safety nature.
         (B)   The mobile home condominiums or stock cooperatives shall be
subject to Code of Regulations Title 25.
         (C)   Only additional on-site improvements or development standards
which were applicable at the time the mobile home park was originally developed
may be required.
         (D)   Off-site public improvements for qualifying mobile home parks
shall be waived, except as follows:
            (I)   Any off-site improvements shall be financed with appropriate
assessment bonds.
            (II)   The Certificate of Compliance shall not be delayed or
contingent upon completion of the off-site improvements.
         (E)   Any requirements and/or documents required by the State Common
Interest Development Act, Civil Code §§ 1350 et seq.
         (F)   Conditions of approval necessary to ensure any noticing
requirements that are required by Map Act § 66427.1 are met.
         (G)   Any plan or document required to be submitted to the Department
of Real Estate shall be reviewed for consistency with the approved project and
plot plan. The plan shall reference the “waiver” notice requirement in
Subdivision (H), below, to the satisfaction of the Director.
         (H)   Notice shall be placed on the Certificate of Subdivision
Compliance that standard subdivision requirements for the creation of
condominiums/stock cooperatives have been waived by the County and only
conditions applicable to the original development of the mobile home park have
been required.
         (I)   The applicants shall comply with the indemnification
requirements of §
81.01.070 (Legal Defense Fee Responsibility) of this Development Code.
         (J)   The Director may impose any conditions of approval to ensure any
appropriate measures for relocation assistance are implemented.
         (K)   No mobile home shall be required to be placed on a permanent
foundation as a result of the conditional approval.
         (L)   Any condition of approval required in compliance with this
Section shall be drafted to expedite the conversion process.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 87.05: DEDICATIONS AND EXACTIONS
Section
   
87.05.010   Purpose.
   
87.05.020   Applicability.
   
87.05.030   Dedications.
   
87.05.040   Acceptance of Dedications.
§ 87.05.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes standards for subdivider dedications of land or
payment of fees, in conjunction with subdivision approval.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.05.020 Applicability.
   Each proposed subdivision shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter
for dedications, reservations, or the payment of fees.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.05.030 Dedications.
   (a)   Streets, Highways, and Flood Control Rights-of-Way.
      (1)   As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider shall dedicate
or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the
subdivision that are needed for:
         (A)   Access rights and abutters’ rights;
         (B)   Alleys;
         (C)   Drainage easements;
         (D)   Public utility easements;
         (E)   Streets; and
         (F)   Other public easements.
      (2)   In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all
streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public
utility easements and other public easements. The subdivider may also be
required to dedicate the additional land as may be necessary and feasible to
provide bicycle paths for the use and safety of residents of the subdivision.
   (b)   Drainage Rights-of-Way. When the Director of Public Works determines
that drainage rights-of-way are necessary, the subdivider shall offer to
dedicate upon the Final Map of the subdivision the necessary rights-of-way for
drainage facilities.
   (c)   Flood Control Dedication. Where dedication is offered for Flood
Control District rights-of-way, the rights-of-way shall be shown as parcels
lettered alphabetically on the Final Map. The offer of dedication shall be made
by an appropriate certificate on the title sheet of the Final Map, and, in
addition, an executed deed conveying fee title to the right-of-way to the Flood
Control District shall be delivered to the District.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.05.040 Acceptance of Dedications.
   (a)   Certification of Board Action. At the time the Board approves a Final
Map, it shall also accept, subject to improvement, or reject any offer of
dedication. The Clerk of the Board shall certify on the map the action of the
Board.
   (b)   Resolution of Acceptance. The Clerk of the Board shall cause a
resolution of acceptance of dedications by the Board to be filed with the
County Recorder.
   (c)   Deferred Acceptance. If at the time the Final Map is approved, any
streets, alleys, paths, public utility easements, rights-of-way for local
transit facilities including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads, and
similar items that directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm
drainage easements are rejected subject to Code of Civil Procedure § 771.010,
the offer of dedication shall remain open and the Board may by resolution at
any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its
action and accept and open the streets, alleys, paths, rights-of-way for local
transit facilities including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads, and
similar items that directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm
drainage easements for public use. The acceptance shall be recorded in the
Office of the County Recorder.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 87.06: SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
87.06.010   Purpose.
   
87.06.020   Applicability of Design and Improvement Standards.
   
87.06.030   Subdivision Design Standards.
   
87.06.040   Site Preparation and Grading for Subdivision Construction.
   
87.06.050   Subdivision Improvement Requirements.
§ 87.06.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter establishes standards for the design and layout of
subdivisions, and the design, construction, or installation of public
improvements within subdivisions. The purpose of these standards is to ensure,
through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new usable parcels
that are consistent with the General Plan, any applicable community plan, and
any applicable specific plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.06.020 Applicability of Design and Improvement Standards.
   The requirements of this Chapter apply as follows:
   (a)   Extent of Required Improvements. Each subdivision of four or fewer
parcels, and each subdivision of five or more parcels, shall provide the
improvements required by this Chapter, and any additional improvements required
by conditions of approval.
   (b)   Applicable Design Standards, Timing of Installation. The subdivider
shall construct all on- and off-site improvements according to standards
approved by the County Surveyor. No Parcel or Final Map shall be presented to
the Board for approval and no Parcel Map shall be presented to the County
Surveyor for approval until the subdivider either completes the required
improvements, or enters into a subdivision improvement agreement with the
County for the work in compliance with §
87.06.050 (Subdivision Improvement Requirements).
   (c)   Subdivision Improvement Standards - Conditions of Approval. The
applicable subdivision improvement and dedication requirements of this Chapter
and any other improvements and dedications required by the review authority in
compliance with §
87.02.060 (Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval), shall be described in
conditions of approval adopted for each approved Tentative Map (§
87.02.070). The design, construction, or installation of all subdivision
improvements shall comply with the requirements of the Director of Public
Works.
   (d)   Oversizing of Improvements.
      (1)   At the discretion of the review authority, improvements required to
be installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision may also be
required to provide supplemental size, capacity, number, or length for the
benefit of property not within the subdivision, and may be required to be
dedicated to the County, in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 6.
      (2)   In the event that oversizing is required, the County shall comply
with all applicable provisions of Map Act §§ 66485 et seq., including the
reimbursement provisions of Map Act § 66486.
      (3)   If a parcel proposed for subdivision is subject to an existing
reimbursement agreement, the subdivider shall pay the required reimbursement
before the recordation of the Parcel or Final Map, or the issuance of a
Building Permit for construction on the parcel, whichever occurs first.
   (e)   Exceptions. Exceptions to the requirements of this Chapter may be
requested and considered in compliance with §
87.01.100 (Exceptions to Subdivision Standards).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.06.030 Subdivision Design Standards.
   (a)   Purpose. This Section establishes standards for the design and layout
of subdivisions, and the design, construction, or installation of public
improvements within subdivisions. The purpose of these standards is to ensure,
through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new usable parcels
that are consistent with the General Plan, any applicable community plan, and
any applicable specific plan.
   (b)   Applicability. Each subdivision shall be designed in compliance with
the standards of this Section, except where an exception is granted in
compliance with §
87.01.100 (Exceptions to Subdivision Standards).
   (c)   Roads and Streets. The layout, design, and construction of proposed
roads and streets shall comply with the General Plan, and adopted County street
standards.
      (1)   Highway Alignment Plan. If the General Plan (or any applicable
community or specific plan) designates a general location of a proposed highway
and any portion thereof may be wholly or partially within a proposed
subdivision or may be affected by a proposed subdivision before the approval of
the subdivision, a specific alignment plan shall be prepared and adopted. Each
roadway shall conform in width and alignment with that shown or indicated on
the General Plan or any standards adopted consistent with the General Plan. As
a condition of approval of the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to
make dedications and construct reasonable improvements as required by the
specific alignment plan. These requirements may be waived by the Director upon
recommendation of the Department of Public Works, if the proposed highway is
located upon a section line or its precise alignment can be otherwise
determined.
      (2)   Circulation Standards.
         (A)   General Plan Consistency. The circulation design of all
subdivisions shall be compatible and coordinate with the General Plan (and any
applicable community or specific plan) and the existing street and land use
pattern in the surrounding area.
         (B)   Part-Width Highways and Alignments. Any part-width highway lying
along and adjacent to any boundary of a subdivision shall have a part-width and
alignment as will conform to the route lines shown on the Master Plan of
Highways covering the same portion of the subdivision.
         (C)   Cul-de-Sacs. Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 600 feet in
length, except as provided below, and shall terminate with a turn-around as
specified in the adopted County Road Standards. The Director may approve a cul-
de-sac that exceeds 600 feet if the Director first finds that the cul-de-sac
will not be injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare.
         (D)   Road Grades. Road grades shall not exceed 12 percent unless it
can be demonstrated that a road grade in excess of 12 percent is necessary to
accomplish the objectives of the General Plan (and any applicable community or
specific plan). In these circumstances, the Director may approve a road grade
not to exceed 14 percent grade for a distance not to exceed 500 feet if a
finding is first made, based upon the recommendations of the County Director of
Public Works and the County Fire Marshal, that the roadway will not create an
unacceptable hazardous risk to the public health, safety, or general welfare.
         (E)   Subdivision Access. The subdivision and each of its phases shall
have two points of vehicular ingress and egress from existing and surrounding
streets, one of which may be for emergency use only. Where providing this
access is physically impossible or a cul-de-sac is proposed, this requirement
may be waived or modified.
   (d)   Public Access to Public Resources. Each proposed subdivision shall be
designed and constructed to provide public access to waterways, lakes, and
reservoirs in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 3.5 (Public Access to
Public Resources).
   (e)   Parcel Design. The size, shape, and arrangement of proposed parcels
shall comply with this Section and with any General Plan (and any applicable
community or specific plan) policy, requirement, or other County Code provision
that applies to proposed subdivisions.
      (1)   General Parcel Design Standards.
         (A)   Each proposed parcel shall be determined by the review authority
to be “buildable” because it contains at least one building site that can
accommodate a structure in compliance with all applicable provisions of this
Development Code.
         (B)   No subdivision shall be designed to leave unsubdivided islands,
strips or parcels, or property unsuitable for subdividing, which is not either
accepted by the County or other appropriate entity for public use, or
maintained, as common area within the development.
      (2)   Parcel Area. Each proposed parcel shall comply with the minimum
area requirements of the applicable land use zoning district established by
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), except as
otherwise provided by this Section.
         (A)   Calculation of Area. When calculating the area of a parcel to
determine compliance with this Section, this Division or the General Plan (and
any applicable community or specific plan), the following shall be deducted
from the gross area of any parcel:
            (I)   A vehicular access easement through the parcel, unless there
is alternative legal and physical access to the parcel for which the easement
is granted;
            (II)   Any easement completely restricting or prohibiting any use
of the property, for ingress, egress, landscaping, recreation, storage, etc.;
or
            (III)   The “flag pole” (access strip) of a flag lot.
         (B)   Minimum Parcel Area Requirements for Common Interest Projects.
The minimum parcel area requirements of this Development Code or the minimum
“buildable” parcel size shall not apply to condominiums, condominium
conversions, and townhouses, but shall apply to the creation of the original
parcel(s) that are the location of the condominium or townhouse.
      (3)   Dimensions and Configuration. The dimensions of each new parcel
shall comply with the requirements of the applicable land use zoning district
established by
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowable Land Uses), or as otherwise
required by the review authority.
         (A)   Side parcel lines shall be approximately normal to street lines.
         (B)   Each parcel on a dead-end street where the side lines converge
from front to the rear of the parcel shall have an average width of not less
than 60 feet, or the width required by this Development Code, whichever is
greater, measured along the front building setback line.
         (C)   Each parcel on a curved street where the side lines converge
from the front to the rear of the parcel shall have an average width of not
less than 60 feet, or the width required by this Development Code, whichever is
greater.
         (D)   Double frontage parcels shall be discouraged except where
essential to separate residential developments from major or secondary highways
or due to topographical conditions. When double frontage parcels are allowed,
vehicular access rights shall be dedicated to the County along the street
designated by the Director.
         (E)   The Director may require parcels larger than the above minimum
sizes specified in multi-family residential, commercial, and industrial
subdivisions. When parcels twice or more the required area or width are shown
as part of a subdivision, the Director may require the parcel(s) to be so
established as to make practical a further division into allowable building
sites, without injury to adjoining property.
         (F)   In desert, hilly, or mountainous areas, the Director may require
parcels larger than required minimums. Larger parcels shall be required when it
is deemed to be necessary in order to conform to the General Plan or any
applicable community or specific plan.
         (G)   Flag lots shall be discouraged.
         (H)   Modification of these parcel design standards may be allowed in
compliance with:
            (I)   The Parcel Area Regulations of
Division 2 of this Development Code.
            (II)   The Planned Development standards and regulations of
Division 4 of this Development Code.
         (I)   This Subdivision does not apply to any parcel which the
subdivider offers to dedicate to the County or any public agency or district.
         (J)   When a land use zoning district classification line divides a
parcel(s), the area and frontage requirements for the parcel(s) shall be those
of the land use zoning district that requires the greater or most restrictive
standards between the two districts involved.
   Example: If the line between a Neighborhood Commercial (CN) District and a
Single Residential (RS) district divides a parcel, the applicable area and
frontage requirements would be those for the CN as they are greater than those
for the RS district.
   (f)   Energy Conservation. Each proposed subdivision shall be designed to
provide maximum opportunities for energy conservation, including opportunities
for passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities, in compliance with Map
Act § 66473.1, as follows.
      (1)   Street Layout. The streets proposed in a subdivision shall be
planned in a primarily east-west orientation where feasible.
      (2)   Parcel and Building Site Design. Proposed parcels shall be
designed, where feasible, to provide building sites that allow the orientation
of structures in east-west alignment for southern exposure, and to take
advantage of existing shade or prevailing breezes.
   (g)   Environmental Health. Lands to be subdivided for residential, park,
playground, or land recreation purposes may be subject to environmental quality
standards as established by ordinances and regulations of the different
departments and agencies within the County.
   (h)   Fire Protection.
      (1)   Subdivision design shall provide for safe and ready access for fire
and other emergency equipment and for routes of escape to safely handle
evacuations.
      (2)   The subdivision shall be served by water supplies for community
fire protection in compliance with the standards established by the appropriate
fire authority.
      (3)   In hazardous fire areas, all flammable or combustible vegetation
shall be removed from around all structures, in compliance with the
requirements of the County Uniform Fire Code and the Fire Safety Overlay
District. Where erosion is probable, the slopes shall be planted with fire
resistive ground cover.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.06.040 Site Preparation and Grading for Subdivision Construction.
   (a)   Grading. Before the issuance of a Building Permit, a grading plan
prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer shall be submitted to and
approved by the Building and Safety Division. Grading plans shall show the
elevations of the natural ground at all lot corners, the finished grade at
corners, the finished pad elevation, finished floor elevations, rates and
directions of all drainage swales, elevation height of all retaining or
perimeter walls and finished sidewalk elevations at all front lot lines, and
existing topographic elevations and drainage direction 100 feet outside the
boundary of proposed project area and/or map.
      (1)   Minimum Slopes. The minimum grade of all drainage swales on parcels
shall be two percent unless approved differently by the Building Official.
      (2)   Pad Elevation, Residential. The building pad elevation of
residential parcels shall be established at a minimum of ten inches above the
design sidewalk elevation at the lowest point of the parcel. The finished floor
elevation of slab floor houses shall be a minimum of 16 inches above the
sidewalk elevation. The pad elevation of all residential parcels shall be
established at least one foot above the maximum water surface in an adjacent
storm drain channel or the ponded surface in an adjacent sump for collection of
storm drain waters. An exception may be allowed in the case of a proposed
subdivision served by a storm drain pump station. The standards of this
Subdivision shall apply to any building pad elevation, except where the
requirements of the California Building Code (CBC) exceed these standards, in
which case the requirements of the CBC shall apply.
      (3)   Drainage Plan. No inter-parcel or “cross drainage” shall be
allowed. Each parcel shall drain its own water to a public street, approved
public or private drainage facility, or natural drainage course without passing
through or across an adjacent parcel, except where a legal right exists (e.g.,
a drainage easement), and is authorized by the Building Official. No parcel
shall drain water over the bank of a flood control channel.
      (4)   Grading Practices. All grading within the County shall employ the
best available management practices, as determined by the Building Official, to
minimize erosion, sedimentation, and unnecessary grading.
      (5)   Grading Exceptions. Specific exceptions to the above requirements
may be authorized at the discretion of the Building Official.
      (6)   Bonding. The County may require as a condition of approval that a
bond be secured before any grading when the grading is proposed before
recordation of the Parcel or Final Map. This bond would be used to install
landscaping and appropriate erosion control measures as needed if the
subdivider abandons the project after grading occurs. All bonding shall be in
compliance with §
87.07.040 (Improvement Agreements, Lien Agreements and Securities).
      (7)   Hillside Grading. If the subject property is within an area having
a natural slope gradient of 15 percent or greater, refer to
Chapter 83.08 (Hillside Grading Standards) for applicable procedures and
standards.
   (b)   Erosion and Sediment Control. A proposed subdivision shall be designed
so that all grading incorporates appropriate erosion and sediment control
measures.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.06.050 Subdivision Improvement Requirements.
   (a)   Bicycle/Walking Paths and Hiking/Equestrian Trails. Depending on the
circumstances surrounding a specific project, the County may require, as a
condition of approval, the subdivider to construct bicycle/walking paths and/or
hiking/equestrian trails within an approved subdivision as determined by the
review authority. In the event the review authority determines that path or
trail construction within a subdivision would be infeasible or constitute
unsound engineering, the review authority may grant the subdivider the option
to pay into a fund, dedicated for these uses, the amount per foot, as
determined by the review authority.
   (b)   Bridges and Major Thoroughfares. The County may assess and collect
fees as a condition of issuing a Building Permit for the purpose of defraying
the actual or estimated costs of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares in
compliance with Map Act § 66484, after the County has established a master plan
for bridge crossings and major thoroughfares by ordinance.
   (c)   Fire Hydrants. The subdivider shall install fire hydrants, with their
associated underground water pipes, of sizes and locations as required and
approved by the Fire Department.
   (d)   Monuments. The subdivider shall install monuments in compliance with
the requirements of the County Surveyor, and Map Act Chapter 4, Article 9.
   (e)   Private Facilities - Maintenance. A subdivision with common area or
private streets shall have conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs)
approved by the County to provide for the maintenance of the common areas and/
or private streets, and establish standards for maintenance.
   (f)   Public Utilities. Each approved parcel shall be provided connections
to public utilities, including electricity, gas, water, sewer, and
telecommunications services, which shall be installed as part of the
subdivision improvements as provided by this Section.
      (1)   Underground Utilities Required. Utility lines, including electric,
telephone, communications, and street lighting, within or directly serving each
subdivision, shall be placed underground. The subdivider is responsible for
complying with the requirements of this Subdivision without expense to the
County, and shall make necessary arrangements with the utility company for the
installation of the facilities. Appurtenances and associated equipment (e.g.,
boxes and meter cabinets) and concealed ducts in an underground system may be
placed above ground. Waiver of the requirements for underground utilities shall
be made through the Public Utilities Commission. This Subdivision shall not
apply to existing utility or common carrier routes in use at the time the
subdivision is completed which do not provide service to the area subdivided.
Aerial routes still in existence at the time the subdivision is completed may
be reinforced from time to time as conditions dictate; however, all provisions
of this Subdivision shall be subject to the requirements of any underground
district created in compliance with County Code §
67.0101 in existence before the subdivision of the land or created after
subdivision.
      (2)   Location of Allowed Overhead Lines. Where allowed, overhead utility
lines shall be located at the rear of parcels where practical, and along the
sides of parcels where necessary.
      (3)   Cable Television Systems. If a local cable television system is
available to serve the project, any subdivision for which a Tentative Map is
required, or a Parcel Map for which a Tentative Map was not required, shall be
designed to provide the appropriate cable television system an opportunity to
construct, install, and maintain on land as reserved for cable television
service or by separate instrument, any equipment necessary to extend cable
television services to each residential parcel in the subdivision.
         (A)   APPROPRIATE CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, as used in this
Subdivision, means those franchised or licensed to serve the geographical area
in which the subdivision is located.
         (B)   This Subdivision shall not apply to the conversion of existing
dwelling units to condominiums, community apartments, or stock cooperatives.
      (4)   Reimbursement for Relocation or Replacement. Whenever the County
imposes as a condition of its approval of a Tentative Map or a Parcel Map a
requirement that necessitates replacing, undergrounding, or permanently or
temporarily relocating existing facilities of a telephone corporation or cable
television system, common carrier, or other public utility, the developer or
subdivider shall reimburse the appropriate facility provider for all costs for
the replacement, undergrounding, or relocation. All of these costs shall be
billed after they are incurred, and shall include a credit for any required
advance payments and for the salvage value of any facilities replaced. Under no
circumstances shall the telephone corporation or cable television system be
reimbursed for costs incurred in excess of the cost to replace the facilities
with substantially similar facilities.
      (5)   Public Services and Facilities Fees. The fee requirements of
Division 5 of this Development Code shall be imposed as conditions of all map
approvals, including Parcel Maps.
   (g)   Railroad Crossings. A proposed subdivision shall be designed to
provide for railroad crossings necessary to provide access to or circulation
within the proposed subdivision, including the preparation of all documents
necessary for application to the California Public Utilities Commission for the
establishment and improvement of the crossings.
      (1)   The subdivider shall deposit with the County Clerk, in cash, the
estimated costs to be incurred by the County in pursuing, or assisting in the
applicant’s pursuit of an application for railroad crossings before the Public
Utilities Commission.
      (2)   Upon termination of the proceedings before the Public Utilities
Commission, an accounting of the deposit will be made and an additional charge
or refund will be made to the subdivider.
   (h)   Sewage Disposal. Each parcel within an approved subdivision shall be
provided an approved on-site sewage disposal system before final building
inspection, or connection to an approved community sewage collection,
treatment, and disposal system, in compliance with the County’s infrastructure
standards and specifications. The subdivider shall also pay any required
connection fee(s).
      (1)   Subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be located as far as
practical from a perennial or intermittent stream in compliance with County
Code Division 3, Article 5, §§
33.0505 and
33.0506, and the requirements of the Division of Environmental Health Services
and the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
      (2)   When a soils or a geologic hazards report for a subdivision is
prepared (either at the developer’s volition or as a requirement of any
governmental agency), it shall include findings and recommendations concerning
probable adverse effects of the hazards to the integrity of water supply and
sewage disposal facilities and structures.
   (i)   Street Lighting. Each proposed subdivision shall provide street
lighting facilities designed and constructed in compliance with the County’s
infrastructure standards and specifications.
   (j)   Street Signs and Street Names.
      (1)   Street Names. All public and private streets within a proposed
subdivision shall be named by the Board or the Director of Public Works. The
duplication of an existing street name within the same area shall not be
allowed in a new subdivision unless the street is an obvious extension of an
existing street.
      (2)   Street Signs. The subdivider shall provide a minimum of two street
name signs at each street intersection; with the signs located on the
diagonally opposite sides of the intersection. The subdivider shall provide one
street name sign at each “T” intersection. All street signs shall be made in
compliance with the San Bernardino County Public Works Standards and
Specification Manual per specifications 303, 303a, and 303b.
   (k)   Storm Drainage. Storm water runoff from the subdivision shall be
collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system.
      (1)   A subdivision that lies in the path of existing watercourses or
overflows from existing watercourses, or natural drainage from upstream
properties, shall not be approved unless adequate dedicated rights-of-way or
improvements are provided as deemed satisfactory by the Director of Public
Works.
      (2)   When the Director of Public Works determines that a subdivision may
cause an unnatural increase or concentration of surface waters onto downstream
property, the subdivision shall not be approved unless drainage outlets are
provided that will be adequate to render the County and the County Flood
Control District harmless from any damages caused by the increase or
concentration of water.
      (3)   The location, type, and size of watercourses or drainage works, and
all drainage of streets and other drainage works between streets, shall comply
with the San Bernardino County Public Works Standards and Specifications Manual
or as required by the Director of Public Works.
      (4)   When the Director of Public Works determines that drainage rights-
of-way are necessary, the subdivider shall offer to dedicate upon the
Tentative, Parcel, or Final Map of the subdivision the necessary rights-of-way
for the drainage facilities.
      (5)   Where dedication is offered or granted for Flood Control District
rights-of-way, the rights-of-way shall be shown as parcels lettered
alphabetically on the Tentative, Parcel, or Final Map. The offer of dedication
or grant shall be made by an appropriate statement on the title sheet of the
Final Map.
   (l)   Water Supply. Each approved parcel shall be served by an approved well
or community water system, and shall be designed and constructed to accommodate
both domestic and fire flows, together with necessary fire hydrants to serve
each parcel proposed to be created.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 87.07: IMPROVEMENT PLANS, INSTALLATION, AND SECURITY
Section
   
87.07.010   Purpose.
   
87.07.020   Improvement Plans.
   
87.07.030   Installation of Improvements.
   
87.07.040   Improvement Agreements, Lien Agreements and Securities.
§ 87.07.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides standards for the preparation and review of
improvement plans, the installation of improvements, and for security to
guarantee improvement installation.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.07.020 Improvement Plans.
   After the approval of a Tentative Map and before the construction of any
improvements, the subdivider shall submit plans to the County as follows:
   (a)   Preparation and Content. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a
California registered professional engineer. Improvement plan submittals shall
include all of the following information:
      (1)   Any drawings, specifications, calculations, design reports, and
other information required by the Director of Public Works;
      (2)   Grading, drainage, Water Quality Management Plan, erosion and
sediment control, and a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for the
entire subdivision; and
      (3)   The improvement plan/specification checking and construction
inspection fees required by the County Fee Ordinance.
   (b)   Submittal of Plans. Improvement plans shall be submitted to the
Director of Public Works and other appropriate reviewing agencies for review
and approval. Upon the approval of improvement plans in compliance with
Subdivision (c) (Review and Approval), below, the subdivider shall also submit
to the Director of Public Works a detailed cost estimate of all improvements,
based on guidelines provided by the County.
      (1)   Street and Drainage Plans and Profiles. Plans, profiles, and
specifications of proposed street and drainage improvements shall be submitted
to the County Department of Public Works, checked and approved before
presentation of the Final Map to the Board for acceptance. These plans and
profiles shall show full details of the proposed improvements in compliance
with County standards.
      (2)   Water Systems Plans. Plans, specifications, and all necessary
details of the proposed water system shall be submitted to the Chief of the
Division of Environmental Health Services for review; provided that the
supplier has certified that it is willing and able to supply water upon
request.
      (3)   Sanitary Sewer Plans. Plans, profiles, specifications, and all
necessary details of the sanitary sewers to be installed shall be submitted to
the Chief of the Division of Environmental Health Services for review; provided
that before submitting the plans, they shall have been approved by the
governmental entity that will serve the subdivision, or if a private sewage
disposal company is to provide service, the plans shall have been approved by
the Chief of the Division of Environmental Health Services.
   (c)   Review and Approval. Improvement plans shall be reviewed and approved
by the applicable agency within the time limits provided by Map Act § 66456.2.
   (d)   Effect of Approval. The final approval of improvement plans shall
generally be required before approval of a Parcel or Final Map. The approval of
improvement plans shall not bind the County to accept the improvements nor
waive any defects in the improvements as installed.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4116, passed - -2010)
§ 87.07.030 Installation of Improvements.
   Subdivision improvements required as conditions of approval of a Tentative
Map in compliance with this Chapter (see §
87.06.050) shall be installed as provided by this Section.
   (a)   Timing of Improvements. Required improvements shall be constructed or
otherwise installed only after the approval of improvement plans in compliance
with §
87.07.020, and before the approval of a Parcel or Final Map in compliance with
§§
87.03.060 (Parcel Map Approval) or
87.03.100 (Final Map Approval), except where:
      (1)   Improvements are deferred in compliance with §
87.07.040 (Improvement Agreements, Lien Agreements and Securities); or
      (2)   Improvements are required as conditions on the approval of a
subdivision of four or fewer parcels, in which case construction of the
improvements shall be required:
         (A)   When a Building Permit is issued for development of an affected
parcel; or
         (B)   At the time the construction of the improvements is required in
compliance with an agreement between the subdivider and the County, as
identified in §
87.07.040 (Improvement Agreements, Lien Agreements and Securities); or
         (C)   At the time identified in a condition of approval, when the
review authority finds that fulfillment of the construction requirements by
that time is necessary for public health and safety, or because the required
construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the
surrounding area.
      (3)   To avoid breaking up street paving, underground utility or service
lines required to be installed as part of a subdivision and which are planned
to run across or underneath a street or alley right-of-way shall be installed
before the preparation of subgrade and before the surfacing of any streets or
alleys. In the event that the development of the subdivision requires the
utility company to perform utility construction work, the developer shall pay a
deposit satisfactory to the utility company within sufficient time to allow
construction work to be performed before subgrade preparation. In no event
shall subgrade preparation commence before installation of all necessary
utilities and laterals.
   (b)   Inspection of Improvements. The inspection of the construction and
installation of required subdivision improvements shall occur as follows.
      (1)   Supervision. Before starting any work, the contractor engaged by
the subdivider shall designate in writing an authorized representative who
shall have the authority to represent and act for the contractor in contacts
with the County. The designated representative shall be present at the work
site at all times while work is in progress. At times when work is suspended,
arrangements acceptable to the Director of Public Works shall be made for any
emergency work that may be required.
      (2)   Inspection Procedures.
         (A)   Inspections Required. The agency that has required a specific
action shall make any inspections as it deems necessary to ensure that all
construction complies with the approved improvement plans. Where required by
the agency, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the County to pay
the full cost of any contract inspection services determined to be necessary by
that agency.
         (B)   Access to Site and Materials. The agency that has required a
specific action shall have access to the work site at all times during
construction, and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for
verifying that the materials and workmanship are in compliance with the
approved improvement plans.
         (C)   Authority for Approval. The work done and all materials
furnished shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the agency that
has required a specific action. The inspection of the work or materials shall
not relieve the contractor of any obligations to fulfill the work as
prescribed.
         (D)   Improper Work or Materials. Work or materials not meeting the
requirements of the approved plans and specifications may be rejected,
regardless of whether the work or materials were previously inspected by the
agency that has required a specific action. In the event that the agency
determines that subdivision improvements are not being constructed as required
by the approved plans and specifications, it shall order the work stopped and
shall inform the contractor of the reasons for stopping work and the corrective
measures necessary to resume the work. Any work done after issuance of a stop
work order shall be a violation of this Chapter.
      (3)   Notification. The subdivider shall notify the Director of Public
Works as part of condition compliance upon the completion of each stage of
construction before recordation as outlined in this Chapter. Further
construction may only be completed if all required actions included in the
conditions of approval have been accomplished and signed off by the agency that
has required the action(s).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.07.040 Improvement Agreements, Lien Agreements and Securities.
   (a)   Improvement Agreements. If all required improvements and inspections
are not satisfactorily completed before a Parcel or Final Map is approved, the
owner(s) of the subdivision shall, before the approval of the Parcel or Final
Map, enter as contractor into an Improvement Agreement with the Board whereby
in consideration of the approval of the Parcel or Final Map and/or acceptance
by the Board of any street, easement, and any other land offered for
dedication, the contractor agrees to furnish the equipment, labor, and material
necessary to complete the work within the time specified in the agreement.
Improvement Agreements and securities shall be initially approved and accepted
by the Board. Improvement Agreements shall be valid for a period specified in
the Improvement Agreement, but the original term shall not exceed two years
from the effective date of the Improvement Agreement. Except as provided below,
extensions of time may be granted at any time by the Board or the Chief
Executive Officer, but only on forms and terms approved by the Board and
determined acceptable as to legal form by County Counsel. If an extension of
time requires the owner of the subdivision to provide substitute or additional
security, such extension of time may only be approved by the Board. Each
extension shall be for a period not to exceed one year. A decision made by the
Chief Executive Officer on a request to extend time may be appealed to the
Board of Supervisors if an appeal is filed with the Clerk of the Board within
ten days of the date that the Chief Executive Officer’s decision was mailed.
   (b)   Amount of Security Required. To ensure that the work will be
completed, improvement security shall be furnished to guarantee the performance
of any act or Improvement Agreement in the following amounts and for the
following purposes:
      (1)   An amount equal to 100 percent of the total estimated cost of the
improvement or of the act to be performed, as determined by the Board,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the required act or Improvement
Agreement.
      (2)   An additional amount equal to 50 percent of the total estimated
cost of the improvement or the performance of the required act, as determined
by the Board, securing payment to the contractor, to the subcontractors, and to
persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment to them for the improvement
or the performance of the required act.
      (3)   Whenever an entity required to furnish security in compliance with
this Section is a California nonprofit corporation, funded by the United States
of America or one of its agencies, or funded by this State or one of its
agencies, the entity shall not be required to comply with Subdivisions (b)(1)
and (b)(2), above, if the conditions described in the California Subdivision
Map Act, currently in Government Code § 66499.3(c), are met.
      (4)   An amount equal to ten percent of the total estimated cost of
improvements or performance of the required act, as determined by the Board,
necessary for the guarantee and warranty of the improvement for 12 months
following the completion and acceptance, against any defective work or labor
done, or defective materials furnished.
      (5)   As part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in
addition to the face amount of the security, there shall be included costs and
reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by
the County in successfully enforcing the obligation secured.
   (c)   Type of Security Required.
      (1)   The furnishing of security in connection with the performance of
any act or Improvement Agreement shall be one of the following, at the option
of and subject to the approval of the Board:
         (A)   Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties
as prescribed in Government Code § 66499(a)(1);
         (B)   A deposit, either with the County or a responsible escrow agent
or trust company, at the option of the County, of money or negotiable bonds of
the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies as prescribed in
Government Code § 66499(a)(2);
         (C)   A letter or other instrument of credit from one or more
financial institutions subject to regulation by the State or Federal
government, and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or
Improvement Agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment as prescribed
in Government Code § 66499(a)(3); or
         (D)   Lien Agreement as described in §
87.07.040 (d) below.
      (2)   Bonds to secure faithful performance and for the benefit of
laborers and material of any agreement, shall be in substantially the forms as
shown in the California Subdivision Map Act (Government Code §§ 66499.1 and
66499.2). The money, negotiable bond, or instrument of credit shall be a trust
fund to guarantee performance and shall not be subject to enforcement of a
money judgment by any creditors of the depositor until the obligation secured
thereby is performed to the satisfaction of the County.
   (d)   Lien Agreement as Security.
      (1)   As authorized herein, the owner of a “subdivision” (defined for
purposes of this Subdivision (d) as a residential subdivision with more than
five lots up to a maximum lot size of two acres or a commercial or industrial
subdivision) may, in lieu of posting the security described in Subdivision (c)
of this Section, enter into an agreement with the County to construct the
required improvements in the future, securing such performance by granting the
County a lien on the property to be subdivided. Such an agreement shall be
known as a “Lien Agreement.”
      (2)   Where the Director of the Department of Public Works finds that it
would not be in the public interest to require the installation of the required
improvements sooner than two years after recordation of the map, the owner of
the subdivision may execute a Lien Agreement with the County at the time the
owner of the subdivision enters into an Improvement Agreement with the County
to construct required improvements pursuant to this Section. A Lien Agreement
may also be used to substitute existing security which was furnished under
Subdivision (c) of this Section; provided, however, that use of a Lien
Agreement as substitution for existing security shall be at the County's sole
option. Notwithstanding any provisions of the foregoing to the contrary,
however, the County will not accept a Lien Agreement from any owner of a
subdivision, either at the time of execution of the Improvement Agreement, or
as a substitute for existing security, if any lots have been sold, if
construction permits (including but not limited to building or grading
permits), have been issued on any of the property, or if construction of any of
the required improvements has begun.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the above, the County may accept a Lien Agreement
from any owner of a subdivision as a substitute for existing security if
grading has commenced on the land to be divided so long as the grading is in
strict accordance with a valid grading permit and all the following are met:
         (A)   There is no need for the County to construct the required
improvements if the subdivision is abandoned or delayed for any period of time
or for any other reason;
         (B)   The grading has no effect on the use, operation and maintenance
of existing streets or highways, public or private;
         (C)   The grading has not caused the modification or closure of any
public access points, existing streets or highways, public or private;
         (D)   Additional drainage improvement and/or erosion controls are not
necessary and/or installed in the road right-of-way due to the grading;
         (E)   Delay of the construction of the required improvements for the
subdivision does not affect or delay the improvements of an adjacent
subdivision project upon which work on its required improvements has already
commenced.
      (4)   Lien Agreements shall:
         (A)   Be used only when in the absence of this Subdivision, the owner
of the subdivision would be required to construct or agree to construct the
improvements required by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
         (B)   Be used to secure future improvements in easements, rights-of-
way, rejected offers of dedication or irrevocable offers of dedication.
         (C)   Be in an approved form acceptable to County Counsel.
         (D)   Contain an itemization of the required improvements and an
estimate of costs approved by the Director of the Department of Public Works,
and shall specify that the obligation of the owner of the subdivision or any
subsequent owner extends to the actual cost of construction if such costs
exceed the estimate.
         (E)   Be recorded with the County Recorder and have the priority of a
judgment lien as prescribed by Government Code § 66499(b) or its successor. The
recorded Lien Agreement shall be indexed in the Grantor Index to the names of
all record owners of the real property as specified on the map and in the
Grantee Index to the County. From the time of the recordation of the Lien
Agreement, a lien shall attach to the property in an amount necessary to
complete the required improvements. Under no circumstance shall the County
agree to subordinate the lien.
         (F)   Be approved concurrently with the approval of the map with a
note of the Lien Agreement’s existence placed on the map, except where the Lien
Agreement is being substituted after map approval for other security already
deposited, in which case the Lien Agreement shall be signed and acknowledged by
all parties having any record title interest in the real property, as
prescribed by Government Code § 66436 or its successor, consenting to the
subordination of their interests to the Lien Agreement.
         (G)   Be allowed only where the owner of the subdivision provides a
title insurance policy and current title report from a title company approved
by the County that documents that the owner of the subdivision is the record
owner of the real property to be divided, and the real property to be divided
is not subject to any mortgages, deeds of trust, or judgment liens. The title
insurance policy and title report shall be submitted to the Department of
Public Works within 90 days prior to the execution of the Lien Agreement. In
addition, an updated title insurance policy and title report shall be submitted
to the Department of Public Works on the day of the recordation of the Lien
Agreement.
      (5)   The Lien Agreement shall provide that the owner of the subdivision
shall substitute acceptable security for the Lien Agreement and commence to
construct the required improvements within two years following recordation of
the map, or, in the case of a Lien Agreement which has been substituted for
existing security, within two years following recordation of the Lien
Agreement.
      (6)   For Lien Agreements executed at the time of recordation of the map,
the time for substitution of acceptable security and commencement of
construction of the required improvements may be extended up to two times, each
extension for a period not to exceed one year, by the Director of the
Department of Public Works. The Director of the Department of Public Works may
not grant such extensions if the owner of the subdivision has substituted a
Lien Agreement for security originally furnished. The Board of Supervisors,
however, on its own motion or at the request of the owner of the subdivision,
may grant additional time extensions, on a case-by-case basis, as it deems
appropriate, for substitution of acceptable security and commencement of
construction of the required improvements pursuant to agreements secured either
by Lien Agreements executed at the time of recordation of the map, or Lien
Agreements substituted for existing security.
      (7)   During the term of the Lien Agreement, legal ownership of the
property to be subdivided shall be transferred to a title company approved by
the Director of the Department of Public Works. No individual lots may be sold
while the Lien Agreement is in force. Fee title to the entire property
encumbered by the Lien Agreement, however, or to all lots designated on any
individual final map which is encumbered by the Lien Agreement, may be sold in
the aggregate to a single purchaser, provided that the proposed purchaser of
the property must, prior to assuming title to the property, either execute a
new Lien Agreement in a form acceptable to the County which will encumber the
property to be conveyed, specifying the respective obligations of the owners of
property subject to the original and such new Lien Agreement, or provide
acceptable alternative security for the improvements the County requires be
constructed as a condition to development of the property conveyed. Any new
Lien Agreement must require that acceptable security be substituted therefore,
and the improvements secured thereby commenced by the same date provided in the
Lien Agreement with the original owner, unless such date shall be extended as
provided above.
      (8)   At the time of the approval of a Lien Agreement by the Board of
Supervisors, the owner of the subdivision shall provide a cash deposit in the
amount of $15,000.00 to the Department of Public Works for the purpose of
reverting the property to acreage if the owner of the subdivision breaches the
terms of the Lien Agreement. In addition, at such time as title to any property
subject to a Lien Agreement shall be conveyed, the transferee thereof, if such
transferee executes a new Lien Agreement to secure construction of the
improvements imposed upon such property as described above, shall also provide
a cash deposit in the amount of $15,000.00 to the Department of Public Works
for the purpose of reverting the property to acreage if the owner of the
subdivision breaches the terms of the Lien Agreement. The effect of these
requirements shall be that each owner of property which is encumbered by a Lien
Agreement shall at all times have $15,000.00 per Lien Agreement encumbering
such owner's property on deposit with the County for the purpose described
herein. Any unused portion of any such deposit shall be refunded to the owner
of the subdivision following completion of such reversion. If the costs of
reverting the property to acreage exceed $15,000.00, the owner of the
subdivision shall pay such additional costs to County prior to recordation of
the reversion to acreage map.
      (9)   When a Lien Agreement is utilized as security upon approval of the
map, offers of dedication for street purposes will not be accepted until the
Lien Agreement is released following substitution of acceptable alternative
security and the required improvements are completed to the satisfaction of the
Director of the Department of Public Works.
      (10)   The Lien Agreement shall be released upon substitution by the
owner of the subdivision of acceptable security for the Lien Agreement in order
to begin construction of the required improvements, or recordation of a
reversion to acreage map.
      (11)   The property to be subdivided must have sufficient equity to cover
the estimated delayed infrastructure cost at the time the Lien Agreement is
processed. The total estimate of delayed infrastructure costs shall not exceed
50 percent of the appraised value. The County shall obtain a state certified
general real estate appraiser, at the developer’s expense, to determine the
property’s value, equity, and conditions of title.
      (12)   Prior to the approval of any time extension of the Lien Agreement,
the Director of the Department Public Works, in his or her sole discretion, may
require re-evaluation of the property’s value at the developer’s expense. If
the lien amount exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value, the County may elect
to revert the property to acreage utilizing the cash deposit.
      (13)   In no instance shall the Lien Agreement compel the County to
construct the required improvements.
   (e)   Forfeiture on Failure to Complete. Upon the failure of the owner of
the subdivision to complete any improvements and work within two years from the
date the Improvement Agreement is executed, the Board may, upon notice in
writing served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the
person, firm, or corporation signing the contract, determine that the
improvement work or any part of the work is incomplete and may cause to be
forfeited to the County or Flood Control District, the sum of money or bonds
given for the faithful performance of the work as may be necessary to complete
the work.
   (f)   Exoneration of Improvement Security. With the exception of flood
control or drainage works inspected by the Flood Control Engineer, it shall be
the duty of the Director of the Department of Public Works to inspect or
receive certificates of completion of all improvements installed as to their
compliance with this Chapter and County standards. The security furnished by
the owner of the subdivision may be released by the Board or by the Chief
Executive Officer as follows:
      (1)   Security given for faithful performance of any act or Improvement
Agreement shall be released upon the performance of the act or final completion
and acceptance of the required work. The Board delegates to the Chief Executive
Officer the authority to accept the completed work.
      (2)   Security guaranteeing the payment to the contractor,
subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment shall,
after passage of the time within which claims of lien are required to be
recorded in compliance with Civil Code Article 3 (commencing with § 8410) of
Chapter 4 of Title 2 of Part 6 of Division 4 and other acceptance of the work,
be reduced to an amount equal to the total claimed by all claimants for whom
claims of lien have been recorded and notice thereof given in writing to the
Board, and if no claims have been recorded, the security shall be released in
full. Requests for a release shall be made to the Land Use Services Department,
Land Development Division, which may, prior to the release of any security
under this subsection, require the owner of the subdivision to provide a title
report or other form of evidence sufficient to show what claims of lien, if
any, are of record on the subdivision.
      (3)   The release shall not apply to any cost and reasonable expenses and
fees, including reasonable attorney’s fees, nor to any required guarantee and
warranty period, nor to the amount of the security deemed necessary by the
County for the guarantee and warranty period.
      (4)   Maintenance security necessary for guarantee and warranty of the
work for a period of 12 months following completion and acceptance thereof
against any defective work or labor completed, or defective materials furnished
shall be released if no claims of defective work have been filed with the Board
in that time period. In the event of the defective work, the security shall be
held until all work is considered satisfactory and acceptable by the County.
   (g)   Partial Release of Performance Security. A partial release of
performance security may be requested by filing an application, on a form
created by the Land Use Services Department, with the Land Use Services
Department in accordance with the California Subdivision Map Act, Government
Code § 66499.7. A portion of the performance security may be released upon the
approval of the Board. The following conditions shall be applied to
applications submitted requesting partial release of the performance security.
      (1)   The cost estimate of the remaining work shall not exceed 20 percent
of the total original performance security.
      (2)   The substitute security (or the remaining security) shall be 100
percent of the revised total cost estimate of the remaining work, as determined
by the Board.
   (h)   Review. The Board shall review the delegation of authority provided to
the Chief Executive Officer under this Section at least once by June 30, 2016,
and at least once every two years thereafter.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4116, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4243,
passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4393, passed - -2020)
CHAPTER 87.08: SOIL REPORTS
Section
   
87.08.010   Purpose.
   
87.08.020   Preliminary Soils Report.
   
87.08.030   Final Soils Report.
   
87.08.040   Geologic Investigation and Report.
§ 87.08.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides standards for the preparation and review of soils
reports, in compliance with the Map Act Chapter 4, Article 7.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.08.020 Preliminary Soils Report.
   A preliminary soils report based upon adequate test borings and prepared by
a registered civil engineer shall be required for every subdivision for which a
Final Map is required or when required as a condition of development when soils
conditions warrant the investigation and report. The preliminary soils report
shall be submitted with the Tentative Map application.
   (a)   Form of Report. A preliminary soils report may be divided into two
parts:
      (1)   Soils Reconnaissance. The soil reconnaissance shall include a
complete description of the site based on a field investigation of soils
matters. The soils matters reviewed shall include stability, erosion,
settlement, feasibility of construction of the proposed improvements,
description of soils related hazards and problems, and proposed methods of
eliminating or reducing these hazards and problems; and
      (2)   Soils Investigation and Report. This investigation and report shall
include field investigation and laboratory tests with detailed information and
recommendations relative to all aspects of grading, filling, and other
earthwork, foundation design, pavement design and subsurface drainage.
         (A)   The report shall also recommend any required corrective action
for the purpose of preventing structural damage to subdivision improvements and
the structures to be constructed on the parcels. The report shall also
recommend any special precautions required for erosion control, and the
prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property.
         (B)   If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of
critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected,
would lead to structural defects or environmental impacts, a subsequent soils
investigation of each parcel in the subdivision may be required and shall be
submitted to and approved by the Building Official before approval of a Parcel
or Final Map.
   (b)   Preliminary Soils Report Waiver. The preliminary soils report may be
waived if the Building Official determines that existing available information
on the qualities of the soils of the subdivision makes no preliminary analysis
necessary.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.08.030 Final Soils Report.
   A final soils report prepared by a registered civil engineer shall be
required where a preliminary soils report was required, unless the final report
is waived by the Building Official.
   (a)   Filing of Report. The final soils investigation and report shall be
filed with the improvement plans.
   (b)   Content of Report.
      (1)   The report shall contain sufficient information to ensure
compliance with all recommendations of the preliminary soils report and the
specifications for the project.
      (2)   The report shall also contain information relative to soils
conditions encountered which differed from that described in the preliminary
soils reports, along with any corrections, additions, or modifications not
shown on the approved plans.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 87.08.040 Geologic Investigation and Report.
   If the Building Official determines that conditions warrant, a geologic
investigation and report may also be required.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
DIVISION 8: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND CONSERVATION
CHAPTER 88.01: PLANT PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT
Section
   
88.01.010   Purpose.
   
88.01.020   Applicability.
   
88.01.030   Exempt Activities.
   
88.01.040   Regulated Trees and Plants and General Permit.
   
88.01.050   Native Tree or Plant Removal Permits.
   
88.01.060   Desert Native Plant Protection.
   
88.01.070   Mountain Forest and Valley Tree Conservation.
   
88.01.080   Riparian Plant Conservation.
   
88.01.090   Tree Protection from Insects and Disease.
§ 88.01.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides regulations and guidelines for the management of plant
resources in the unincorporated areas of the County on property or combinations
of property under private or public ownership. The intent is to:
   (a)   Promote and sustain the health, vigor and productivity of plant life
and aesthetic values within the County through appropriate management
techniques.
   (b)   Conserve the native plant life heritage for the benefit of all,
including future generations.
   (c)   Protect native trees and plants from indiscriminate removal and to
regulate removal activity.
   (d)   Provide a uniform standard for appropriate removal of native trees and
plants in public and private places and streets to promote conservation of
these valuable natural resources.
   (e)   Protect and maintain water productivity and quality in local
watersheds.
   (f)   Preserve habitats for rare, endangered, or threatened plants and to
protect animals with limited or specialized habitats.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.01.020 Applicability.
   The provisions in this Chapter apply to the removal or relocation of
regulated trees or plants and to any encroachment (for example, grading) within
the protected zone of a regulated tree or plant on all private land within the
unincorporated areas of the County and on public lands owned by the County,
unless otherwise specified. Nothing in this Chapter shall relieve nor be
interpreted to exempt a development from complying with applicable State or
Federal laws and regulations.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.01.030 Exempt Activities.
   The provisions in this Chapter, except those of §
88.01.090 (Tree Protection From Insects and Disease), shall not apply to the
removal of regulated trees or plants that may occur in the following
situations. Removal actions shall not authorize the removal of perch trees
within an identified American Bald Eagle habitat.
   (a)   Timber Operations. Removal as part of a timber operation conducted in
compliance with the Z’berg-Nejedly Forest Practice Act of 1973 (Public
Resources Code §§ 4526 et seq.).
   (b)   Government Owned Lands. Removal from lands owned by the United States,
State of California, or local governmental entity, excluding Special Districts
(i.e., Special Districts shall be subject to the provisions of this Division.).
   (c)   Public Utilities. Removal by a public utility subject to jurisdiction
of the Public Utilities Commission or any other constituted public agency,
including franchised cable TV, where to establish or maintain safe operation of
facilities under their jurisdiction, trees are pruned, topped, or braced.
   (d)   State Agencies. Removal by, or under the authority of, the State of
California:
      (1)   Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.
      (2)   Forest Improvement Program.
      (3)   Agricultural Conservation Program.
   (e)   Government Laws. Removal required by other codes, ordinances, or laws
of the County, State, or United States.
   (f)   Emergency. Removal of native trees and plants that are an immediate
threat to the public health, safety, or welfare and that require emergency
removal to prevent probable damage to a structure or injury to people or fenced
animals.
   (g)   Forest Stocking Control Program. Removal as part of a stocking control
program prepared by a California Registered Professional Forester.
   (h)   Fire Hazard Reduction Program. Removal as part of a fire hazard
reduction program approved by the Fire Chief.
   (i)   Bona Fide Agricultural Activity. Removal as part of a bona fide
agricultural activity, as determined by the Director, which is one of the
following:
      (1)   Conducted under a land conservation contract.
      (2)   An existing agricultural activity, including expansions of the
activity onto undisturbed contiguous land.
      (3)   A proposed bona fide agricultural activity (i.e., an agricultural
activity that is served by a water distribution system adequate for the proper
operation of the activity).
         (A)   The Director shall be given 30 days’ written notice of the
removal describing the:
            (I)   Location of the land.
            (II)   Nature of the proposed activity.
            (III)   Proposed sources of water for the activity.
         (B)   The Director shall notify the landowner in writing before the
elapse of the 30-day period if, in the opinion of the Director, the activity is
not a bona fide agricultural activity, or else the activity shall be deemed
bona fide.
   (j)   Parcel less than 20,000 Square Feet Developed with Primary Structure.
Removal on parcels that have a net area of 20,000 square feet or less and that
are developed with a primary structure, other than a sign structure.
   (k)   Located Within 20 Feet of Permitted Structure. Removal from a parcel
of a regulated native plant or tree that is within 20 feet of a structure that
was constructed or set down on the parcel under a County development permit.
   (l)   Private Fuel Wood. Removal of two or fewer regulated native trees in
the Mountain Region or Valley Region per year per acre for private fuel wood
purposes. The year shall be measured as the last 12 consecutive months.
   (m)   Oak Woodlands. The following projects shall be exempt from the
conditions for mitigating the conversion of oak woodlands required in §
88.01.050(e) (Native Tree or Plant Removal Permits - Conditions of Approval),
below, in compliance with Public Resources Code § 21083.4:
      (1)   Projects undertaken in compliance with a Natural Community
Conservation Plan or subarea plan within a Natural Community Conservation Plan,
as approved in compliance with Fish and Game Code §§ 2800 et seq., that
includes oaks as a covered species or that conserves oak habitat through
natural community conservation preserve designation and implementation and
mitigation measures that are consistent with this Chapter.
      (2)   Affordable housing projects for lower income households, as defined
in Health and Safety Code § 50079.5, that are located within a city’s sphere of
influence.
      (3)   Projects on agricultural land within an Agricultural Land Use
Zoning District that includes land used to produce or process plant and animal
products for commercial purposes.
      (4)   Projects undertaken in compliance with a State agency’s regulatory
program certified in compliance with Public Resources Code § 21080.5.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.01.040 Regulated Trees and Plants and General Permit.
   (a)   Regulated Trees and Plants. A regulated tree or plant shall be any of
the trees or plants identified in:
      (1)   Section
88.01.060(c) (Regulated Desert Native Plants);
      (2)   Section
88.01.070(b) (Regulated Trees); or
      (3)   Section
88.01.080(b) (Regulated Riparian Plants).
   (b)   Permit for Removal Required. A Tree or Plant Removal Permit issued in
compliance with section
88.01.050 (Tree or Plant Removal Requirements) shall be required for the
removal of regulated trees and plants.
   (c)   Conditions of Approval. The permits required by this Chapter may be
subject to conditions imposed by the applicable review authority as identified
in §
88.01.050(e) (Tree or Plant Removal Permits - Condition of approval).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
§ 88.01.050 Native Tree or Plant Removal Permits.
   (a)   When Tree or Plant Removal Permit Required. A Tree or Plant Removal
Permit shall be required for the removal of a regulated tree or plant as
identified in this Chapter.
      (1)   Removals in Conjunction with Land Use Application or Development
Permit - Director Approval. The Director may approve the removal of regulated
trees or plants when requested in conjunction with a land use application, a
Building Permit, and all other development permits (e.g., Grading Permits,
Mobile Home Setdown Permits, etc.). An approved land use application and/or
development permit shall be considered to include a Tree or Plant Removal
Permit, if the land use application or development permit specifically reviews
and approves the removals. The review of a land use application or development
permit shall consider and require compliance with this Chapter.
      (2)   Removals Not in Conjunction with Land Use Application or
Development Permit - Director Approval. The Director may approve a Tree or
Plant Removal Permit for the removal of regulated trees or plants requested not
in conjunction with a land use application or development permit.
      (3)   Removals to Mitigate Fire Hazards - Fire Chief Approval. The Fire
Chief may approve a Tree or Plant Removal Permit for the removal of regulated
trees or plants when requested for the purposes of mitigating fire hazards and
independent of a land use application or development permit.
   (b)    Expert Certification. The applicable review authority may require
certification from an appropriate arborist, registered professional forester or
a Desert Native Plant Expert that the proposed tree removal, replacement, or
revegetation activities are appropriate, supportive of a healthy environment,
and in compliance with this Chapter. The certification shall include the
information in compliance with Department procedures.
   (c)   Preconstruction Inspections. A preconstruction inspection before
approval of development permits shall be required in areas with regulated trees
or plants to determine the presence of regulated trees and plants. The
preconstruction inspection may be combined with any other required inspection.
   (d)   Duration of Tree or Plant Removal Permits.
      (1)   Removals in Conjunction with Land Use Application or Development
Permit. The duration of a Tree or Plant Removal Permit, when issued in
conjunction with a land use application and/or a development permit, shall have
the same duration of the associated application or permit, unless otherwise
specified.
      (2)   Removals Not in Conjunction with Land Use Application or
Development Permit. The applicable review authority shall specify the
expiration date for all other Tree or Plant Removal Permits.
   (e)   Conditions of Approval. A Tree or Plant Removal Permit may be subject
to the following conditions imposed by the applicable review authority:
      (1)   Types of Conditions. The conditions may specify criteria, methods,
and persons authorized to conduct the proposed activities in addition to the
requirements in this Chapter.
      (2)   Transplanting or Stockpiling. Where indicated in this Chapter,
regulated trees and plants may be required to be transplanted and/or stockpiled
for future transplanting.
      (3)   Performance Bonds. The review authority may require the posting and
maintenance of a monetary security deposit where necessary to ensure the
completion of the required mitigation measures in compliance with §
86.06.050 (Performance Guarantees).
      (4)   Conversion of Oak Woodlands. If a project will result in a
conversion of oak woodlands that will have a significant effect on the
environment and is not exempt under §
88.01.030(m) (Exempt Activities - Oak Woodlands), one or more of the conditions
in this Subdivision may be imposed in compliance with Public Resources Code §
21083.4. For the purposes of this Subdivision, “oak” shall mean a native tree
species that is in the genus Quercus, which is not designated as Group A or
Group B commercial species under regulations adopted by the State Board of
Forestry and Fire Protection in compliance with Public Resources Code § 4526,
and which is five inches or more in diameter as measured at a point four and
one-half feet (breast height) above natural grade level. The applicable review
authority may require certification from a Tree Expert that the proposed
mitigation measures are appropriate, supportive of a healthy oak woodland
environment, and in compliance with this Subdivision. The certification shall
include the information in compliance with Department procedures. The
conditions that may be imposed include one or more of the following:
         (A)   Preservation. Preserve existing oak woodlands by recording
conservation easements in favor of the County or an approved organization or
agency.
         (B)   Replacement or Restoration. Replace or restore former oak
woodlands. The review authority may require the planting and maintenance of
replacement trees, including replacing dead or diseased trees. The replacement
ratio and tree sizes shall be based on the recommendation of an Oak
Reforestation Plan prepared by a registered professional forester. The
requirement to maintain trees in compliance with this Subdivision shall
terminate seven years after the trees are planted.
         (C)   In-lieu mitigation fee. Contribute in-lieu mitigation fee to the
Oak Woodlands Conservation Fund, established under Fish and Game Code § 1363
for the purpose of purchasing oak woodlands conservation easements. A project
applicant who contributes funds in compliance with this Subdivision shall not
receive or use a grant from the Oak Woodlands Conservation Fund as part of the
mitigation for the project. The in-lieu fee for replacement trees shall be
calculated based upon their equivalent value as established by the
International Society of Arboriculture’s (ISA) current edition of Guide to
Establishing Values for Trees and Shrubs, etc.).
         (D)   Other Mitigation Measures. Perform other mitigation measures as
may be required by the review authority (e.g., inch-for-inch off-site
replacement planting; transfer of development rights, enrollment of project
with offset provider for carbon credits in greenhouse gas emission registry,
carbon reduction, and carbon trading system; etc.).
   (f)   Findings for Tree or Plant Removal Permits. The applicable review
authority may authorize the removal of a regulated tree or plant only if the
following findings are made:
      (1)   Findings for Removals in the Valley Region, Mountain Region, and
Desert Region. The removal of the regulated tree or plant is justified for one
of the following reasons:
         (A)   The location of the regulated tree or plant and/or its dripline
interferes with an allowed structure, sewage disposal area, paved area, or
other approved improvement or ground disturbing activity and there is no other
alternative feasible location for the improvement.
         (B)   The location of the regulated tree or plant and/or its dripline
interferes with the planned improvement of a street or development of an
approved access to the subject or adjoining private property and there is no
other alternative feasible location for the improvement.
         (C)   The location of the regulated tree or plant is hazardous to
pedestrian or vehicular travel or safety.
         (D)   The regulated tree or plant or its presence interferes with or
is causing extensive damage to utility services or facilities, roadways,
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pavement, sewer line(s), drainage or flood control
improvements, foundations, existing structures, or municipal improvements.
         (E)   The condition or location of the regulated tree or plant is
adjacent to and in such close proximity to an existing or proposed structure
that the regulated tree or plant has or will sustain significant damage.
      (2)   Additional Findings for Removals in the Mountain Region. In the
Mountain Region only, the applicable review authority shall also make all of
the following findings:
         (A)   Where improvements are proposed, the design of the improvements
ensures that at least the following minimum percentage of the subject parcel
will be maintained or established in a natural undeveloped vegetated or
revegetated condition sufficient to ensure vegetative coverage for a forest
environment, as determined by the applicable Review Authority.
            (I)   Twenty percent of commercial, industrial, and administrative/
professional uses.
            (II)   Thirty-five percent of multi-family residential uses.
         (B)   At least one half of natural areas for all uses, except single-
family residential uses, will be located in the front setback area or located
so that significant portions are visible from the public right-of-way on which
the improvements are to be located.
         (C)   A perch tree within a federally identified American Bald Eagle
habitat will not be removed unless an adequate substitution is provided.
         (D)   A Registered Professional Forester has certified in writing that
the condition or location of a regulated tree is contributing to overstocked
tree stand conditions and that its removal will improve the overall health,
safety, and vigor of the stand of trees containing the subject tree.
      (3)   In the Desert Region only, the applicable Review Authority shall
also make the following findings:
         (A)   Joshua trees that are proposed to be removed will be
transplanted or stockpiled for future transplanting wherever possible.
         (B)   In the instance of stockpiling, the permittee has complied with
Department policy to ensure that Joshua trees are transplanted appropriately.
Transplanting shall comply with the provisions of the Desert Native Plants Act
(Food and Agricultural Code §§ 80001 et seq.), as required by §
88.01.060(d) (Compliance with Desert Native Plants Act).
         (C)   No other reasonable alternative exists for the development of
the land when the removal of specimen size Joshua Trees is requested. Specimen
size trees are defined as meeting one or more of the following criteria:
            (I)   A circumference measurement equal to or greater than 50
inches measured at four and one-half feet above natural grade level.
            (II)   Total tree height of 15 feet or greater.
            (III)   Trees possessing a bark-like trunk.
            (IV)   A cluster of ten or more individual trees, of any size,
growing in close proximity to each other.
   (g)   Plot Plan Requirements. Before the issuance of a Tree or Plant Removal
Permit, a plot plan shall be approved by the applicable Review Authority for
each site indicating exactly which trees or plants are authorized to be
removed. The required information shall be added to any other required plot
plan.
   (h)   Construction Standards. During construction and before final
inspection under a development permit, the following construction standards
shall apply, unless otherwise approved in writing by an arborist, registered
professional forester, or a Desert Native Plant Expert:
      (1)   Enclosures. The trunks of regulated trees and regulated plants
shall not be enclosed within rooflines or decking.
      (2)   Attachments. Utilities, construction signs, or other hardware shall
not be attached so as to penetrate or abrase any live regulated tree or plant.
      (3)   Grade Alterations. No grade alterations shall bury any portion of a
regulated tree or plant or significantly undercut the root system within the
dripline.
   (i)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Other Applicable Code Provisions. The provisions of
Chapter 86.09 (Enforcement) shall apply to this Chapter.
      (2)   Enforcement Authorities. The authorities responsible for the
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter shall be the same as the review
authorities responsible for permit approvals as specified in this Section. In
addition, the provisions of this Chapter may be enforced by the California
Department of Forestry, where applicable.
      (3)   Extension of Time. If property is subject to snow, flooding, or
other conditions that render compliance with the provisions of this Chapter
within the specified time periods impractical because of inaccessibility, an
enforcement officer may extend the period of time for compliance.
      (4)   Powers of Enforcement Officers.
         (A)   A peace officer or any authorized enforcement officer may in the
enforcement of this Section:
            (I)   Make arrests without warrant for a violation of this Chapter
that the officer may witness.
            (II)   Confiscate regulated native trees or plants, or parts of
them, that are unlawfully harvested, possessed, sold, or otherwise obtained in
violation of this Chapter.
         (B)   In addition, a designated enforcement officer shall be
authorized and directed to enter in or upon any premises or other place, train,
vehicle, or other means of transportation within or entering the State, which
is suspected of containing or having present regulated plants in violation of
this Chapter in order to examine permits and wood receipts and observe tags and
seals and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
      (5)   When Enforcement Officer Vested with Power of Peace Officer. When
power or authority is given by this Chapter to a person, it may be exercised by
any deputy, inspector, or agent duly authorized by that person. A person in
whom the enforcement of a provision of this Chapter is vested shall have the
power of a peace officer as to that enforcement, which shall include State or
Federal agencies with which cooperative agreements have been made by the County
to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
      (6)   Written Permission of Landowner Required for Removal. No person
shall remove or damage all or part of any regulated tree or plant on the
property of another person without first obtaining notarized written permission
from the landowner and required permits, wood receipts, or tags and seals. In
addition, it shall be unlawful for a person to falsify a document offered as
evidence of permission to enter upon the property of another to harvest all or
parts of a regulated tree or plant, whether alive or dead.
      (7)   Permit Available for Display and Inspection. No person, except as
provided in this Chapter, shall harvest, offer for sale, destroy, dig up or
mutilate, or have in his or her possession a regulated plant or tree, or the
living or dead parts of them, unless the plant or tree was harvested under a
valid permit and, where applicable, a valid wood receipt on his or her person.
A person shall exhibit the permit, wood receipt, tags and/or seals upon request
for inspection by an authorized County enforcement officer or any peace
officer. No wood receipt or tag and seal shall be valid unless it is issued
with a valid permit and the permit bears the wood receipt number or tag number
on its face. Required tags and seals shall be attached securely to a regulated
desert native plant.
      (8)   Land Disturbance. No person, except as provided in this Chapter,
shall commence with a disturbance of land (e.g., grading or land clearing)
without first obtaining approval to assure that said disturbance will not
result in the removal of any regulated native trees or plants. Said approval
may be in the form of a development permit or a Tree or Plant Removal Permit
issued by the appropriate authority.
   (j)   Penalties. Penalties shall be those specified in
Chapter 86.09 (Enforcement) and shall include the following and any other
penalties specified by individual Sections of this Chapter.
      (1)   Fine for Illegal Removal.
         (A)   In addition to other penalties and fees imposed by this
Development Code or other law, a person, firm, or corporation convicted of a
violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
upon conviction.
         (B)   When one or more plants or trees are removed in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter, the removal of each separate plant or tree shall be
a new and separate offense.
         (C)   The penalty for the offense shall be a fine of not less than
$500.00 nor more than $1,000.00, or six months in jail, or both.
         (D)   Payment of a penalty shall not relieve a person, firm, or
corporation from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from
the violation.
      (2)   Replacement Program for Illegal Removal.
         (A)   In addition to other penalties imposed by this Development Code
or other law, a person, firm, or corporation convicted of violating the
provisions of this Chapter regarding improper removal of regulated native trees
or plants shall be required to retain, as appropriate, a Tree Expert or Desert
Native Plant Expert to develop and implement a replacement program.
         (B)   The expert shall determine the appropriate number, size,
species, location, and planting conditions for replacement plants or trees in
sufficient quantities to revegetate the illegally disturbed area.
         (C)   If it is inappropriate to revegetate the illegally disturbed
area, another appropriate location (e.g., public parks) may be substituted at
the direction of the court.
         (D)   The violator shall post a bond in an amount sufficient to remove
and reinstall plant/tree materials that were planted as a part of a replacement
program and failed within two years.
      (3)   Revocation of Permits.
         (A)   Upon conviction of a violation of this Chapter, all Tree or
Plant Removal Permits issued to the convicted person, firm, or corporation
shall be revoked.
         (B)   No new or additional Tree or Plant Removal Permits shall be
issued to the permittee for a period of one year from the date of conviction.
         (C)   Additionally, in the Desert Region the permittee shall be
required to surrender unused wood receipts or tags and seals to the Director.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 88.01.060 Desert Native Plant Protection.
   This Section provides regulations for the removal or harvesting of specified
desert native plants in order to preserve and protect the plants and to provide
for the conservation and wise use of desert resources. The provisions are
intended to augment and coordinate with the Desert Native Plants Act (Food and
Agricultural Code §§ 80001 et seq.) and the efforts of the State Department of
Food and Agriculture to implement and enforce the Act.
   (a)   Definitions. Terms and phrases used within this Section shall be
defined in
Division 10 (Definitions) and/or defined by the California Food and
Agricultural Code. The California Food and Agricultural Code definition, if one
exists, shall prevail over a conflicting definition in this Development Code.
   (b)   Applicability. The provisions of this Section shall apply to desert
native plants specified in Subdivision (c) (Regulated Desert Native Plants)
that are growing on any of the following lands, unless exempt in compliance
with §
88.01.030 (Exempt Activities):
      (1)   Privately owned or publicly owned land in the Desert Region.
      (2)   Privately owned or publicly owned land in any parts of the Mountain
Region in which desert native plants naturally grow in a transitional habitat.
   (c)   Regulated Desert Native Plants. The following desert native plants or
any part of them, except the fruit, shall not be removed except under a Tree or
Plant Removal Permit in compliance with §
88.01.050 (Tree or Plant Removal Permits). In all cases the botanical names
shall govern the interpretation of this Section.
      (1)   The following desert native plants with stems two inches or greater
in diameter or six feet or greater in height:
         (A)   Dalea spinosa (smoketree).
         (B)   All species of the genus Prosopis (mesquites).
      (2)   All species of the family Agavaceae (century plants, nolinas,
yuccas).
      (3)   Creosote Rings, ten feet or greater in diameter.
      (4)   All Joshua trees.
      (5)   Any part of any of the following species, whether living or dead:
         (A)   Olneya tesota (desert ironwood).
         (B)   All species of the genus Prosopis (mesquites).
         (C)   All species of the genus Cercidium (palos verdes).
   (d)   Compliance with Desert Native Plants Act. Removal actions of all
plants protected or regulated by the Desert Native Plants Act (Food and
Agricultural Code §§ 80001 et seq.) shall comply with the provisions of the Act
before the issuance of a development permit or approval of a land use
application.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.01.070 Mountain Forest and Valley Tree Conservation.
   This Section provides regulations to promote conservation and wise use of
forest resources in the Mountain Region and native tree resources in the Valley
Region. The provisions are intended to augment and coordinate with the Z’berg-
Nejedly Forest Practice Act of 1973 (Public Resources Code §§ 4526 et seq.) and
the efforts of the State Department of Forestry and Fire Protection to
implement and enforce the Act.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   Private Harvesting. The provisions of this Section apply to the
private harvesting of all trees growing on private land and on public land in
the unincorporated Mountain Region and Valley Region.
      (2)   Commercial Harvesting. The commercial harvesting of trees shall be
prohibited, except as allowed by and authorized by the State Department of
Forestry and Fire Protection in compliance with the Z’berg-Nejedly Forest
Practice Act of 1973 (Public Resources Code §§ 4526 et seq.).
   (b)   Regulated Trees. The following trees shall only be removed with an
approved Tree or Plant Removal Permit issued in compliance with §
88.01.050 (Tree or Plant Removal Permits):
      (1)   Native Trees. A living, native tree with a six inch or greater stem
diameter or 19 inches in circumference measured four and one-half feet above
natural grade level.
      (2)   Palm Trees. Three or more palm trees in linear plantings, which are
50 feet or greater in length within established windrows or parkway plantings,
shall be considered to be heritage trees and shall be subject to the provisions
of this Chapter regarding native trees.
   (c)   Tree Protection from Insects and Disease. For regulations on the
treatment and disposition of felled trees, see §
88.01.090 (Tree Protection from Insects and Disease).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.01.080 Riparian Plant Conservation.
   This Section provides regulations to promote healthy and abundant riparian
habitats that protect watersheds; control transmission and storage of natural
water supplies; provide unique wildlife habitats for rare, endangered and
threatened plants and animals; provide attractive environments; control natural
soil erosion and sedimentation to protect stream banks subject to erosion and
undercutting; and provide sufficient shade to reduce temperature and
evaporation and the growth of algae in streams. The provisions of this Section
are intended to augment and coordinate with the responsibilities of the
California Department of Fish and Game.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   Applicable Areas. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all
riparian areas located on private land in all zones within the unincorporated
areas of the County and to riparian areas on public land owned by the County,
unless exempt as specified by §
88.01.030 (Exempt Activities) and by Subdivision (2) (Exemptions), below.
      (2)   Exemptions. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
         (A)   Emergency Flood Control District operations or water
conservation measures established and authorized by an appropriate independent
Special District.
         (B)   An area that has an existing man-made impervious structure,
which is greater than 120 square feet in roof area, between the area proposed
to be disturbed by a development permit and the bank of a subject stream, as
measured in a straight line perpendicular to the centerline of the stream.
   (b)   Regulated Riparian Plants.
      (1)   Vegetation Described. The removal of vegetation within 200 feet of
the bank of a stream, or in an area indicated as a protected riparian area on
an overlay map or Specific Plan, shall require approval of a Tree or Plant
Removal Permit in compliance with §
88.01.050 (Tree or Plant Removal Permits) and shall be subject to environmental
review.
      (2)   Streams. For the purposes of this Section, streams include those
shown on United States Geological Survey Quadrangle topographic maps as
perennial or intermittent, blue or brown lines (solid or dashed), and river
wash areas.
   (c)   Preconstruction Inspections. Preconstruction inspections shall include
the verification of the presence of riparian vegetation.
   (d)   Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval for removal of riparian
vegetation may be imposed in addition to, and in combination with, any
condition imposed in compliance with §
88.01.050 (Tree or Plant Removal Permits).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008)
§ 88.01.090 Tree Protection from Insects and Disease.
   This Section provides regulations for the treatment and disposition of
felled trees in the Mountain Region to protect against damaging insects (e.g.
bark beetles) and diseases. The intent is to mitigate the serious danger posed
to forests from coniferous trees that are cut in land clearing operations and
are then allowed to remain exposed and untreated against noxious insects, which
then multiply in the felled trees to later attack and damage healthy coniferous
trees.
   (a)   Applicability. The provisions in this Section apply to coniferous
trees located on land in the Mountain Region. Every person, firm, or
corporation, whether as principal, agent, or employee, that has control of,
right of entry on, or access to land in the Mountain Region shall comply with
this Section.
   (b)   Treatment of Felled Trees. Except as otherwise provided by this
Section, felled coniferous trees, portions of trees, and stumps shall be
treated in compliance with at least one, or a combination, of the following
methods and the method in Subdivision (c) (Stump Treatment), below, within 15
days after a coniferous tree has been cut.
      (1)   Remove to a solid waste disposal site specifically designated by
the County for this type of use.
      (2)   Burn sufficiently to consume the bark, when allowed by the Fire
Department and the Air Pollution Control District.
      (3)   Lop and scatter material less than four inches in diameter so that
it is piled no higher than 24 inches above the ground, when allowed by the Fire
Department.
      (4)   Remove the bark.
      (5)   Chip or grind.
      (6)   Split and scatter with bark toward the sun for a minimum of 45
consecutive days or until final inspection is completed, whichever is less.
      (7)   Stack in the sun and cover with six mil clear plastic, which has a
continuous seal from the outside and for at least 180 days.
      (8)   Spray with a commercial insecticide, as approved by the
Agricultural Commissioner for these insects and purposes.
      (9)   Treat under any other method approved by the enforcement officer in
writing.
   (c)   Stump treatment. Fresh cut stumps of live coniferous trees shall be
protected from infection by Annosus Root Rot (Fomes annosus) with borax powder
(granular tech, ten mole) as soon as possible after felling, covering the
entire newly exposed cut and/or broken surface completely with a thin uniform
layer of white borax within two hours.
   (d)   Inspections. In the case of construction activity, the Building
Official shall not approve development permit inspections until felled
coniferous trees, portions of trees, and stumps are treated in compliance with
this Section.
   (e)   Certificate of Compliance. Where trees have been treated by an
approved method and the evidence of treatment is not readily observable to the
inspector on the construction site, the Building Official shall require a
permittee to obtain a certificate that the treatment has been completed in an
acceptable manner. The certificate may be from one of the following authorities
      (1)   Fire Chief.
      (2)   Agricultural Commissioner.
      (3)   Appropriately certified Pest Control Adviser as defined in Food and
Agricultural Code §§ 11401 et seq.
      (4)   Qualified Applicator as defined in Food and Agricultural Code §§
11401 et seq. 
   (f)   Extension of Time of Enforcement. If compliance with Subdivision (b)
(Treatment of Felled Trees) and Subdivision (c) (Stump Treatment) within the
specified time periods is impractical because of inaccessibility to the cut
timber due to snow or flooding, an enforcement officer may extend the period of
time for compliance.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 88.02: SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
88.02.010   Purpose.
   
88.02.020   Applicability.
   
88.02.030   Exempt Activities.
   
88.02.040   Dust Control - Desert Region.
   
88.02.050   Wind-Borne Soil Erosion.
§ 88.02.010 Purpose.
   The Chapter establishes uniform standards and processes for regulating
development that disturbs the surface of lands. The intent of these provisions
is to:
   (a)   Ensure conservation of soil, water, and other valuable natural
resources.
   (b)   Reduce erosion and maintain soil productivity.
   (c)   Maintain healthy environments and air quality.
   (d)   Guide the planning and evaluation of proposed development.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.02.020 Applicability. 
   Each Section in this Chapter describes activities that disturb land surfaces
and the applicable regions; identifies required permits and plans for the
activities; and provides regulations to mitigate the adverse impact of the
activities.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.02.030 Exempt Activities.
   The intent of this Section is not to invalidate existing discretionary
permits, but rather to prevent or mitigate accelerated erosion. The following
activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter, except §
82.13.080(c) (General Erosion Control Requirements) and conditions of
accelerated erosion existing before adoption of this Development Code.
   (a)   Activities Not Resulting in Land Disturbance. Activities where the
Building Official recognizes that no land disturbance will take place,
including:
      (1)   Change of use permits where there would be no expansion of land
disturbing activities.
      (2)   Construction within an existing structure.
   (b)   Agricultural Activities. Agricultural grading and routine agricultural
activities (e.g., plowing, harrowing, discing, ridging, listing, land planning,
and similar operations to prepare a field for a crop, including routine
clearing to maintain existing rangeland, etc.).
   (c)   Land Clearing Activities for Fire Prevention. Land clearing and
vegetation clearance around structures as required by State and local fire
codes and fire prevention guidelines. Land clearing shall be limited to that
required to comply with applicable fire codes and regulations.
   (d)   Resource Management Activities. Clearing, fuel management,
reforestation, erosion control, or other resource management programs that are
carried out under the auspices of a government agency and that include
appropriate erosion control measures. Agencies should notify the Building
Official of these types of projects.
   (e)   Road/Utility Construction and Maintenance Activities. Road
construction and maintenance as well as installation of utilities in compliance
with plans and procedures approved by the Director of Public Works; provided
that adequate measures, consistent with the intent of this Chapter, have been
taken to control erosion and the flow of sediment into lakes, streams, and
drainage courses.
   (f)   Septic System and Well Installation and Repair Activities. Activities
in compliance with a valid permit for septic system installation and repair or
well drilling; however §
82.13.080(e)(4) (Land Clearing Measures - Installation and Maintenance of
Protection) and §
82.13.080(f)(1) (Winter operation Measures - Winter Operation Erosion Control
Measures) shall apply and sediment from the septic system installation and
repair or well drilling activities shall not be allowed to enter a stream or
body of water.
   (g)   Soil Testing Activities. Routine testing of soil type and
characteristics to determine soil suitability, water percolation, or similar
soil tests; provided, however, that sediment from these activities shall not be
allowed to enter a stream, drainage course, or body of water.
   (h)   Timber Harvesting Activities. Timber harvesting activities subject to
and in compliance with a valid Timber Harvest Plan approved in compliance with
the Z’berg-Nejedly Forest Practice Act of 1973 (Public Resources Code §§ 4526
et seq.).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.02.040 Dust Control - Desert Region.
   This Section provides regulations for disturbances to fragile desert soils
in order to reduce the amount of fugitive dust that may (for long periods of
time) adversely affect those who own; possess, control; or use residential
parcels of land; and those who are located downwind of a residential parcel of
land whose surface is being disturbed.
   (a)   Applicability. The provisions in this Section apply to parcels in the
Desert Region that are one acre or greater in size and are utilized for
residential purposes.
   (b)   Permit Requirements. A land use permit shall not be required for
grading, land clearing, or vegetation removal activities that comply with
Subdivision (c) (Dust Control Standards - Desert Region), below. If more
extensive grading, land clearing, or vegetation removal activities are proposed
than allowed in Subdivision (c), the activities shall be require approval of a
Site Plan Permit in compliance with
Chapter 85.08 (Site Plan Permit).
   (c)   Dust Control Standards - Desert Region. Land shall be cleared or
natural vegetation shall be removed only in order to provide for the
installation of building pads, driveways, landscaping, agriculture, or some
other structure or allowed use normally related or accessory to residential
uses. No person, except as provided in this Chapter, shall commence with a
disturbance of land (e.g., grading or land clearing) without first obtaining
approval to assure that said disturbance will not result in a significant
increase of fugitive dust. Said approval may be in the form of a development
permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 88.02.050 Wind-Borne Soil Erosion.
   This Section provides regulations to conserve soil resources and to minimize
the injurious effects of dust storms.
   (a)   Statement of Hazardous Wind Erosion Conditions. The Board finds and
determines that:
      (1)   Existence of Hazardous Wind Erosion Conditions. Serious and
hazardous wind erosion problems exist within portions of the County creating
conditions that adversely affect the health, safety, welfare, and property of
residents of the County.
      (2)   Reasons for Hazardous Wind Erosion Conditions. These conditions
exist because of:
         (A)   Improper and untimely disturbance of the surface or subsurface
of land, the soil of which is coarse textured and of a sandy nature; and
         (B)   The character and the presence of strong prevailing winds,
seasonal and otherwise, that progressively erode land and blow soil in
substantial quantity onto public and private property.
      (3)   Public Nuisance. The hazardous wind erosion conditions constitute a
public nuisance.
      (4)   Areas of Hazardous Wind Erosion Conditions. Hazardous wind erosion
conditions are prevalent and in need of immediate correction within the
boundaries of property described in Subdivision (b) (Applicability), below.
   (b)   Applicability. The following areas of the County shall be subject to
the provisions of this Section:
      (1)   Unincorporated Area near Rancho Cucamonga in the Valley Region.
Beginning at the north quarter corner of Section 26, Township 1 north, Range 7
west, San Bernardino Meridian, said corner being also the centerline
intersection of Hermosa and Wilson Avenues; Thence north along said centerline
of Hermosa Avenue and its prolongation to the southerly boundary of the San
Bernardino National Forest; Thence easterly along said southerly boundary,
following all of its various courses to the centerline of Interstate 15;Thence
southwesterly along said centerline to the centerline of East End Avenue;
Thence south along said centerline of East End Avenue and its prolongation to
the boundary of San Bernardino County; Thence west along said County boundary
and continuing along said County boundary, following all of its various courses
to the centerline of State Highway 71; Thence northerly along said centerline
of State Highway 71 to the centerline of Euclid Ave.; Thence northerly along
said centerline of Euclid Ave. to the north quarter corner of Section 30,
Township 1 north, Range 7 west, said corner being also the centerline
intersection of Euclid Ave. and 24th Street; Thence easterly along said
centerline of 24th street to the point of beginning.
      (2)   Unincorporated area In Wonder Valley Fire and Road District in the
Desert Region. That territory commonly known as Wonder Valley and more
particularly described as follows:
         T2N, R9E, Sections 25 and 36;
         T2N, R9E, Sections 1, 12, 13 and 24;
         T1N, R10E, Sections 1 through 25;
         T1N, R11E, Sections 1 through 30; and
         T1N, R12E, Sections 1 through 30.
      (3)   Other Unincorporated Territory. On recommendation of the
Agricultural Commissioner and with the approval of the Board, additional
unincorporated areas of the County may be made subject to this Section when
conditions exist as stated in Subdivision (a) (Statement of Hazardous Wind
Erosion Conditions), above.
      (4)   Territory Within City Limits. The Agricultural Commissioner may
enforce the provisions of this Section within the city limits of any city
located in the County upon the occurrence of all of the following:
         (A)   Adoption by the governing body of the city of all provisions of
this Section (excluding those in this Subdivision (b) (Applicability).
         (B)   Designation of the city’s geographical area to which the
provisions of this Chapter shall apply.
         (C)   Entrance by the city into a contract with the County for
enforcement of this Chapter by the Agricultural Commissioner. The Board’s Fee
Resolution shall set the fee for enforcement.
   (c)   Dust Prevention Required. To conserve the soil resources within the
areas described in Subdivision (b) (Applicability), above, and to minimize the
injurious effects of dust storms, the owner and all persons in possession of
real property within the identified areas shall take reasonable measures and
means to prevent dust blowing from the property.
   (d)   Soil Erosion Permit - When Required. A Soil Erosion Permit issued by
the Agricultural Commissioner shall be required before undertaking activities
that will result in:
      (1)   Disturbing the surface or subsurface of land by excavating,
leveling, cultivating, discing, plowing, blading, removing residues, natural or
planted tree, vine or root crops; or by distributing or spreading a substantial
quantity of similar soil on the land; or
      (2)   Aggravating erosion, whether by any of the activities described in
Subdivision (1), above, or by the recreational use of off-road vehicles at any
time;
   (e)   Exempt Activities. A Soil Erosion Permit shall not be required to
disturb the surface or subsurface of the land under the following
circumstances; however, prevention of blowing dust as required by Subdivision
(c) (Dust Prevention Required) shall still apply:
      (1)   When activities are required by another ordinance, statute, rule or
regulation.
      (2)   When necessary to grade, trench, or otherwise install, repair or
replace utility services within the boundaries of utility or public rights-of-
way when the activities are completed within 72 hours.
      (3)   When the disturbance or proposed activity is confined to an area of
one acre or less.
      (4)   When a viticulturist properly utilizes a Noble blade to control
weed growth within a vineyard.
      (5)   When the soil disturbance occurs as an agricultural practice within
an Agricultural Preserve established in compliance with
Chapter 86.10 (Agricultural Preserves/Land Conservation Contract Actions).
   (f)   Permit Application Filing, Processing, and Review Procedures.
      (1)   Permit Application. An application for the Soil Erosion Permit
shall be made in writing to the Agricultural Commissioner on forms provided by
the County.
      (2)   Contents of Application. The application shall include the
following information:
         (A)   Applicant’s name, address, and phone number.
         (B)   Location and Assessor’s Parcel Number of the property.
         (C)   A description of the cause and purpose of the soil disruption.
         (D)   A description of the protective measures to be used by the
applicant.
         (E)   Approximate starting and completion dates of the soil disruption
and building construction/landscaping.
         (F)   Name and telephone number of the responsible person during windy
periods.
         (G)   Other information as is required to enable the Agricultural
Commissioner to fix and prescribe appropriate conditions that will prevent or
minimize wind erosion of the permittee’s soil.
      (3)   Permit Fees. The fee for a Soil Erosion Permit shall be identified
in the Planning Fee Schedule.
      (4)   Conditions. The Soil Erosion Permit shall be subject to conditions
that the Agricultural Commissioner may impose to ensure that surface protection
is provided before, during, and/or after the time of the disturbance of the
surface or subsurface of the land. Protective measures required by the
Agricultural Commissioner shall be provided by means of agricultural measures
or any other effective method, or combination of methods, of holding the soil
in place.
      (5)   Notification of Decision. The Agricultural Commissioner shall
inform the applicant in writing of the Agricultural Commissioner’s decision.
The notification shall include a description of the right to an appeal and the
ten day deadline for filing an appeal as required in §
88.02.050(j) (Appeals), below.
      (6)   Annual Permit Renewals and Fee Payments. Annual renewal and payment
of appropriate fees shall be required until the Agricultural Commissioner
releases the permittee from the permittee’s obligations under the permit in
compliance with Subdivision (7), (Continuing Obligation to Prevent Erosion
until Release), below.
      (7)   Continuing Obligation to Prevent Erosion until Release. In order to
prevent the soil on the land from being eroded by wind and blown onto public
roads or other public or private property, the permittee’s obligations under
the Soil Erosion Permit shall continue in force and effect, regardless of
whether the permit has been renewed as required by Subdivision (6) (Annual
Permit Renewals and Fee Payments), until the Agricultural Commissioner has
notified the permittee in writing that the permittee’s obligations under the
Soil Erosion Permit are released.
   (g)   Agricultural Commissioner Authority.
      (1)   Authorized Actions. Subject to the restrictions in this Section
regarding constitutional freedoms and laws respecting rights of privacy, the
Agricultural Commissioner shall have authority, at all reasonable times, to
enforce this Section and to:
         (A)   Enter upon any property to investigate for violations of this
Section.
         (B)   Detain any person for purposes of investigation.
         (C)   Issue Temporary Stop Work Orders in compliance with Subdivision
(i) (Temporary Stop Work Orders), below.
         (D)   Issue a citation to a person committing a misdemeanor or an
infraction offense under this Section within the presence of the Agricultural
Commissioner.
      (2)   Inspection or Abatement.
         (A)   The inspection or abatement of a structure or private property
shall be made:
            (I)   With the consent of the owner or occupant of the property; or
            (II)   If consent is refused, with a warrant issued in compliance
with Code of Civil Procedure § 1822.50 (Title 13 [Inspection Warrants] of Part
3 [Special Proceedings of a Civil Nature]).
         (B)   However, in the event of an emergency affecting the public
health or safety, an inspection or abatement may be made without consent or the
issuance of a warrant.
   (h)   Abatement of Hazardous Conditions.
      (1)   Notice of Hazardous Conditions. When land presents a hazardous
condition that may affect the health, safety, and welfare of neighboring
residents (because of the condition of the land with regard to loose soil and
windy conditions), the landowners of record shall be notified by the
Agricultural Commissioner in writing by first class mail of the conditions.
      (2)   Deadline for Abatement. If these conditions are not corrected
within 30 days of the mailing of the notice, the Agricultural Commissioner may
order the conditions to be corrected as reasonably and economically as possible
in compliance with the discretion of the Agricultural Commissioner. However,
when time is of the essence and emergency action is necessary to put into
effect these protective provisions, the Agricultural Commissioner may take
immediate steps to abate the hazardous soil erosion condition.
      (3)   Assessment of Abatement Costs.
         (A)   The County Auditor shall pay the cost of the abatements that may
be conducted by the County from the funds of the Agricultural Commissioner.
         (B)   The total cost of each abatement shall be computed and an
administrative fee of 20 percent of the cost shall be added to the bill.
         (C)   A bill for the entire sum of the costs and administrative fee
shall be mailed to the owner of record of the subject land, as determined by
and at the address in the County Assessor’s records. A copy of the bill shall
be sent to the County Auditor. The bill shall include an itemized statement
covering the work necessary for the abatement of the hazardous condition.
         (D)   If the record owner of the land or his or her agent does not pay
the bill within 30 days after the mailing, the Agricultural Commissioner shall
certify to the Auditor the demands remaining unpaid on the bill, together with
any other information required by law. The County Auditor shall enter the
amount of the bill on the tax roll as a special assessment and tax lien on the
property from which abatement of the hazardous condition was accomplished. The
special assessment shall be included on the next succeeding tax statement. From
that time forward, the amounts of the assessment shall be:
            (I)   Collected at the same time and in the same manner as County
taxes are collected; and
            (II)   Subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and
sale in cases of delinquencies as provided for ordinary taxes.
      (4)   Cancellation or Refund of Abatement Assessments. All or any portion
of the assessment entered, shall, on order of the Board of Supervisors, be
cancelled by the County Auditor if uncollected, or refunded by the County
Treasurer under the order of the Board of Supervisors, if the assessment was
entered, charged, or paid:
         (A)   More than once.
         (B)   Through clerical error.
         (C)   Through the error of the Board of Supervisors or of the
Agricultural Commissioner in respect to any material fact, including the case
where the expense records indicate the County abated a hazardous condition on
the property, but in fact no hazardous condition existed on the property or the
County did not abate the hazardous condition existing on the property.
         (D)   Illegally.
         (E)   On property acquired after the lien by the State or any city,
county, school district or other public entity, and because of public ownership
the property is not subject to sale for delinquent taxes.
      (5)   Eligibility Requirements for Refund Claims. No order for refund
shall be made except on a claim that is:
         (A)   Verified by the person who paid the special assessment or the
representative of that person or that person’s estate; and
         (B)   Filed within three years after making the payment to be
refunded.
   (i)   Temporary Stop Work Orders.
      (1)   Issuance. The Agricultural Commissioner may issue a Temporary Stop
Work Order and the subject soil disturbing operation shall immediately be
stopped, whether a permit has been issued or not, when:
         (A)   A permit has been issued, but not all of the permit requirements
have been complied with. The Temporary Stop Work Order may require that all
work cease until all the permit requirements have been met.
         (B)   Operations are in progress, with a permit or not, and weather
conditions are causing substantial dust to be carried into the air. The
Temporary Stop Work Order may require the cessation of all work until the
current dust air pollution is abated.
         (C)   Operations are in progress, regardless of weather conditions,
and a soil disturbance permit has not been issued.
      (2)   Appeal Not Allowed. A Temporary Stop Work Order shall not be
subject to an appeal.
   (j)   Appeals.
      (1)   Eligible Appellant. Upon receipt to the Agricultural Commissioner’s
written decision to deny a Soil Erosion Permit or to impose conditions on the
issuance of a Soil Erosion Permit, an applicant may appeal the decision to the
Soil Erosion and Dust Prevention Appeals Board.
      (2)   Filing Deadline. The appeal shall be filed in writing within ten
working days of the Agricultural Commissioner’s action.
      (3)   Soil Erosion and Dust Prevention Appeals Board. The Soil Erosion
and Dust Prevention Appeals Board shall consist of the following members:
         (A)   An employee of the Office of the Agricultural Commissioner, but
not any employee who acted on the subject permit request of the appellant;
         (B)   An employee of the General Services Group; and
         (C)   A designee of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation
District.
      (4)   Notice and Date of Hearing. The Soil Erosion and Dust Prevention
Appeals Board shall, upon receipt of an appeal set the matter for hearing and
shall notify the appellant of the hearing date at least 15 days before the
date. If the appellant resides outside the County, the period of notice shall
be at least 25 days.
      (5)   Action by Soil Erosion and Dust Prevention Appeals Board. The Soil
Erosion and Dust Prevention Appeals Board shall act on the appeal and its
determination shall be conclusive.
      (6)   Notification of Board’s Decision. Notification of the Soil Erosion
and Dust Prevention Board’s decision shall be mailed to the appellant.
   (k)   Violation. Failure to comply with the terms of a Soil Erosion Permit
shall be unlawful. A violation of this Section or the terms of the permit may
be found without present evidence of blowing sand or soil erosion.
   (l)   Penalties for Violation. Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm,
company, or corporation violating the provisions of this Section shall be
guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as specified below. Each day or portion
of a day in which the violation exists shall be a new and separate offense.
      (1)   First and Second Violations. Any person convicted shall be:
         (A)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by fine not
exceeding $100.00 and not less than $50.00 for a first violation.
         (B)   Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine not
exceeding $200.00, but not less than $100.00 for a second violation.
         (C)   Notwithstanding the above, a first or second offense may be
charged and prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Third and Additional Violations. The third and any additional
violations shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and not less than $500.00 or six months in jail,
or both.
      (3)   Correction Required Even If Penalty Paid. Payment of a penalty
shall not relieve a person, firm, corporation, or other entity from
responsibility for correcting the condition resulting from the violation.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 88.03: SURFACE MINING AND LAND RECLAMATION
Section
   
88.03.010   Purpose.
   
88.03.020   Incorporation of SMARA and State Regulations.
   
88.03.030   Applicability.
   
88.03.040   Permit, Plan, And Financial Assurance Requirements.
   
88.03.050   Vested Rights.
   
88.03.060   Application Filing, Processing, and Review.
   
88.03.070   Additional Conditions Of Approval.
   
88.03.080   Financial Assurances.
   
88.03.090   Reclamation Standards.
   
88.03.100   Interim Management Plans.
   
88.03.110   Annual Report.
   
88.03.120   Inspections.
   
88.03.130   Violations and Penalties.
   
88.03.140   Post-Approval Procedures.
§ 88.03.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Extraction of Minerals Essential to County Economic Well-Being. The
County recognizes that the extraction of minerals is essential to the continued
economic well-being of the County and its residents and to societal needs and
that the reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse
effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety.
   (b)   Surface Mining in Diverse Areas. The County also recognizes that
surface mining takes place in diverse areas where the geologic, topographic,
climatic, biological, and social conditions are significantly different and
that reclamation operations and their related specifications may vary
accordingly.
   (c)   Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to
ensure the continued availability of important mineral resources, while
regulating surface mining operations as required by:
      (1)   California’s Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Public
Resources Code §§ 2710 et seq.) (SMARA).
      (2)   Public Resources Code § 2207 (relating to annual reporting
requirements).
      (3)   State Mining and Geology Board regulations (“State regulations”)
for surface mining and reclamation practice (Code of Regulations §§ 3500 et
seq.) to ensure that:
         (A)   Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and
that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition that is readily adaptable
for alternative land uses.
         (B)   The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged,
while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed,
wildlife, range and forage, and aesthetic enjoyment.
         (C)   Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.020 Incorporation of SMARA and State Regulations.
   (a)   Incorporation of SMARA and State Regulations. The provisions of the
California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (Public Resources Code §§
2710 et seq.), Public Resources Code § 2207, and the regulations implementing
the act (Code of Regulations §§ 3500 et seq.) (“State regulations”) are made a
part of this Chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if the
provisions were specifically and fully contained in this Chapter; except that
when the provisions of this Chapter are more restrictive than correlative State
provisions, this Chapter shall prevail.
   (b)   Amendments to SMARA. In the event that the State amends SMARA to the
extent that it adds to or conflicts with this Chapter, State law shall prevail.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.030 Applicability.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all public and private
property in the unincorporated areas of the County.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.040 Permit, Plan, And Financial Assurance Requirements.
   (a)   Approval of Conditional Use Permit, Reclamation Plan, and Financial
Assurance Required.  Unless exempted by SMARA, State regulations, or
Subdivision (b) (Exemptions), below, any person who proposes to engage in
surface mining operations shall, before the commencement of the operation,
obtain County approval of a Conditional Use Permit, Reclamation Plan, and
financial assurances for reclamation in compliance with this Chapter. An
exemption from these approval requirements shall not automatically exempt a
project or activity from the application of other County regulations,
ordinances, or policies (e.g., the application of CEQA; the requirements of
Conditional Use Permits or other permits; the payment of development impact
fees; the imposition of other dedications and exactions as may be allowed under
the law; etc.).
   (b)   Exemptions. This Chapter shall not apply to the following activities,
subject to the exceptions noted in Subdivision (a), above:
      (1)   Excavations or grading conducted for farming or for the purpose of
restoring land following a flood or natural disaster.
      (2)   Onsite excavation and onsite earthmoving activities that are an
integral and necessary part of a construction project and that are undertaken
to prepare a site for construction of structures, landscaping, or other land
improvements, including the related excavation, grading, compaction, or the
creation of fills, road cuts, and embankments, whether or not surplus materials
are exported from the site, subject to all of the following conditions:
         (A)   All required permits for the construction, landscaping, or
related land improvements have been approved by a public agency in compliance
with applicable provisions of State law and locally adopted plans and
ordinances, including the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
         (B)   The County’s approval of the construction project:
            (I)   Is consistent with the General Plan.
            (II)   Included consideration of the onsite excavation and onsite
earthmoving activities in compliance with CEQA.
         (C)   Surplus materials shall not be exported from the site unless and
until the site accepting the surplus materials has also been approved for
development according to the appropriate procedures of the agency having land
use jurisdiction.
         (D)   Surplus materials shall not be exported from the site unless and
until actual construction work has commenced and shall cease if it is
determined that construction activities have terminated, have been indefinitely
suspended, or are no longer being actively pursued.
      (3)   Operation of a plant site used for mineral processing, including
associated onsite structures, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials,
including the onsite stockpiling and onsite recovery of mined materials,
subject to all of the following conditions:
         (A)   The plant site is located on lands with an appropriate land use
zoning district designation commensurate with the activity according to the
General Plan (e.g., Regional Industrial (IR), Special Development (SD), etc.).
         (B)   None of the minerals being processed are being extracted onsite.
         (C)   Reclamation work has been completed in compliance with the
approved Reclamation Plan for mineral extraction activities that occurred
onsite after January 1, 1976.
      (4)   Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial
purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than 1,000
cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less.
      (5)   Limited surface mining operations that are required by Federal law
in order to protect a mining claim, if those operations are conducted solely
for that purpose (otherwise known as “assessment work.”)
      (6)   Other surface mining operations that the State Mining and Geology
Board determines to be of an infrequent nature and that involve only minor
surface disturbances.
      (7)   Emergency excavations or grading conducted by the Department of
Water Resources or the Reclamation Board for the purpose of averting,
alleviating, repairing, or restoring damage to property due to imminent or
recent floods, disasters, or other emergencies.
      (8)   Road construction and maintenance for timber or forest operations,
if the land is owned by the same person or entity and if the excavation is
conducted adjacent to timber or forest operation roads. This exemption shall
only be available if slope stability and erosion are controlled in compliance
with State Mining and Geology Board Reclamation Regulations and, upon closure
of the site, the person closing the site implements, where necessary,
revegetation measures and post-closure uses in consultation with the Department
of Forestry and Fire Protection. This exemption shall not apply to onsite
excavation or grading that occurs within 100 feet of a Class One watercourse or
75 feet of a Class Two watercourse, or to excavations for materials that are,
or have been, sold for commercial purposes.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.050 Vested Rights.
   (a)   Pre-SMARA and Post-SMARA Right to Conduct Surface Mining Operations. A
Conditional Use Permit shall not be required for any person who has obtained a
vested right to conduct surface mining operations before January 1, 1976, as
long as the vested right continues and as long as no substantial changes have
been made in the operation except in compliance with SMARA, State regulations,
and this Chapter. Where a person with vested rights has continued surface
mining in the same area subsequent to January 1, 1976, the person shall obtain
County approval of a Reclamation Plan covering the mined lands disturbed by the
subsequent surface mining. In those cases where an overlap exists (in the
horizontal and/or vertical sense) between pre-SMARA and post-SMARA mining, the
Reclamation Plan shall require reclamation proportional to that disturbance
caused by the mining after January 1, 1976 (i.e., the effective date of SMARA).
   (b)   Other Requirements Applicable to Vested Mining Operations. All other
requirements of State law and this Chapter shall apply to vested mining
operations.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.060 Application Filing, Processing, and Review.
   (a)   Application Filing.
      (1)   Applications for a Conditional Use Permit and/or Reclamation Plan
for surface mining or land reclamation projects shall be made on forms provided
by the Department and filed in compliance with
Chapter 85.03 (Application Procedures).
      (2)   The forms for Reclamation Plan applications shall require, at a
minimum, each of the elements required by SMARA (Public Resources Code §§ 2772-
2773) and other State regulations, and any other requirements deemed necessary
to facilitate an expeditious and fair evaluation of the proposed Reclamation
Plan, to be established at the discretion of the Director. For surface mining
operations that are exempt from a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with
this Chapter, the Reclamation Plan application shall include information
concerning the mining operation that is required for processing the Reclamation
Plan. All documentation for the Reclamation Plan shall be submitted to the
County at one time.
      (3)   As many copies of the Conditional Use Permit application and the
Reclamation Plan application as may be required by the Director shall be
submitted to the Department.
      (4)   Applications shall include all required environmental review forms
and information prescribed by the Director.
   (b)   Fees.
      (1)   Establishment of Fees. The County shall establish processing fees
that it deems necessary to cover the reasonable costs incurred in implementing
this Chapter and the State regulations, (e.g., costs of processing of
applications, annual reports, inspections, monitoring, enforcement, compliance
etc.). The fees shall be included in the Planning Fee Schedule.
      (2)   Payment of Fees. The fees shall be paid by the operator, as
required by the County, at the time of filing of the Conditional Use Permit
application, Reclamation Plan application, and at other times that are
determined by the County to be appropriate in order to ensure that reasonable
costs of implementing this Chapter are borne by the mining operator.
   (c)   Processing.
      (1)   Within 30 days of acceptance of an application for a Conditional
Use Permit for surface mining operations and/or a Reclamation Plan as complete,
the Department shall notify the State Department of Conservation of the filing
of the application(s).
      (2)   Whenever mining operations are proposed in the 100-year floodplain
of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and within one mile, upstream or
downstream, of any State highway bridge, the Department shall also notify the
State Department of Transportation that the application has been received.
      (3)   The Department shall process the application(s) through
environmental review in compliance with the California Environmental Quality
Act (Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq.) and the County’s Environmental
Review Guidelines.
      (4)   Subsequent to the appropriate environmental review, the Department
shall prepare a staff report with recommendations for consideration by the
Commission.
      (5)   Before final approval of a Reclamation Plan and financial
assurances (as required in this Chapter), or any amendments to the Reclamation
Plan or existing financial assurances, the Director shall:
         (A)   Certify to the State Department of Conservation that the
Reclamation Plan and/or financial assurance complies with the applicable
requirements of State law; and
         (B)   Submit the Reclamation Plan, financial assurances, or amendments
to the State Department of Conservation for review.
   (d)   Review by Commission and State.
      (1)   In compliance with Public Resources Code § 2774(d), the State
Department of Conservation (DOC) shall be given:
         (A)   Thirty days to review and comment on the Reclamation Plan; and
         (B)   Forty-five days to review and comment on the financial
assurance.
      (2)   The Commission shall evaluate written comments received, if any,
from the DOC during the comment periods.
      (3)   Staff shall prepare a written response describing the disposition
of the major issues raised by the State for the Commission’s approval. In
particular, when the Commission’s position is at variance with the
recommendations and objections raised in the State’s comments, the written
response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were
not accepted. The Commission staff report including the staff prepared
responses to the DOC, along with the minutes of the hearing, shall constitute
the written response to the State.
   (e)   Public Hearing. Upon completion of the environmental review procedure
and filing of documents required by the Director, a public hearing before the
Commission shall be held to consider approval of the Conditional Use Permit or
Reclamation Plan for the proposed or existing surface mine in compliance with
Public Resources Code § 2774.
   (f)   Action by Commission. The Commission shall then take action to
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the Conditional Use Permit and/or
Reclamation Plan, and to approve the financial assurances in compliance with
Public Resources Code § 2770(d).
   (g)   Conditional Approval. If a Conditional Use Permit is being processed
concurrently with the Reclamation Plan and it becomes necessary to comply with
permit processing deadlines, the Commission may conditionally approve the
Conditional Use Permit with the condition that the Department shall not issue
the Conditional Use Permit for the mining operations until cost estimates for
financial assurances have been reviewed by the State Department of Conservation
and final action has been taken on the Reclamation Plan and financial
assurances.
   (h)   Approved Conditional Use Permit and Reclamation Plan Copies Provided
to State. The Department shall forward a copy of each approved Conditional Use
Permit for mining operations and/or approved Reclamation Plan, and a copy of
the approved financial assurances to the State Department of Conservation
within 30 days of approval.
   (i)   Statement of Responsibility. Before commencing mining operations, the
property owner and/or mining operator shall sign a Statement of Responsibility
accepting responsibility for reclaiming mined lands in compliance with the
Reclamation Plan. The Department shall retain the Statement of Responsibility
in the mining operation’s permanent record. Upon sale or transfer of the
operation, the new operator shall submit a new Statement of Responsibility in
compliance with Subdivision (j) (Transfer of Ownership), below.
   (j)   Transfer of Ownership. Upon sale or transfer of a mining operation and
for the purpose of documenting a transfer of ownership of an approved
Conditional Use Permit or Reclamation Plan, a new property owner and/or mining
operator of a mining operation shall submit the following documents before
taking over a mining operation:
      (1)   The new operator of a mining operation shall file a Transfer of
Ownership application with the Department. The Director shall approve the
application and the Transfer of Ownership form shall be placed in the
Department’s permanent record.
      (2)   The new property owner and/or mining operator of a mining operation
shall file a new Statement of Responsibility with the Department. The Director
shall approve the Statement of Responsibility and the new Statement of
Responsibility shall be placed in the Department’s permanent record.
   (k)   Findings for Approval of Permits and Plans.
      (1)   Conditional Use Permits. In addition to the findings required by
Chapter 85.06 (Conditional Use Permits/Minor Use Permits), Conditional Use
Permits for surface mining operations shall include a finding that the project
complies with the provisions of SMARA and State regulations.
      (2)   Reclamation Plans. In order to approve Reclamation Plans, all of
the following findings shall be made in the affirmative:
         (A)   The Reclamation Plan complies with SMARA (Public Resources Code
§§ 2772-2773 and any other applicable provisions).
         (B)   The Reclamation Plan complies with applicable requirements of
State regulations (Code of Regulations §§ 3500-3505 and 3700-3713).
         (C)   The Reclamation Plan and potential use of land reclaimed in
compliance with the Plan are consistent with this Chapter and the General Plan
and any applicable resource plan or element.
         (D)   The Reclamation Plan has been reviewed in compliance with CEQA
and the County’s environmental review guidelines, and all significant adverse
impacts from reclamation of the surface mining operations are mitigated below a
level of significance or to the maximum extent feasible.
         (E)   The land and/or resources, such as water, will be reclaimed to a
condition that is compatible with, and blends in with, the surrounding natural
environment, topography, and other resources, or suitable off-site development
will compensate for related disturbance to resource values.
         (F)   The Reclamation Plan will reclaim the mined lands to a usable
condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land uses consistent with
the General Plan and applicable resource plan.
         (G)   A written response to the State Department of Conservation has
been prepared, describing the disposition of major issues raised by that
Department. Where the County’s position is at variance with the recommendations
and objections raised by the State Department of Conservation, the response
shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not
accepted.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012)
§ 88.03.070 Additional Conditions of Approval.
   (a)   Protection of Mines from Incompatible Uses. Mine development is
encouraged in compatible areas before encroachment of conflicting uses. Mineral
resource areas that have been classified by the State Department of
Conservation’s Division of Mines and Geology or designated by the State Mining
and Geology Board as Mineral Resource Zones (MRZ), as well as existing surface
mining operations that remain in compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter, shall be protected from intrusion by incompatible land uses that may
impede or preclude mineral extraction or processing, to the extent possible for
consistency with the General Plan. Before approving a use that would otherwise
be incompatible with mineral resource protection, conditions of approval may be
applied to encroaching development projects to minimize potential conflicts.
   (b)   Mapping of Identified Resource Areas. In compliance with Public
Resources Code § 2762, the General Plan and resource maps shall be updated to
reflect mineral information (classification and/or designation reports) within
12 months of receipt from the State Mining and Geology Board of the
information. Land use decisions within the County shall be guided by
information provided on the location of identified mineral resources of
regional significance. Conservation and potential development of identified
mineral resource areas shall be considered and encouraged. Recordation on
property titles of the presence of important mineral resources within the
identified mineral resource areas may be encouraged as a condition of approval
of any development project in the impacted area.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.080 Financial Assurances.
   (a)   Security Required as Condition of Approval. To ensure that reclamation
will proceed in compliance with the approved Reclamation Plan, the County shall
require as a condition of approval security that will be released upon
satisfactory performance.
      (1)   Acceptable Types of Security. The applicant may post security in
the form of a surety bond, trust fund, irrevocable letter of credit from an
accredited financial institution, or other method acceptable to the County and
the State Mining and Geology Board as specified in State regulations, and that
the County reasonably determines are adequate to perform reclamation in
compliance with the surface mining operation’s approved Reclamation Plan.
      (2)   Required Payees. Financial assurances shall be made payable to the
County and the State Department of Conservation. In the case where the approved
Reclamation Plan involves unpatented land under the control of the Bureau of
Land Management (BLM), National Park Service, or U.S. Forest Service, the
appropriate agency shall also be added as a third payee.
   (b)   Purpose of Security. Financial assurances shall be required to ensure
compliance with elements of the Reclamation Plan, including the following:
      (1)   Revegetation and landscaping requirements.
      (2)   Reclamation of aquatic or wildlife habitat.
      (3)   Reclamation of water bodies and water quality.
      (4)   Slope stability and erosion and drainage control.
      (5)   Disposal of hazardous materials.
      (6)   Removal of equipment and buildings that are not part of an approved
end use.
      (7)   Other measures, if necessary.
   (c)   Cost Estimates for Security.
      (1)   Cost estimates for the financial assurance shall be submitted to
the Department for review and approval before the operator actually obtains
financial assurances.
      (2)   The Director shall forward a copy of the cost estimates, together
with supporting documentation, to the State Department of Conservation for
review.
      (3)   If the State Department of Conservation does not comment within 45
days of receipt of these estimates, it shall be assumed that the cost estimates
are adequate, unless the County has reason to determine that additional costs
may be incurred.
      (4)   The Director shall have the discretion to approve the financial
assurance if it meets the requirements of this Chapter, SMARA, and State
regulations.
   (d)   Cost Estimates to Determine Amount of Security Required.
      (1)   The amount of the financial assurance shall be based upon the
estimated costs of reclamation stipulated in the approved Reclamation Plan,
including any maintenance of reclaimed areas as may be required, subject to
adjustment for the actual amount required to reclaim lands disturbed by surface
mining activities since January 1, 1976, and new lands to be disturbed by
surface mining activities in the upcoming year.
      (2)   Cost estimates shall be prepared by the mine operator, a licensed
engineer, or other professional experienced in the reclamation of mined lands.
      (3)   The estimated amount of the financial assurance shall be based on
the following:
         (A)   An analysis of physical activities necessary to implement the
approved Reclamation Plan.
         (B)   The unit costs for each of the physical activities.
         (C)   The number of units of each of the physical activities.
         (D)   The actual administrative costs.
      (4)   Financial assurances to ensure compliance with revegetation,
reclamation of water bodies, reclamation of aquatic or wildlife habitat, and
other elements of the approved Reclamation Plan shall be based upon cost
estimates that include:
         (A)   Labor.
         (B)   Equipment.
         (C)   Materials.
         (D)   Mobilization of equipment.
         (E)   Administration.
         (F)   Reasonable profit by a commercial operator other than the
permitee.
      (5)   A contingency factor of ten percent shall be added to the cost of
financial assurances to cover the County’s reasonable expenses for the
administrative and legal fees required to foreclose on the financial assurance
instrument.
      (6)   In projecting the costs of financial assurances, it shall be
assumed without prejudice or insinuation that the surface mining operation
could be abandoned by the operator and, consequently, the County or State
Department of Conservation may need to contract with a third party commercial
company for reclamation of the site.
   (e)   Time Period That Security Required to Remain in Effect. The financial
assurances shall remain in effect for the duration of the surface mining
operation and any additional period specified in the Reclamation Plan for the
purpose of monitoring until reclamation is completed (including any maintenance
required).
   (f)   Annual Adjustment in Amount of Security. The amount of financial
assurances required of a surface mining operation for any one year shall be
adjusted annually to account for new lands disturbed by surface mining
operations, inflation, and giving credit for reclamation of lands accomplished
in compliance with the approved Reclamation Plan. The financial assurances
shall include estimates to cover reclamation for existing conditions and
anticipated activities during the upcoming year, excepting that the permittee
may not claim credit for reclamation scheduled for completion during the coming
year. The annual SMARA inspection by the County shall, in most cases, be used
to validate the submitted estimate.
   (g)   Submittal of Revised Security Figures. Revisions to financial
assurances shall be submitted to the Director each year before the anniversary
date for approval of the financial assurances. The financial assurance shall
cover the cost of existing disturbance and anticipated activities for the next
calendar year, including any required interim reclamation. If revisions to the
financial assurances are not required, the operator shall explain, in writing,
why revisions are not required.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.090 Reclamation Standards.
   (a)   Applicable State Law.
      (1)   Reclamation Plans shall comply with the provisions of SMARA (Public
Resources Code §§ 2772-2773) and State reclamation regulations (Code of
Regulations §§ 3500-3505).
      (2)   Reclamation Plans approved after January 15, 1993, Reclamation
Plans for proposed new mining operations and any substantial amendments to
previously approved Reclamation Plans shall also comply with the reclamation
standards in Code of Regulations §§ 3700-3713.
   (b)   Additional Performance Standards. The performance standards in
Division 3 (Countywide Development Standards) shall apply to Reclamation Plans.
In addition, the applicable Review Authority may impose additional performance
standards as developed in review of individual projects, as warranted.
   (c)   Phasing of Reclamation.
      (1)   Reclamation activities shall be initiated at the earliest possible
time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further
disturbance. Interim reclamation may also be required for mined lands that have
been disturbed and that may be disturbed again in future operations.
Reclamation may be done on an annual basis, in stages compatible with
continuing operations, or on completion of all excavation, removal, or fill, as
approved by the County.
      (2)   Each phase of reclamation shall be specifically described in the
Reclamation Plan and shall include all of the following information:
         (A)   The beginning and expected ending dates for each phase.
         (B)   All reclamation activities required.
         (C)   Criteria for measuring completion of specific reclamation
activities.
         (D)   Estimated costs for completion of each phase of reclamation.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.100 Interim Management Plans.
   (a)   Deadline for Submittal of Interim Management Plan (IMP). Within 90
days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, the operator shall submit to
the Department a proposed Interim Management Plan (IMP).
   (b)   IMP Submittal Requirements.
      (1)   The proposed IMP shall fully comply with the requirements of SMARA
and all Conditional Use Permit conditions and shall provide measures the
operator will implement to maintain the site in a stable condition, taking into
consideration public health and safety.
      (2)   The proposed IMP shall be submitted on forms provided by the
Department and shall be processed as an amendment to the Reclamation Plan.
      (3)   An IMP shall not be considered a project for the purposes of
environmental review.
   (c)   Continuation of Security Required. Financial assurances for idle
operations shall be maintained as though the operation were active, or as
otherwise approved through the idle mine’s IMP.
   (d)   State Department of Conservation Review. Upon receipt of a complete
proposed IMP, the Department shall forward the IMP to the State Department of
Conservation for review. The IMP shall be submitted to the State Department of
Conservation at least 30 days before approval by the Director.
   (e)   Director’s Action on IMP. Within 60 days of receipt of the proposed
IMP, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the Director and the operator,
the Director shall review and approve or deny the IMP in compliance with this
Chapter. The operator shall have 30 days, or a longer period mutually agreed
upon by the operator and the Director, to submit a revised IMP. The Director
shall approve or deny the revised IMP within 60 days of receipt. If the
Director denies the revised IMP, the operator may appeal that action in
compliance with
Chapter 86.08 (Appeals).
   (f)   Duration of Approved IMP. The IMP may remain in effect for a period
not to exceed five years, at which time the Director may renew the IMP for
another period not to exceed five years, or require the surface mining operator
to commence reclamation in compliance with its approved Reclamation Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.110 Annual Report.
   Surface mining operators shall forward an annual surface mining report to
the State Department of Conservation and to the Department on a date
established by the State Department of Conservation, upon forms furnished by
the State Mining and Geology Board. New mining operations shall file an initial
surface mining report and any applicable filing fees with the State Department
of Conservation within 30 days of initial permit approval, or before
commencement of operations, whichever is sooner. Applicable fees, together with
a copy of the annual inspection report, shall be forwarded to the State
Department of Conservation at the time of filing the annual surface mining
report.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.120 Inspections.
   (a)   Inspection Within Six Months of Annual Report. The Department shall
arrange for inspection of a surface mining operation within six months of
receipt of the Annual Report required in §
88.03.110 (Annual Report), to determine whether the surface mining operation is
in compliance with the approved Conditional Use Permit and/or Reclamation Plan,
approved financial assurances, and State regulations.
   (b)   Minimum One Inspection per Calendar Year.  In no event shall less than
one inspection be conducted in any calendar year.
   (c)   Eligible Inspectors. The inspections may be made by a State registered
geologist, State registered civil engineer, State licensed landscape architect,
or State registered forester, who is experienced in land reclamation and who
has not been employed by the mining operation in any capacity during the
previous 12 months, or other qualified specialists, as selected by the
Director.
   (d)   Inspection Forms. Inspections shall be conducted using a form approved
and provided by the State Mining and Geology Board.
   (e)   Notification of Inspection to State. The Department shall notify the
State Department of Conservation within 30 days of completion of the inspection
that the inspection has been conducted, and shall forward a copy of the
inspection notice and any supporting documentation to the mining operator.
   (f)   Payment for Inspection. The operator shall be solely responsible for
the reasonable cost of the inspection.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.130 Violations and Penalties.
   If the Director, based upon an annual inspection or otherwise confirmed by
an inspection of the mining operation, determines that a surface mining
operation is not in compliance with this Chapter, the applicable Conditional
Use Permit, and/or the Reclamation Plan, the County shall follow the procedures
outlined in Public Resources Code, §§ 2774.1 and 2774.2 concerning violations
and penalties, as well as the provisions of
Chapter 86.09 (Enforcement) for initiating enforcement action, which could
include the revocation of a Conditional Use Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 88.03.140 Post-Approval Procedures.
   (a)   Transfer of Ownership and Statement of Responsibility. See §
88.03.060(i) (Statement of Responsibility) and §
88.03.060(j) (Transfer of Ownership), above, for provisions governing ongoing
post-approval responsibilities and evidence of transfer of property ownership.
   (b)   Other Post-Approval Procedures. The procedures and requirements in
Division 6 (Development Code Administration), related to permit implementation,
time limits, extensions, appeals, and revocations, shall apply following the
decisions on Conditional Use Permits and Reclamation Plans.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
DIVISION 9: PUBLIC FACILITIES FINANCING
CHAPTER 89.01: DRAINAGE FACILITIES FINANCING
Section
   
89.01.010   Purpose.
   
89.01.020   Establishment of Area Drainage Plans.
   
89.01.030   Fee Collection and Accounting.
   
89.01.040   Drainage Fee Calculation.
   
89.01.050   Credit and Exceptions.
   
89.01.060   Surplus and Refunds.
   
89.01.070   Subject Areas.
§ 89.01.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Purpose of Chapter. The purpose of this Chapter is to require the
payment of drainage fees for most new construction that is within an adopted
Local Area Drainage Plan.
   (b)   Purpose of Fees. The fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of
Building Permits for the purposes of defraying the actual or estimated costs of
constructing planned drainage facilities.
   (c)   Authority for Chapter. The authority for this Chapter is derived from
the power granted to local governments by the Constitution of the State of
California to preserve the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.01.020 Establishment of Area Drainage Plans.
   (a)   Applicable Within Adopted Local Area Drainage Plans. The provisions of
this Chapter shall only affect those unincorporated portions of the County that
are within the boundaries of an adopted Local Area Drainage Plan.
   (b)   Area Will Require Construction of Drainage Facilities. The Board in
adopting a Local Area Drainage Plan shall find and determine that development
or redevelopment of the property in the Plan Area will require the construction
of the facilities described in the Plan Area and that the drainage fees are
fairly apportioned within the drainage area.
   (c)   The drainage fees shall be fairly apportioned based on one of the
following:
      (1)   On the basis of benefits conferred on property proposed to be
developed or redeveloped;
      (2)   On the need for drainage facilities created by the development and
the development of other property in the drainage area; or
      (3)   On the basis of the proportionate storm water run-off from each
parcel.
   (d)   Fees Shall Not Exceed Pro Rata Share. Fees to be paid shall not exceed
the pro rata share of the amount of the total actual or estimated costs of all
facilities within an area which would be assessable on the property if the
costs were apportioned uniformly on a per acre basis.
   (e)   Adoption of Area Drainage Plan. The Board, in adopting or amending the
Local Area Drainage Plan, shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Identify the purpose of the fee.
      (2)   Identify the use to which the fee is to be put. If the use is
financing public facilities, then the facilities should be identified. The
facilities may be identified by reference to any public document which
identifies the facilities for which the fee is charged.
      (3)   Confirm that there is a reasonable relationship between:
         (A)   The fee’s use and the type of development project on which the
fee is imposed;
         (B)   The need for the public facility and the type of development
project on which the fee is imposed; and
         (C)   The amount of the fees and the cost of the flood control
facilities, or portion thereof, attributable to the development on which the
fee is imposed.
   (f)   Compliance with Government Code § 66004 Required. Local Area Drainage
Plans and/or the drainage fee may be adopted by the Board, and thereafter
amended at any time, only after first holding a public hearing. The
requirements of Government Code § 66004 shall be followed prior to holding a
public hearing establishing or modifying a fee for a Local Area Drainage Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.01.030 Fee Collection and Accounting.
   (a)   Deposit of Drainage Fees. Except as otherwise provided in §
89.01.030(c), below, whenever a Building Permit, Grading Permit, or other
County approval in connection with new construction is requested within the
boundaries of a Local Area Drainage Plan, the specified drainage fee shall be
deposited to the appropriate Planned Drainage Facilities Fund. Any interest
income earned by the money in the fund shall also be deposited in the fund. The
amount of the drainage fee shall be specified within the schedule of fees for
each Local Area Drainage Plan. The established fee shall be paid to the County
prior to the issuance of Building Permits, Grading Permits, or other County
approvals in connection with new construction.
   (b)   Deposited into a Drainage Facilities Fund. Drainage fees required by
this Chapter shall be paid to the County and deposited into a Drainage
Facilities Fund. A separate fund shall be established for each Drainage Area.
Monies in the funds shall be expended solely for the construction and
reimbursement for the construction of drainage facilities, including related
administration expenses, within the area from which the fees comprising the
fund were collected, and/or to reimburse the local agency for the cost of
engineering, right-of-way acquisition, and administrative services required to
design and construct facilities within the Local Area Drainage Plan.
   (c)   Money May Be Advanced by Local Agency. Money may be advanced by a
local agency to design and construct drainage facilities, related
administrative services, or to acquire necessary right-of-way within the area
of an adopted Local Area Drainage Plan. Money so advanced shall be reimbursed
to the local agency from the appropriate Planned Drainage Facilities Fund.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.01.040 Drainage Fee Calculation.
   (a)   Parcels with Less than One Acre. Fees assessed at the time of the
issuance of a Building Permit, Grading Permit, or other County approval related
to new construction shall be based upon the total area of the parcel; provided,
the parcel has a net area of less than one acre.
   (b)   Parcels with One Acre or More. Fees assessed at the time a Building
Permit, Grading Permit, or other County approval related to new construction is
issued on a parcel which has a net area of one acre or more shall be based on:
The area of the developed portion of the parcel or one acre, whichever is
greater. As used in this Chapter, the phrase “area of developed portion of the
parcel” shall mean the area of that portion of the parcel lying within a single
rectangle which encloses all improvements, landscaped areas, parking areas, and
storage areas; plus the area of all improvements related to the required access
that are outside the area of the described rectangle.
   (c)   Fee to Be Determined by Building Official. The amount of fees assessed
and the area on which the fee is based shall be determined by the Building
Official. The Building Official may require an applicant to submit all
information necessary to calculate the fee(s).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.01.050 Credit and Exceptions.
   (a)   Developer Agreement.
      (1)   When required for the implementation of an adopted Local Area
Drainage Plan, an agreement may be entered into between a developer and the
County whereby the developer may advance money for the construction of
facilities, or design of the facilities within a Local Area Drainage Plan.
Subject to the restrictions in Subdivision (a)(2), below, the sole security to
the developer for repayment of money or other consideration advanced shall be
money subsequently accruing in the appropriate Planned Drainage Facilities
Fund. Reimbursement shall be for the amount agreed upon in advance only and
shall not include interest or other charges. The agreement shall expire 15
years after the date it was entered into, and any subsequent money paid into
the fund shall accrue to the fund without obligation to a developer whose
agreement has expired.
      (2)   The County may designate that up to 25 percent of the funds
collected in a Planned Drainage Facilities Fund be utilized for reimbursement
for any agreement entered into in compliance with Subdivision (a)(1),above.
Other than the amount so designated by the County, Planned Drainage Facilities
Funds shall not be used as reimbursement for any agreements authorized by
Subdivision (a)(1), above.
   (b)   Consideration in Lieu of Payment of Drainage Fees. An agreement may be
entered into between a developer and the County whereby considerations (e.g.,
actual construction, dedication of right-of-way, or design work by a civil
engineer) may be accepted in lieu of part or all of the payment of drainage
fees, and the Board shall first find that the alternative is acceptable and is
equal to or greater in value than the required fee, prior to approving an
agreement.
   (c)   Exemptions from Drainage Fees. Drainage fees shall not be required as
a condition of Building Permits on existing developed parcels for:
      (1)   Maintenance and repair of existing improvements.
      (2)   Reconstruction, when permits are issued within two years of the
destruction of a structure due to earthquakes, fire, vandalism, wind, or other
natural or man-made disasters.
      (3)   Construction of carports, garages, patio covers, storage buildings,
swimming pools, and similar structures, accessory to a single-family residence.
      (4)   Other construction or reconstruction which does not involve grading
causing an increased rate of runoff when the construction or reconstruction
falls within the boundaries of the rectangle described in §
89.01.040 (Drainage Fee Calculation), above, as the “area of the developed
portion of the parcel,” as it existed prior to the effective date of an
applicable area drainage plan. The applicant shall be responsible for providing
sufficient information to establish that the proposed grading would not
increase the rate of runoff. Assessment of fees due to grading shall apply only
to that portion of the parcel on which grading would contribute to an increased
rate of runoff.
   (d)   Credit for Prior Payment. If a drainage fee for a parcel, or portion
thereof, has been previously paid, credit shall be given for prior payment
toward any fee payment required by this Chapter.
   (e)   Chapter Not Applicable to Other Assessments for Same Facilities. The
provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable to property subject to other
assessments for the same drainage facilities.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.01.060 Surplus and Refunds.
   (a)   Use of Surplus Funds. After completion of facilities and the payment
of all claims from any Planned Drainage Facilities Fund, the Board shall
determine by resolution or other legislative action the amount of the surplus,
if any, remaining in any of these funds. Any surplus funds shall be used, in
those amounts as the Board may determine, for one or more of the following
purposes:
      (1)   For transfer to the County General Fund; provided, the amount of
the transfer shall not exceed five percent of the total amount expended from
the particular fund and the funds transferred are used to support the operation
and maintenance of those facilities for which the fees were collected;
      (2)   For the construction of additional or modified facilities within
the same Local Area Drainage Plan; or
      (3)   As a refund in the manner provided in Subdivision (b), below.
   (b)   Refunds. Any surplus remaining shall be refunded in the following
manner:
      (1)   There shall be refunded to the current owner(s) of property for
which a fee was previously collected, the balance of the monies in the same
proportion which each individual fee collected bears to the total of all
individual fees collected from the particular drainage area.
      (2)   Where property for which a fee was previously collected has
subsequently been subdivided into more than one parcel, each current owner of a
parcel shall share in the refund payable to the owner(s) of the property for
which a fee was previously collected in the same proportion which the area of
each individual parcel bears to the total area of the property for which a fee
was previously collected.
      (3)   There shall be transferred to the County General Fund any remaining
portion of the surplus which has not been paid to or claimed by the persons
entitled thereto within two years from the date either of the completion of the
improvements, or the adoption by the Board of a resolution declaring a surplus,
whichever is last to occur.
   (c)   Refunds Made in Compliance with Government Code § 66001. Subject to
the provisions of Subdivisions (a) and (b), above, commencing on the fifth year
after imposition of a fee for an Local Area Drainage Plan and annually
thereafter, the Board shall hold a hearing with respect to any portion of the
fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted five or more years, and shall refund to
the then owner(s) of parcels or units in development projects within the Local
Area Drainage Plan on a pro rata basis any unexpended or uncommitted fees plus
interest accrued thereon, for which the Board is unable to demonstrate a
reasonable relationship between the need for the fee and the purpose for which
it was charged. When applicable, refunds shall be made in compliance with
Government Code § 66001.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.01.070 Subject Areas.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall be applied only to areas within the
boundaries of Local Area Drainage Plans that have been adopted by the Board,
and shall have no force or effect in any other portion of the County. The fees,
plan areas, regulations, and rules are contained in the associated texts of
each Local Area Drainage Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 89.02: RECREATIONAL FACILITIES FINANCING
Section
   
89.02.010   Purpose and General Provisions.
   
89.02.020   Jurisdiction Limitations.
   
89.02.030   Requirements.
   
89.02.040   Procedure.
   
89.02.050   Exemptions.
§ 89.02.010 Purpose and General Provisions.
   (a)   Purpose of Chapter. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the
development of park and recreational facilities, through subdivision
regulations, in an area where the need for parks has been expressed by the
community, and a public agency exists to administer these facilities.
   (b)   General Provisions.
      (1)   Each subdivider of land for residential use shall, as a condition
to the approval of a parcel map or final map, dedicate lands or pay fees in
lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for park or recreational purposes.
      (2)   Dedication and fee requirements shall be conveyed to the designated
public agency or into a special County fund established for this purpose, prior
to approval of the parcel map or final map.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.02.020 Jurisdiction Limitations.
   The requirement for dedication of land or payment of fees shall be
contingent upon a Board resolution adopted at a public hearing specifying the
requirements and procedures for a community area. The area shall be served by a
public agency legally empowered to improve, maintain, and operate the dedicated
land in compliance with the General Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.02.030 Requirements.
   Land or fees required under this Chapter shall be conveyed or paid directly
to the County or the public agency. The County, or public agency, after
accepting the land or funds, shall develop the land or use the funds in
compliance with this Section.
   (a)   Use of Fees and Land. The fees, land, or combination thereof are to be
used only for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities within
the agency which will serve or benefit future residents of the subdivision.
   (b)   Establishment and Development Time.
      (1)   The Board, in agreement with the public agency having park
responsibility, shall specify by resolution at the time approval is given to
the final map when the development of a park or recreation facility to serve
the subject subdivision will begin.
      (2)   The starting date shall be reasonable with respect to the following
criteria:
         (A)   The need for the park or facility;
         (B)   Weather constraints;
         (C)   Minimized disruption of the neighborhood; and
         (D)   The accumulation of the necessary funds and land.
   (c)   Land Disposition. In the event that opportunities for better
recreation facilities than those provided by the dedication materialize, the
dedicated land may be sold with the proceeds from the sale being used for
suitable park and recreation facilities which better serve the neighborhood in
which that subdivision is located.
   (d)   Payment of Fees. Only the payment of fees shall be required in
subdivisions of less than 50 parcels unless agreed otherwise by the Board and
the subdivider.
   (e)   Standards for Dedication.
      (1)   The amount of land to be dedicated or the fees to be paid shall
bear a reasonable relationship to the use or benefits of the park and
recreation facilities by the future residents of the subdivision.
      (2)   The Board, upon the recommendation of the designated public agency
having park responsibility, shall set by resolution the ratio of park acres for
each 1,000 of population anticipated from the future subdivision.
      (3)   The ratio may be set to maintain the existing level of park acres
per 1,000 population served by the public agency.
   (f)   Amount of Park Fees Required. When the requirements of this Chapter
are complied with solely on the basis of providing park fees, the minimum
amount of fees to be paid shall be computed by using the following formula:
 
NSP (L + D) = minimum fee
1,000
 
WHERE:
N = number of proposed dwelling units
S = planned park acreage per 1,000 population
P = population per dwelling unit on a scale and density set by the responsible
    public agency
L = fair market value per acre of land being subdivided
D = average cost per acre to develop a park as determined by the public agency
 
   (g)   Amount of Land Required. Whenever the requirements of this Chapter are
complied with solely on the basis of providing park land, the minimum amount of
land required shall be the amount which could be purchased with the fees
computed in Subdivision (f), above.
   (h)   Determination of Fair Market Value. The fair market value shall be
determined as of the date of filing of the parcel map or final map in
compliance with the following:
      (1)   The fair market value as determined by the Board based upon the
market value of the land as a part of the subdivision, not as raw acreage, in
compliance with the current practice of the County Assessor;
      (2)   If the subdivider objects to the evaluation, the subdivider may, at
the subdivider’s own expense, obtain an appraisal of the property by a
qualified real estate appraiser from the general area, approved by the County,
which appraisal may be accepted by the Board if found reasonable; or
      (3)   The County and subdivider may agree to the fair market value.
   (i)   Combination of Park Land and Fees Required. When only a portion of the
required park land is dedicated as required in Subdivision (g), above, a fee
computed in compliance with Subdivision (f), above shall be paid for any
additional land that would have been required to be dedicated.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.02.040 Procedure.
   The requirements of this Chapter shall be complied with prior to the
approval of the parcel map or final map, the provision of park land in whole or
in part, the payment of a park fee, or by a combination of both as required by
the Advisory Agency.
   (a)   Subdivider. At the time of filing a tentative map, parcel map, or
minor subdivision plot plan for approval, the subdivider shall, as part of the
filing, state in writing whether it is desired to dedicate property for park
and recreational purposes or to pay a fee in lieu of dedication. If the
subdivider desires to dedicate land for this purpose, the area shall be
designated on the tentative tract or parcel map as submitted.
   (b)   Action of the Advisory Agency. At the time of the tentative tract map
approval, the Advisory Agency shall determine as part of the approval, whether
to require a dedication of the land within the subdivision, payment of a fee in
lieu of dedication, or a combination of both.
   (c)   Prerequisites for Approval of Parcel and Final Maps. Where dedication
is offered and accepted, it shall be accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. Where fees are required, the same shall
be deposited with the County or Local agency prior to the approval of the
parcel map or final map.
   (d)   Determination of Dedication or Fees. The Advisory Agency shall
determine whether to require land dedication, payment of a fee in lieu of
dedication, or a combination of both, by consideration of the following
criteria:
      (1)   The Open Space Element of the General Plan;
      (2)   The access, geology, location, and topography of land in the
subdivision available for dedication;
      (3)   The shape and size of the subdivision and the land available for
dedication; and
      (4)   The desires and plans of the public agency which will provide the
services.
   (e)   Compliance with Applicable Plans. Park and recreational areas where
required shall be developed in conjunction with any bikeway, equestrian, and
pedestrian linkage ways and in compliance with the County’s Conservation and
Open Space policies and any applicable community or specific plans.
   (f)   Credit for Private Open Space. Where private open space for park and
recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and the space is to
be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision,
the areas shall be credited up to 75 percent against the requirement of a
dedication for park and recreation purposes, as identified in §
89.02.030(g), above, or the payment of fees in lieu of dedication, as
identified in §
89.02.030(f), above; provided, the Advisory Agency finds it is in the public
interest to do so, and that the following standards are met:
      (1)   The court areas, yards, setbacks, and other open areas required to
be maintained by the building, land use district, and zoning regulations shall
not be included in the computation of private open space;
      (2)   The private ownership and maintenance of the open space is
adequately provided for by written agreement;
      (3)   The use of the private open space is restricted for park and
recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of
the future owners of the property within the tract;
      (4)   The proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for
park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration factors which include
access, geology, location, shape, size, and topography of the private open
space land; and
      (5)   The facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial
compliance with the provisions of the General Plan, and are approved by the
Commission.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.02.050 Exemptions.
   The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to the following types of
development:
   (a)   Condominium Projects. Condominium projects which consist of the
subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than
five years old, when no new dwelling units are added;
   (b)   Industrial Subdivisions. Industrial subdivisions;
   (c)   Parcel Maps for Shopping Centers. Parcel maps for a subdivision
containing less than five parcels for a shopping center containing more than
300,000 square feet of gross leasable area and no residential development or
uses; and
   (d)   Parcel Maps for Nonresidential Developments. Subdivisions containing
less than five parcels and not used for residential purposes; provided, that a
condition shall be placed on the approval of the parcel map that if a Building
Permit is requested for construction of a residential structure(s) on one or
more of the parcels within four years of approval, a fee in compliance with
this Chapter shall be paid by the owner of each parcel as a condition of the
issuance of the Building Permit.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
CHAPTER 89.03: TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES FINANCING
Section
   
89.03.010   Purpose.
   
89.03.020   Establishment of Local Area Transportation Facilities Plans.
   
89.03.030   Fee Payment.
   
89.03.040   Local Transportation Facilities.
   
89.03.050   Fee Calculation.
   
89.03.060   Agreements between the County and a Developer.
   
89.03.070   Exclusions.
   
89.03.080   Refunds.
   
89.03.090   Subject Areas.
§ 89.03.010 Purpose.
   (a)   Purpose of Chapter. The purpose of this Chapter is to require the
payment of transportation facilities fees for new development that is within
the boundaries of an adopted Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan.
   (b)   Purpose of Fees. The fees shall be for the purposes of defraying the
actual or estimated costs of constructing transportation facilities that are
necessary to accommodate vehicular traffic generated by new development within
the Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan from which the fees are
collected.
   (c)   Authority for Chapter. The authority for this Chapter is derived from
the power granted to local governments by the Constitution of the State of
California to preserve the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.03.020 Establishment of Local Area Transportation Facilities Plans.
   (a)   Applicable Within Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan. The
provisions of this Chapter shall only affect those unincorporated portions of
the County that are located within the boundaries of an adopted Local Area
Transportation Facilities Plan.
   (b)   Duties of the Board. The Board, in adopting or amending a Local Area
Transportation Facilities Plan, shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Identify the purpose of the fee.
      (2)   Identify the uses which are supportive of the fee and the
transportation facilities which will be provided with the fees.
      (3)   Confirm that a reasonable relationship exists between:
         (A)   The fee’s use and the type of development project on which the
fee is imposed;
         (B)   The need for the transportation facilities and the type of
development project on which the fee is imposed; and
         (C)   The amount of the fee and the cost of the transportation
facility, or portion thereof, attributable to the development on which the fee
is imposed.
   (c)   Major Thoroughfares and Bridges. The transportation facilities which
constitute major thoroughfares as identified in Government Code § 66484 and the
canyons, freeways, railways, or streams for which bridges are required, shall
be identified in the circulation, transportation, or flood control element of
the General Plan in the area of the Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan
at least 30 days prior to implementation of a fee for the facilities. Major
thoroughfares shall be in addition to, or a reconstruction of, existing major
thoroughfares, and bridges shall be original bridges or additions to existing
bridges.
   (d)   Compliance with Government Code §§ 66004 and 66484 Required. Local
Area Transportation Facilities Plans and/or the transportation facilities fee
may be adopted by the Board, and thereafter amended at any time, only after
holding a public hearing. The requirements of Government Code § 66004 shall be
followed prior to holding a public hearing establishing or increasing a fee for
transportation facilities, and, if major thoroughfares or bridges are included,
the provisions of Government Code § 66484 shall also be followed.
   (e)   Filing of Written Protests by Property Owners. A public hearing
concerning fees to construct major thoroughfares or bridges is subject to
protest by the owners of property within the plan area. If, prior to the
conclusion of a public hearing, there is a written protest, filed with the
Clerk of the Board, by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the
property to be benefitted by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not
withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than one-half of that to
be benefitted, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, and the Board
shall not, for the 12 months following the filing of that written protest,
commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement or acquisition in
compliance with Government Code § 66484.
   (f)   Recordation of Fee Ordinance. Adopted Local Area Transportation
Facilities Plans and any subsequent amendment of the plans shall be filed with
the Clerk of the Board and any ordinance which implements a fee for major
thoroughfares or bridges within a Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan
shall be recorded with the San Bernardino County Recorder’s Office.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.03.030 Fee Payment.
   (a)   Transportation Facilities Fees Required. Except as otherwise provided
in §
89.03.070 (Exclusions), below, whenever a structure or mobilehome Setdown
Permit is issued within the boundaries of an adopted Local Area Transportation
Facilities Plan, transportation facilities fees shall be required in the amount
specified in the Schedule of Fees for the plan, and shall be paid within the
time periods specified in Subdivisions (b), (c), and (d), below.
   (b)   Fees Required by a Building Permit. Fees required in compliance with
this Chapter as a result of a Building Permit shall be paid no earlier than the
date of issuance of the Building Permit by the Office of Building and Safety,
and no later than the date of final building inspection.
   (c)   Fees Required by a Mobilehome Not in a Mobilehome Park. Fees required
in compliance with this Chapter for those mobilehomes not located within a
legally established Mobilehome Park shall be paid no earlier than the date of
issuance of the mobilehome Setdown Permit and not later than the date of the
issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
   (d)   Fees Required by a Mobilehome in a Mobilehome Park. Fees required in
compliance with this Chapter for those mobilehomes to be located within a
legally established Mobilehome Park shall be paid no earlier than the date of
issuance of the Building Permit for the construction of each space or
combination of spaces, and no later than the date of final inspection for the
spaces.
   (e)   Compliance with Schedule of Fees. The amount of the fee required shall
be that which is in effect in the Schedule of Fees for the applicable Local
Area Transportation Facilities Plan on the date of payment of the fees.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.03.040 Local Transportation Facilities.
   (a)   Local Transportation Facilities Fund.
      (1)   Transportation facilities fees required in compliance with this
Chapter, within the boundaries of a Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan,
shall be deposited into a Local Transportation Facilities Fund.
      (2)   A separate fund shall be established for each Local Area
Transportation Facilities Plan and fees collected within the boundaries of the
plan shall be deposited into the applicable fund.
      (3)   Any interest income earned by money in the fund shall also be
deposited in the fund.
      (4)   The fees shall cease to be required within the boundaries of a
Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan when they have been collected in an
amount adequate to pay for all of the transportation facilities proposed in the
plan.
   (b)   Use of Funds. Monies in a Transportation Facilities Fund shall be
expended solely for the construction, financing, or purchase of transportation
facilities within the boundaries of the Local Area Transportation Facilities
Plan from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, and/or to
reimburse the County for the cost of engineering, property acquisition, and
administrative services required to construct, design, finance, or purchase
facilities in the Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan.
   (c)   Monies Advanced by the County. Monies may be advanced by the County to
construct, design, finance, or purchase transportation facilities, or related
administrative services, and to acquire necessary property or rights-of-way
within the boundaries of an adopted Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan.
Money so advanced shall be reimbursed to the County from the applicable Local
Transportation Facilities Fund.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.03.050 Fee Calculation.
   (a)   Fees Shall Not Exceed Estimated Cost of Providing the Facilities. Fees
assessed on new residential and nonresidential development within the
boundaries of an adopted Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan shall not
exceed the estimated cost of providing the transportation facilities identified
in the applicable Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan. For the purposes
of this Chapter, the types of structures and/or uses defined as nonresidential
shall be as specified in each separate Local Area Transportation Facilities
Plan.
   (b)   Calculation in Compliance with Plan. Specific fees required for new
development shall be calculated as prescribed by the applicable Local Area
Transportation Facilities Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.03.060 Agreements between the County and a Developer.
   (a)   Advances.
      (1)   An agreement may be entered into between a developer and the County
whereby the developer may advance money for the construction, financing, or
purchase of facilities, or design of the facilities, within the boundaries of a
Local Transportation Facilities Plan; provided, the sole security to the
developer for repayment of money or other consideration advanced shall be money
subsequently accruing in the applicable Local Transportation Facilities Fund.
      (2)   Reimbursement shall only be for the amount agreed upon in advance,
and shall not include interest or other charges.
      (3)   The total amount of money reimbursed within a Local Area
Transportation Facilities Plan for one fiscal year shall not exceed
approximately 25 percent of the fees collected within the plan area during the
same fiscal year, except as may otherwise be provided in the applicable Local
Area Transportation Facilities Plan.
      (4)   The agreement shall expire 20 years after the date it was entered
into, and any subsequent money paid into the fund shall accrue to the fund
without obligation to the developer whose agreement has expired.
   (b)   Agreements for Consideration In-lieu of Fees. An agreement may be
entered into between a developer and the County whereby considerations (e.g.,
dedication of land, right-of-way, actual construction, equipment, facilities,
or design work by a civil engineer) may be accepted in-lieu of part or all of
the payment of transportation facilities fees. Prior to approving an agreement,
the Board shall find that the in-lieu consideration is equal to or greater in
value than the required fee.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.03.070 Exclusions.
   (a)   Intent of Exclusions. The intent of this Section is to exclude from
the payment of transportation facilities fees the replacement of structures or
uses with new structures or uses, that generate the same or a lesser amount of
vehicular traffic than those being replaced on the same parcel, including:
      (1)   Legally established existing structures, or uses in operation
(including mobilehome parks), on the effective date of the applicable Local
Area Transportation Facilities Plan. Expansion of the structures or uses shall
be subject to the fees.
      (2)   Replacements of structures or uses for which fees have been paid in
compliance with this Chapter where the replaced structure or use generates the
same or less traffic as the structure or use for which the fees were originally
paid.
   (b)   Residential Exclusions. No transportation facilities fees shall be
required for residential Building Permits or residential mobilehome Setdown
Permits for the following activities:
      (1)   Alterations, construction, and repairs of accessory storage
buildings, carports, garages, patio covers, spas, swimming pools, amateur radio
devices or earth stations, boundary or decorative fences, or any other
residential accessory structures.
      (2)   Replacement of a legally established residential dwelling unit,
including a unit involuntarily destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, or other
accidents or catastrophe; provided, that:
         (A)   The replacement will not result in an increase in the number of
residential dwelling units; and
         (B)   The proposed type of residential dwelling unit (e.g., single-
family, multi-family, mobilehome, etc.) is within a fee category, as identified
in the applicable Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan, for which the per
dwelling unit fee amount is less than or equal to the per dwelling unit amount
of the fee category for the dwelling unit to be replaced. If the proposed type
of residential dwelling unit is within a fee category for which the fee amount
is greater than the amount of the fee category for the dwelling unit being
replaced, the amount of the fee required shall be the difference between the
two fee categories.
   (c)   Nonresidential Exclusions. No transportation facilities fees shall be
required for nonresidential uses or structures for the following activities:
      (1)   Alterations and repairs.
      (2)   Replacement of nonresidential structures or uses if:
         (A)   New or replacement construction will not increase the area or
square footage upon which fees are assessed as prescribed in the applicable
Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan; and
         (B)   The proposed type of structure or use is within a fee category
(as identified in the applicable Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan)
that has a fee amount that is less than or equal to the amount of the fee
category for the structure or use to be replaced. If the proposed type of
structure or use is within a fee category that has a fee amount that is greater
than the amount of the fee category for the structure or use being replaced,
the amount of the fee required shall be the difference between the two fee
categories.
   (d)   Relationship to Other Transportation Facilities Assessments.
      (1)   The provisions of this Chapter shall not be applicable to property
subject to other assessments which wholly provide for the same transportation
facilities as the applicable Local Transportation Facilities Plan.
      (2)   Where the assessments partially provide for the facilities, the
fees or in lieu considerations required through the Local Area Transportation
Facilities Plan shall be imposed at a level that only reflects the additional
costs of providing the facilities.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.03.080 Refunds.
   (a)   Refund of Unexpended or Uncommitted Fees. Commencing on the seventh
year after impositions of a fee for a Local Area Transportation Facilities Plan
and annually thereafter, the Board shall hold a hearing with respect to any
portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted five or more years, and
shall refund to the then owners of parcels or units in development projects
within the plan areas on a prorata basis any unexpended or uncommitted fees
plus interest accrued thereon, for which the Board is unable to demonstrate a
reasonable relationship between the need for the fee and the purpose for which
it was charged. Refunds shall be made in compliance with Government Code §
66001.
   (b)   Refund of Surplus Monies. After completion of facilities and the
payment of all claims from any Local Transportation Facilities Fund, the Board
shall determine by resolution or other legislative action the amount of the
surplus monies, if any, remaining in any of these funds. Any surplus shall be
refunded in compliance with Government Code § 66001.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 89.03.090 Subject Areas.
   The provisions of this Chapter shall be applied only to unincorporated areas
within the boundaries of Local Area Transportation Facilities Plans that have
been established by the Board, and shall have no force or effect in any other
portion of the County. The fees, plan areas, regulations, and rules are
contained in the associated texts of each Local Area Transportation Plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
DIVISION 10
CHAPTER 810.01: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
810.01.010   Purpose.
   
810.01.020   Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases.
   
810.01.030   Definitions, A.
   
810.01.040   Definitions, B.
   
810.01.050   Definitions, C.
   
810.01.060   Definitions, D.
   
810.01.070   Definitions, E.
   
810.01.080   Definitions, F.
   
810.01.090   Definitions, G.
   
810.01.100   Definitions, H.
   
810.01.110   Definitions, I.
   
810.01.120   Definitions, J.
   
810.01.130   Definitions, K.
   
810.01.140   Definitions, L.
   
810.01.150   Definitions, M.
   
810.01.160   Definitions, N.
   
810.01.170   Definitions, O.
   
810.01.180   Definitions, P.
   
810.01.190   Definitions, Q.
   
810.01.200   Definitions, R.
   
810.01.210   Definitions, S.
   
810.01.220   Definitions, T.
   
810.01.230   Definitions, U.
   
810.01.240   Definitions, V.
   
810.01.250   Definitions, W.
   
810.01.260   Definitions, X.
   
810.01.270   Definitions, Y.
   
810.01.280   Definitions, Z.
§ 810.01.010 Purpose.
   This Chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this
Development Code, many of which are technical or specialized, or that may not
reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this Chapter conflict with
definitions in other provisions of the County Code, these definitions shall
control for the purposes of this Development Code. If a word is not defined in
this Chapter, within the text of this Development Code or in other provisions
of the San Bernardino County Code, the Director shall determine the correct
definition.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 810.01.020 Definitions of Specialized Terms and Phrases.
   As used in this Development Code, the following terms and phrases shall have
the meaning ascribed to them in this Section, unless the context in which they
are used clearly requires otherwise. Whenever the word or phrase being defined
is followed by “(See Land Use Tables.),” the word or phrase is used in the land
use tables in
Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 810.01.030 Definitions, A.
   (a)   ACCESS. The physical arrangement for ingress to and egress from a
parcel or structure (e.g., driveway, walkway, stairs, etc.)
      (1)   ACCESS ENVELOPE. An area delineated on the site plan to which all
clearing and land disturbance for construction of access must be defined.
      (2)   ACCESS RIGHTS. The right, claim, title or privilege of access, by
pedestrians or vehicles, or a public road or way.
      (3)   APPROVED ACCESS. See APPROVED ACCESS.
      (4)   LEGAL ACCESS. For divisions of land resulting in parcels of less
than 20 acres, legal access is defined as:
         (A)   A dedicated right-of-way;
         (B)   A dedication to the County of San Bernardino and to the public
in general, an easement for public road, County highway and public utility
purposes of a width as established by the Circulation Element of the General
Plan. The easement or road constructed on the dedicated land shall not become a
County highway until and unless the Board of Supervisors by appropriate
resolution, has caused the road to be accepted into the County Maintained Road
System;
         (C)   An existing traveled way that is substantially in compliance
with County road standards, where a prescriptive right by the user has been
established for public use by court decree.
         (D)   Private road easement.
      (5)   NON-ACCESS. Access rights that have been relinquished by
appropriate dedication certificate and labeled on a recorded final map and/or
parcel map.
      (6)   NONVEHICULAR ACCESS. Vehicular access rights to abutting lots or
right-of-way have been relinquished by appropriate dedication certificate and
labeled on a recorded Final Map and/or Parcel Map or by separate instrument.
      (7)   VEHICULAR ACCESS RIGHTS. The right of access of owners or occupants
of abutting lands to a public road or way, other than as pedestrians.
   (b)   ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE DISABLED. Accessible services, structure or
facilities are those that may be entered and used by individuals despite
handicapping conditions. Accessibility also includes responding to the needs of
people with sight or hearing disabilities, in addition to those with
developmental, activity, manual or mobility impairments, so that they may enjoy
the full and free use of those services, structures or facilities.
   (c)   ACCESSORY BUILDING SIGN. See SIGN.
   (d)   ACCESSORY CROP PRODUCTION. (See Land Use Tables.) One or more of the
activities included in the definition of “Crop Production, Horticulture,
Orchard, Vineyard” occurring incidental to a primary residential use on the
same site. This does not include wholesale or retail nurseries.
   (e)   ACCESSORY DWELLING. (See Land Use Tables.) A dwelling unit that is
accessory and incidental to a primary agricultural, residential, commercial,
industrial or institutional land use on the same site, and is for the purpose
of providing a residence for one or more people needed to maintain, operate
and/or secure the primary non-residential land use on the property. Accessory
dwellings include:
      (1)   CARETAKER HOUSING. The residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by
the owners, operators or caretaker employed to guard or operate part or all of
the site where the caretaker dwelling is located as an accessory use. The
caretaker unit may be located either above the first floor or behind a primary
commercial use.
      (2)   LABOR QUARTERS. Residential occupancy of single or multiple
dwelling units with individual, shared or no kitchen facilities to provide
housing for the employees and their families of agricultural, mining, logging,
major construction, scientific exploration or other remote land uses.
   (f)   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. An attached or a detached residential
dwelling unit, not considered to exceed the allowable density of the parcel,
which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons
with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation
on the same parcel as the single-family or multi-family dwelling is situated.
An accessory dwelling unit includes an efficiency unit, as defined in §17958.1
of the Health and Safety Code, and a manufactured home, as defined in §18007 of
the Health and Safety Code. To be considered detached, the roofs between the
primary structure and the accessory structure must be at least ten feet apart.
   (g)   ACCESSORY OFFICE. See OFFICE.
   (h)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A subordinate structure, the use of which is
incidental to that of the main structure on, or main use of, the land. The use
of an accessory structure may be for either a primary or an accessory use
allowed by the appropriate land use zoning district.
      (1)   AGRICULTURAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. (See Land Use Tables.) A
structure for sheltering animals, or agricultural equipment (e.g., tools,
supplies, hay, feed, etc.). Examples of these structures include barns, non-
commercial greenhouses, coops, corrals, and pens. Does not include pasture
fencing, which requires no County approval when in compliance with
Chapter 83.06 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls).
      (2)   RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. (See Land Use Tables.) Any
use and/or structure that is customarily a part of, and clearly incidental and
secondary to a residence, and does not change the character of the residential
use. This definition includes the following detached accessory structures, and
other similar structures normally associated with a residential use of
property. See also AGRICULTURAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
 
garages                      studios
gazebos                      swimming pools
greenhouses (non-commercial) tennis and other on-site sports courts
spas and hot tubs            workshops
storage sheds
 
      Also includes the indoor storage of automobiles, personal recreational
vehicles and other personal property, accessory to a residential use.
   (i)   ACCESSORY USE. (See Land Use Tables.) A subordinate use, which may be
permanent or temporary. The use is incidental and supported by the primary use.
Example: A carport or garage for a single-family dwelling.
   (j)   ACCESSORY WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. See WIND ENERGY SYSTEM.
   (k)   ACTION. The decision made by the Director on a land use application
coupled together with the appropriate findings, environmental determination and
conditions of approval.
   (l)   ACTIVE THERMAL SYSTEM. See THERMAL SYSTEM, ACTIVE.
   (m)   ADULT BUSINESS. (See Land Use Tables). In addition to any other
definitions contained in the Development Code, the following words and phrases
shall, for the purpose of this Title, be defined as follows, unless it is
clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. Should any
of the definitions be in conflict with any current provisions of the
Development Code, these definitions shall prevail.
      (1)   ADULT ARCADE shall mean a business establishment to which the
public is permitted or invited and where coin, card or slug operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled devices, still or
motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices
or other image producing devices are maintained to show images on a regular or
substantial basis, where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” Such devices shall be
referred to as “adult arcade devices.”
      (2)   ADULT RETAIL STORE shall mean a business establishment having as a
regular and substantial portion of its stock in trade, “adult oriented
material.”
      (3)   ADULT BOOTH/INDIVIDUAL VIEWING AREA shall mean a partitioned or
partially enclosed portion of an adult business used for any of the following
purposes:
         (A)   Where a live or taped performance is presented or viewed, where
the performances and/or images displayed or presented are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” or
         (B)   Where “adult arcade devices” are located.
      (4)   ADULT BUSINESS shall mean:
         (A)   A business establishment or concern that as a regular and
substantial course of conduct operates as an adult retail store, adult motion
picture theater, adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult motel or hotel, adult
modeling studio; or
         (B)   A business establishment or concern which as a regular and
substantial course of conduct offers, sells or distributes “adult oriented
material” or “sexually oriented merchandise,” or which offers to its patrons
materials, products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” but not including those uses or
activities which are preempted by state law.
      (5)   ADULT CABARET shall mean a business establishment (whether or not
serving alcoholic beverages) that features “adult live entertainment.”
      (6)   “ ADULT CABARET DANCER shall mean any person who is an employee or
independent contractor of an “adult cabaret” or “adult business” and who, with
or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs as a
sexually oriented dancer, exotic dancer, stripper, go go dancer or similar
dancer whose performance on a regular and substantial basis focuses on or
emphasizes the adult cabaret dancer’s breasts, genitals, and/or buttocks, but
does not involve exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or depicting or
engaging in “specified sexual activities.” ADULT CABARET DANCER does not
include a patron.
      (7)   ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL shall mean a “hotel” or “motel” (as defined in
the County Code) that is used for presenting on a regular and substantial basis
images through closed circuit television, cable television, still or motion
picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices or
other image producing devices that are distinguished or characterized by the
emphasis on matter depicting or describing or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
      (8)   ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT shall mean any physical human body
activity, whether performed or engaged in, alone or with other persons
including, but not limited to, singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting,
posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which:
         (A)   The performer (including, but not limited to, topless and/or
bottomless dancers, go go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar
performers) exposes to public view, without opaque covering, “specified
anatomical areas;” and/or
         (B)   The performance or physical human body activity depicts,
describes, or relates to “specified sexual activities” whether or not the
specified anatomical areas are covered.
      (9)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO shall mean a business establishment which
provides for any form of consideration, the services of a live human model,
who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, displays “specified
anatomical areas” to be observed, sketched, photographed, filmed, painted,
sculpted, or otherwise depicted by persons paying for such services. ADULT
MODELING STUDIO does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set
by the Board of Education of the State of California.
      (10)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER shall mean a business establishment,
with or without a stage or proscenium, where, on a regular and substantial
basis and for any form of consideration, material is presented through films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, laser disks, digital video disks,
holograms, virtual reality devices, or similar electronically generated
reproductions that is characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
      (11)   ADULT ORIENTED MATERIAL shall mean accessories, paraphernalia,
books, magazines, laser disks, compact discs, digital video disks, photographs,
prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, pamphlets, videos, slides, tapes,
holograms or electronically generated images or devices including computer
software, or any combination thereof that is distinguished or characterized by
its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” ADULT ORIENTED MATERIAL shall
include “sexually oriented merchandise.”
      (12)   ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ADULT BUSINESS shall mean any of the
following:
         (A)   The opening or commencement of any “adult business” (as defined
above) as a new business;
         (B)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an “adult
business,” to any “adult business;”
         (C)   The addition of any “adult business” to any other existing
“adult business;”
         (D)   The relocation of any “adult business;” or
         (E)   Physical changes that expand the square footage of an existing
“adult business” by more than ten percent.
      (13)   OWNER/LICENSE HOLDER shall mean any of the following:
         (A)   The sole proprietor of an adult business;
         (B)   Any general partner of a partnership that owns and operates an
adult business;
         (C)   The owner of a controlling interest in a corporation or L.L.C.
that owns and operates an adult business; or
         (D)   The person designated by the officers of a corporation or the
members of an L.L.C. to be the license holder for an adult business owned and
operated by the corporation.
      (14)   NON-PERFORMER shall mean a person who is an employee or
independent contractor of an adult business who works in that adult business
during regular business hours. This shall not include after hours workers
providing janitorial, trash or similar after hours services.
      (15)   PERFORMER shall mean a person who is an employee or independent
contractor of an adult business or any other person who, with or without any
compensation or other form of consideration, provides “adult live
entertainment” for patrons of an “adult business.”
      (16)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED MERCHANDISE shall mean sexually oriented
implements, paraphernalia, or novelty items such as, but not limited to:
dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, benwa balls, inflatable
orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated
vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed
primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado masochistic
activity or distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
      (17)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS shall mean and include any of the
following:
         (A)   Less than completely and opaquely covered, and/or simulated to
be reasonably anatomically correct, even if completely and opaquely covered
human:
            (I)   Genitals, pubic region;
            (II)   Buttocks, anus; or
            (III)   Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; or
         (B)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely or opaquely covered.
      (18)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES shall mean and include any of the
following, irrespective of whether performed directly or indirectly through
clothing or other covering:
         (A)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and/
or
         (B)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal; and/
or
         (C)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation,
coitus or masturbation; and/or
         (D)   Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the
infliction of pain, or bondage and/or restraints; and/or
         (E)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation; and/or
         (F)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, or female breast.
   (n)   ADVERTISING, OUTDOOR. See OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.
   (o)   ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. Any structure of any kind or character erected
or maintained for advertising purposes, upon which any advertising sign may be
placed, including advertising statuary.
   (p)   AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Housing with the contract rent or price, including
all housing costs, which is affordable by low and very low (lower and low or
moderate) income households as defined by the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) pursuant to the United States Housing Act of 1937 for the
Riverside-San Bernardino Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA).
   (q)   AFFORDABLE HOUSING COST. The cost defined in the Health and Safety
Code § 50052.5 for owner-occupied and tenant-occupied units. The housing
manager, on or about July 1 of each calendar  year shall publish the maximum
affordable housing costs for sales prices and rents as calculated in compliance
with the applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code.
   (r)   AFFORDABLE RENT. An amount based on the Section B existing program
fair market rates established in compliance with 24 C.F.R. pt. 882 effective at
the time of occupancy less the utility allowance then in effect.
   (s)   AFFORDABLE RENT - LOWER INCOME. A monthly rent that does not exceed an
amount determined by calculating 30 percent of 50 percent of the San Bernardino
median income (as published annually by the State Department of Housing and
Community Development) adjusted in the case of a studio unit for one person
household, in the case of a one bedroom unit for a two person household, in the
case of a two bedroom unit for a three person household and in the case of a
three bedroom unit for a four person household. For the current published
median income, go to http://housing.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/rep/state/incNote.html.
   (t)   AFFORDABLE UNIT. An ownership or rental-housing unit, including senior
housing, occupied by and available to households of low and very low incomes at
an affordable housing cost, adjusted for household size as defined in Chapter
83.03 (Affordable Housing Incentives - Density Bonus), with deed restrictions
as identified in Chapter 83.03 in favor of the County.
   (u)   AGRICULTURE. The tilling of soil, the raising of crops, horticulture,
small livestock farming, dairying or animal husbandry. This includes all uses
customarily incidental thereto, except the following: slaughterhouses, feed
yards, hog farms, fertilizer works, bone yards, plants for the reduction of
animal matter, or any other industrial or agricultural use that is determined
by the Planning Commission to be similarly objectionable because of noise,
odor, smoke, dust or fumes.
   (v)   AGRICULTURAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. (See Land Use Tables.) See ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE.
   (w)   AGRICULTURAL COMMISSIONER. The Agricultural Commissioner of San
Bernardino County or authorized designee.
   (x)   AGRICULTURAL GRADING. Grading on land designated for exclusive
agricultural use. See also GRADING.
   (y)   AGRICULTURAL PRESERVE. Designated areas of existing, viable and
productive agricultural land within which land conservation contracts can be
enforced under the provisions of the California Land Conservation Act of 1965
(Williamson Act), to stay in agricultural use for a designated period of time.
Under the contracts, the property owner is granted certain tax advantages for
the continuation of agricultural use of the land.
   (z)   AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE SALES STAND. (See Land Use Tables.) See PRODUCE
STAND.
   (aa)   AGRICULTURAL SUPPORT SERVICE. (See Land Use Tables.) A use that
directly supports or that is accessory or incidental to an established
agricultural use within the general vicinity. These services do not adversely
affect surrounding properties, groundwater or infrastructure, are supportive of
the farm community, and are fully compatible with agricultural uses. These uses
include:
      (1)   Agricultural chemicals, fuel and fuel oil, nonflammable bottled
gas.
      (2)   Animal husbandry services, veterinary services for large and small
animals, horseshoeing, agricultural processing.
      (3)   Animal waste processing, stockyards, organic fertilizer, feed lots.
      (4)   Farm machinery equipment and supplies, display, sale and repair.
      (5)   Farm produce sales and supply (feed, hay, grain and grain products,
fertilizer).
      (6)   Farm products packaging and processing.
      (7)   Feed storage, farm products warehousing and storage (except
stockyards).
   (bb)   AGRICULTURE LAND, PRIME. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   All land that qualifies for a rating as Class I or Class II in the
Resource Conservation District land use capability classifications.
      (2)   Land that qualifies for a rating 80 through 100 in the State Storie
Index Rating.
      (3)   Land that supports livestock used for the production of food and
fiber and that has an annual carrying capacity equivalent to at least one
animal unit per acre as defined by the United States Department of Agriculture.
      (4)   Land planted with fruit or nut bearing trees, vines, bushes or
crops that have a nonbearing period of less than five years and that will
normally return during the commercial bearing period on an annual basis from
the production of unprocessed agricultural plant production not less than
$200.00 per acre.
      (5)   Land from which the production of unprocessed agricultural plant
products has returned an annual gross value of not less than $200.00 per acre
for three of the previous five years.
   (cc)   AGRICULTURAL USE. The use of land for the cultivation of food or
fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock, usually for commercial
purposes.
   (dd)   AGRITOURISM. The act of visiting a working farm, ranch, agricultural,
or horticultural operation for the purpose of active involvement in the
educational, entertainment, or recreational activities offered by the farm or
operation.
   (ee)   AGRITOURISM ENTERPRISE. (See Land Use Tables.) An enterprise
conducted by an owner of a working farm, ranch, agricultural, or horticultural
operation in order to generate income for the farm or operation that is in
addition to income derived from the primary farming, ranching, or agricultural
activities. Activities and events are designed to educate the public about
farming and ranching activities; promote the heritage and culture of farming,
ranching, and a rural lifestyle, and promote the products of a farm or ranch.
Activities and events may take place indoors or outdoors. Indoor facilities may
include classrooms, meeting rooms, overnight accommodations, party facilities,
renovated barns, etc. Outdoor facilities may include picnicking areas, trails,
riding rings, paddocks, and similar areas for education, entertainment, and
recreation. Examples of activities and events include:
Agricultural food and craft shows       Harvest festivals
Agricultural heritage museums and tours Hayrides
                                        Historical reenactments (e.g.,
Barn dances (including square dancing)  Revolutionary War or Civil War battle
                                        reenactments)
                                        Living history events where families
Cattle drives                           can experience the lives of 18th or
                                        19th century farmers, pioneers,
                                        ranchers, etc.
Cider pressing/tasting                  Horse and pony rides
Craft skills demonstrations (weaving,   Living History displays
candle dipping, clothes making, etc.)
Crop mazes                              Music festivals
Educational and interpretive seminars,  Pet farms
clinics, walks, workshops
Farm equipment displays                 Picnicking
                                        Ranch skills demonstrations
Farm visits                             (horseshoeing, leatherwork, camp
                                        cooking, horse training, etc.)
Food festivals                          Retreats
Food service                            School tours
Gardens (harvesting flowers, greenery,
herbs, dried flowers, berries,          Storytelling
vegetables)
Gift shops                              Wagon rides
Guided crop tours                       Wine tasting
                                        U-pick farm or orchard
 
   (ff)   AIRPORT or HELIPORT. (See Land Use Tables.) Any area of land or water
designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of any aircraft. An
airport or heliport must be utilized in the interest of the public for these
purposes, have a valid airport permit from the State of California Aeronautics
Division, have airspace clearance as required by the Federal Aviation Agency,
and have approval under the County Adopted General Plan of Airports. Military
airports are not required to obtain the listed Federal, State, or County
approvals.
   (gg)   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure or tree or use of land that obstructs
the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an
airport, or is otherwise hazardous to the landing or taking off of aircraft.
   (hh)   ALIQUOT PART. A notation used by the Public Land Survey System to
represent the exact subdivision of a section of land. Aliquot parts are
described as a half or quarter of the largest subdivision of the section,
except fractional lots which cannot be described by aliquot parts. The
divisions shall not be less than five acres.
   (ii)   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare, not exceeding 30 feet in width for the
use of pedestrians or vehicles, that affords only a secondary means of access
to the abutting property.
   (jj)   ALLUVIAL FAN. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (kk)   ALQUIST-PRIOLO EARTHQUAKE FAULT ZONING ACT. Also, formerly known as
the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones Act of 1972 (Public Resources Code §§
2621 et seq.). The purpose of this Act is to provide for public safety in
hazardous fault zones. The Act requires the delineation of potential damage
areas along known active faults throughout California. It requires local
governments to withhold approval of construction permits in those zones until
geologic investigation has determined that the site is not threatened by
surface displacement from future faulting.
   (ll)   ALTERATIONS. See STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.
   (mm)   AMBULANCE, TAXI, OR LIMOUSINE DISPATCH FACILITY. (See Land Use
Tables.) A base facility where ambulances, taxis, limousines, armored cars, tow
trucks, and similar vehicles for specialized transportation are stored, and
from which they are dispatched, and/or where ambulance vehicles and crews not
based at a hospital or fire department stand by for emergency calls. Does not
include storage facilities for towed vehicles, which is classified under
STORAGE - VEHICLE.
   (nn)   ANIMAL KEEPING. (See Land Use Tables.) See Chapter 84.04 (Animal
Keeping) and Chapter 82.07 (Additional Agricultural Overlay District).
   (oo)   ANIMALS, BENEFICIAL OR ENDANGERED.
      (1)   BENEFICIAL. Those species that do not contribute to a strain on an
ecosystem. They may also serve to eradicate pest species for agricultural or
health purposes.
      (2)   ENDANGERED. An animal species that has been diminished in
quantities sufficiently large enough to raise questions regarding the future
propagation of the species.
   (pp)   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. See VETERINARY CLINIC, ANIMAL HOSPITAL. (See Land
Use Tables.)
   (qq)   ANIMAL-PROOFED. Resistant to animals (such as dogs, coyotes,
raccoons) opening, tipping over or otherwise gaining access to trash thereby
causing trash to be scattered.
   (rr)   ANTENNA. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY.
   (ss)   ANTI-DRAIN VALVE. A valve that has been designed to be located under
a sprinkler head to help keep water within the irrigation system and to prevent
the drainage of the sprinkler head when the system is non-operational.
   (tt)   APPAREL AND OTHER FINISHED PRODUCTS. See MANUFACTURING OPERATION I
AND II.
   (uu)   APPLICATION RATE. The depth of water that has been applied to a given
area, measured in inches per minute, or inches per hour, or gallons per hour.
   (vv)   APPLIED WATER. The portion of water that is supplied by an irrigation
system for landscaped areas.
   (ww)   APEX. See Flood Hazard.
   (xx)   APARTMENT. A room, or suite of rooms that when combined constitute a
single dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling structure and that are designed
for, intended for, suitable as a residence for, and/or occupied by one family.
   (yy)   APPLICANT. The property owner(s), or authorized agent of the owner(s)
who is legally authorized to act for the owner(s) of record.
   (zz)   APPROVED ACCESS.
      (1)   A dedicated right-of-way to the County of San Bernardino, an
easement for public road, County Highway and public utility purposes, of a
width as established by the Circulation Element of the County General Plan. The
road constructed thereon shall not be brought into the County maintained road
system until an unless the Board of Supervisors of the County of San
Bernardino, by appropriate resolution, has caused the road to be accepted into
the County Road System.
      (2)   An existing traveled way where a prescriptive right by user has
been established for public use by a Court decree.
      (3)   A traveled way that was in existence before 1967, as determined by
the County Surveyor. The traveled way must connect to a publicly maintained
roadway and must meet each of the following criteria:
         (A)   Have all-weather capability for normal passenger car use.
         (B)   Be of adequate width to provide two-way vehicular access.
         (C)   Be improved and maintained by the use of hand or power machinery
or tools in order to allow relatively regular and continuous use. A traveled
way maintained solely by the passage of vehicles does not constitute APPROVED
ACCESS.
      (4)   APPROVED ACCESS shall not be approved by the County Surveyor unless
the access:
         (A)   Substantially conforms to the alignment shown in the Circulation
Element of the County General Plan or Community Plan where applicable; and
         (B)   May practically and feasibly be applied to road use. The
approved access provisions apply to divisions of land resulting in lots of 20
acres or more.
   (aaa)   APPROVED STRUCTURE. See STRUCTURE, APPROVED.
   (bbb)   ARCHITECTURAL LIGHTING. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (ccc)   AREA OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (ddd)   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (eee)   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (fff)   AREA OF STATEWIDE SIGNIFICANCE. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (ggg)   ART GALLERY. See LIBRARY.
   (hhh)   ATTACHED LIGHTING. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (iii)   AUCTION YARD. See SWAP MEET, OUTDOOR MARKET, AUCTION YARD.
   (jjj)   AUTO AND VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL. (See Land Use Tables.) A retail
or wholesale establishment selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans,
trailers, motorcycles, and bicycles (bicycle sales are also included under
GENERAL RETAIL). Vehicles for sale may be displayed outdoors or indoors, as
authorized by the required Conditional Use Permit.
   May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories,
incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include: the sale of auto parts/
accessories separate from a vehicle dealership; mobile home, recreational
vehicle, or watercraft sales (see MOBILE HOME, RV AND BOAT SALES); tire
recapping establishments; businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, (see
RECYCLING - SCRAP AND DISMANTLING YARDS); or SERVICE STATIONS, which are
separately defined.
   (kkk)   AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACE. See PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4085,
passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4136, passed --2011;
Am. Ord. 4239, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4341, passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4383,
passed - -2020)
§ 810.01.040 Definitions, B.
   (a)   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A safety device used to prevent pollution
or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the
irrigation system.
   (b)   BACKFILLING. As it pertains to landscape construction, is the refill
of an excavation area, usually with native soil material that has been
excavated from the project site.
   (c)   BAIL BOND SERVICE. (See Land Use Tables.) A business that provides
bail bonds for incarcerated persons.
   (d)   BAR/TAVERN. (See Land Use Tables.) A business in which alcoholic
beverages are sold for on-site consumption and that is not part of a larger
restaurant. Includes bars, taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any
food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May also
include beer brewing as part of a microbrewery (“brew-pub”), and other beverage
tasting facilities. Does not include adult oriented businesses (see ADULT-
ORIENTED BUSINESS.).
   (e)   BASE FLOOD. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (f)   BASEMENT or CELLAR. A room of a structure partly or wholly underground
and having more than one-half of its height below the average level of the
adjoining ground. A basement, having more than one-half of its height above the
average level of the adjoining ground, shall be considered a story.
   (g)   BED AND BREAKFAST INN (B&B). (See Land Use Tables.) An accessory use
to a single dwelling where a limited or specified number of guest rooms are
made available to transient guests for rent to provide overnight sleeping
accommodations on a less than weekly basis. Bed and Breakfast Uses are
subdivided into three basic categories as follows:
      (1)   HOST HOME.  A single dwelling containing one to two guest rooms
that are available for rent to transient guests to provide sleeping
accommodations on a less than weekly basis where the dwelling is occupied by
the owner of the property.
      (2)   BED AND BREAKFAST HOME. A single dwelling containing three to five
guest rooms that are available for rent to transient guests to provide sleeping
accommodations on a less than weekly basis where the dwelling is occupied by
the owner of the property.
      (3)   BED AND BREAKFAST INN/LODGE. An existing single dwelling that has
been designated a Historical Structure containing a at least of six but no more
than 10 guest rooms that are available for rent to transient guests to provide
sleeping accommodations on a less than weekly basis where the dwelling is
occupied by the owner of the property.
   (h)   BENEFICIAL ANIMALS. See ANIMALS.
   (i)   BLOCK. The property abutting on one side of a street between two
nearest intersection streets, railroad right-of-way or other natural barrier,
provided however, that where a street curves so that any two chords thereof
form an angle of 120 degrees or less measured on the lot side, each curve shall
be construed as an intersection street.
   (j)   BOARD or BOARD OF SUPERVISORS. The Board of Supervisors of the County
of San Bernardino, State of California.
   (k)   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling with not more than five guest rooms, with
not more than one person per room, where lodging and meals are provided for
compensation on a weekly or greater basis, not including those facilities
defined as social care facilities.
   (l)   BOAT SALES. See MOBILE HOME, BOAT OR RV SALES.
   (m)   BORROW PIT. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (n)   BROADCASTING ANTENNAE AND TOWERS. (See Land Use Tables.) Any structure
or device (e.g., antennas, towers, etc.) used for radio and television
broadcasting and receiving.
   (o)   BROADCASTING STUDIO. (See Land Use Tables.) Commercial and public
communications use including radio and television broadcasting and receiving
stations and studios, with facilities entirely within buildings. Does not
include transmission and receiving apparatus, including antennas and towers,
which are instead defined under BROADCASTING ANTENNAE AND TOWERS.
   (p)   BUFFER. A strip of land established to separate incompatible or
different land uses. Normally a buffer area is landscaped and retained as open
space. The term may be used more broadly to describe  any area or use that
separates two unlike land uses, such as the use of multi-family housing between
single-family housing and commercial uses.
   (q)   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, fowl, chattels or property of any kind.
   (r)   BUILDING AND LANDSCAPE MATERIALS SALES. (See Land Use Tables.) A
retail establishment selling hardware, lumber and other large building
materials, plant materials, and other landscaping materials. Includes paint,
wallpaper, glass, fixtures. Includes all these stores selling to the general
public, even if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales.
An establishment that primarily sells electrical, plumbing, heating, and air
conditioning equipment and supplies is classified in WHOLESALING AND
DISTRIBUTION.
   (s)   BUILDING COVERAGE. The alterations of a lot by the creation of surface
area upon which a building rests. It is the building footprint. The percentage
surface coverage does not include roadways, swimming pools, tennis courts,
solar collection devices or related apparatus. See also LOT COVERAGE.
   (t)   BUILDING ENVELOPE. The area delineated on development plans in which
all clearing and land disturbance for building construction must be confined
unless otherwise authorized by this Development Code. If not delineated, it is
the area of a lot not included within a required front yard, rear yard, side
yard or side street yard setback area, or any recorded easement, or offer of
dedication.
   (u)   BUILDING HEIGHT. See §
83.02.040 (Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions).
   (v)   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Deputy Director of Land Use Services for
Building and Safety, charged with the administration and enforcement of this
Development Code, or an authorized designee.
   (w)   BUILDING SITE. The ground area occupied or to be occupied by a
building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces as required by
this Development Code.
   (x)   BUSINESS STRUCTURE. See STRUCTURE, BUSINESS OR INDUSTRIAL.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Ord. 4136, passed--2011)
§ 810.01.050 Definitions, C.
   (a)   CAFÉ. See RESTAURANT, CAFÉ, COFFEE SHOP (See Land Use Tables).
   (b)   CALF GROWING RANCH. Any premises used for the raising or keeping of
ten or more weaned calves.
   (c)   CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE. The currently adopted edition of the
California Building Code with California Amendments as published by the
International Conference of Building Officials.
   (d)   CAMOUFLAGE FACILITY. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY.
   (e)   CAMP or CAMPGROUND. (See Land Use Tables.) A site used or intended for
use for temporary occupancy by campers traveling by automobiles or otherwise,
which may include individual campsites, but where utility hookups for
recreational vehicles are typically not provided. See also RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
PARK. Other types of camping facilities regulated by this Development Code
include the following.
      (1)   CAMP, ORGANIZED. A site with program and facilities established for
the primary purpose of providing an outdoor group living experience with
social, spiritual, educational, or recreational objectives normally for five
days or more during one or more seasons of the year.
         (A)   These camps are located on a permanent site and have a well-
defined program of organized supervised activities in which campers are
required to participate. There is present at the camp a qualified program
director and a staff adequate to carry out the daily program activities, which
are mainly out of doors.
         (B)   An establishment that rents or leases facilities on an
individual family or group basis for the principal purpose of sporting or other
unorganized recreational activities are not considered an organized camp.
      (2)   CAMP, PUBLIC. A site used or intended to be used, let or rented for
camping purposes by two or more camping parties in trailers, tents or other
movable or temporary dwellings.
   (f)   CAPITAL FACILITIES. Physical facilities or equipment, such as roads,
libraries, schools, government buildings, water and sewer systems.
   (g)   CARETAKER HOUSING. See ACCESSORY DWELLING.
   (h)   CARNIVAL. The exhibiting or conducting of a traveling show or of
entertainment open to the public, including any caravan, museum, menagerie,
animal collection, circus, sideshow, burlesque show, rodeo, carnival, animal
exhibition, feats of horsemanship, acrobatic performance, “wild west” show, or
any other show or entertainment similar in character.
   (i)   CARPORT. A permanent roofed structure with no more than two enclosed
sides, used or intended to be used for shelter and storage.
   (j)   CASITA. See GUEST HOUSE.
   (k)   CATTERY. (See Land Use Tables.) See KENNELS AND CATTERIES.
   (l)   CELLULAR RADIOTELEPHONE SERVICE (CRS). See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITY.
   (m)   CEMETERY. (See Land Use Tables.) Land used, or intended to be used,
for the permanent internment of dead human bodies or the cremated remains of
dead human bodies, or land dedicated for cemetery purposes. PET CEMETERY shall
be a cemetery for domesticated animals and shall be in compliance with
applicable State and County regulation, including mapping and applicable
Conditional Use Permit requirements.
   (n)   CENTERLINE. The centerline of a street shall mean the right-of-way
centerline as established by the County Surveyor, the City Engineer of any city
within the County, or the State Division of Highways of the State of
California. If no centerline has been established and in any case in which the
foregoing definition is not applicable, the reviewing authority shall designate
the centerline.
   (o)   CERTIFIED LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR. An individual who is certified
to perform landscape irrigation audits, by an accredited institution or a
professional trade organization, such as the Irrigation Association.
   (p)   CERTIFY. To authenticate or vouch for in writing, and signed by the
certifying party, that the submitted data is true, as represented, or that the
requirements of the regulations have been satisfied.
   (q)   CHANNEL ACQUISITION. The buying or leasing of drainage courses for the
purpose of routing or controlling water runoff or floods.
   (r)   CHEMICALS AND RELATED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING
OPERATIONS II.
   (s)   CHILD CARE. See DAY CARE.
   (t)   CHURCH. See PLACES OF WORSHIP.
   (u)   CIRCULATION ELEMENT. Any street, highway, boulevard, freeway, parkway,
road, lane, alley, public easement or public right-of-way designed or
designated for the use of pedestrians or vehicles by the General Plan and any
applicable specific plan.
   (v)   CLAY PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS I AND II.
   (w)   CLUB. An association of persons, whether incorporated or
unincorporated and organized for some common nonprofit purpose, but not
including a group organized solely or primarily to render a service customarily
carried on as a business.
   (x)   COFFEE SHOP. See RESTAURANT, CAFÉ, COFFEE SHOP. (See Land Use Tables.)
   (y)   COLLECTION FACILITY. See RECYCLING FACILITY.
   (z)   COLLECTOR. See ROAD SYSTEM.
   (aa)   CO-LOCATION WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. See WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.
   (bb)   COMMERCIAL COACH. A vehicle with or without motive power, designed
and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional or commercial
purposes, and shall include vehicles containing mobile offices.
   (cc)   COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT - INDOOR. (See Land Use Tables.)
Establishments providing indoor amusement and entertainment services for a fee
or admission charge, including:
 
bowling alleys
coin-operated amusement arcades
dance halls, clubs and ballrooms
electronic game arcades (video games, pinball, etc.)
ice skating and roller skating
pool and billiard rooms as primary uses
 
      This use does not include adult oriented businesses, which are separately
defined. Four or more electronic games or coin operated amusements in any
establishment, or a premises where 50 percent or more of the floor area is
occupied by amusement devices, are considered an electronic game arcade as
described above; three or fewer machines are not considered a land use separate
from the primary use of the site.
   (dd)   COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT - OUTDOOR. (See Land Use Tables.) A facility
for various outdoor recreational activities, where a fee is charged for use.
Examples include:
 
amusement and theme parks
go-cart tracks
golf driving ranges
miniature golf courses
skating parks
water slides
 
      May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the
above outdoor commercial recreational uses, including bars and restaurants,
video game arcades, etc.
   (ee)   COMMERCIAL KENNELS AND CATTERIES. (See Land Use Tables.). See
KENNELS.
   (ff)   COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
FACILITY.
   (gg)   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY GENERATION FACILITY. The components and
subsystems that, in combination, convert solar energy into electric or thermal
energy primarily for the purpose of off-site consumption, and may include other
appurtenant structures and facilities. The definition includes, but is not
limited to, photovoltaic power systems and solar thermal systems.
   (hh)   COMMERCIAL USE. One or more of the land use types listed in the
tables of “Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements” in Division 2 (Land Use
Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) under the headings of “Recreation,
Education & Public Assembly Uses,” “Retail,” “Services, Business and
Professional,” and/or “Services, General.” “Agricultural Support Services” are
also considered as a commercial use.
   (ii)   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the County of San Bernardino.
   (jj)   COMMON CARRIER. Any corporation or business that performs a service
for, or delivers a commodity to the public or any portion thereof via a
pipeline or other transmission line or device for which any compensation or
payment whatsoever is received and is subject to the Federal Mineral Leasing
Act of 1920, as amended by P.L. No. 93-153.
   (kk)   COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT. A real property development that
consists of, or will consist of, separately owned lots, parcels, areas, or
spaces with either or both of the following features:
      (1)   One or more additional contiguous or noncontiguous lots, parcels,
areas, or spaces owned in common by the owners of the separately owned lots,
parcels, areas, or spaces.
      (2)   Mutual, common, or reciprocal interests in, or restrictions upon,
all or a portion of these separately owned lots, parcels, areas, or spaces, or
both and, in which the owners of the separately owned lots, parcels, areas, or
spaces have rights, directly or indirectly, to the beneficial use and enjoyment
of all or a portion of the lots, parcels, areas, or spaces.
      The estate in a separately or commonly owned lot, parcel, area, or space
may be an estate of inheritance or perpetual estate, an estate for life, an
estate for years, or any combination of the foregoing.
      Either common ownership of the additional contiguous or noncontiguous
lots, parcels, or areas or the enjoyment of the mutual, common, or reciprocal
interests in, or restrictions upon, the separately owned lots, parcels, areas
or spaces or both, may be through ownership of shares of stock or membership in
an association or otherwise. Shares of stock, if any exist, shall be deemed to
be interests in a common interest development and real estate development for
purposes of Corporations Code § 25100(f).
   (ll)   COMMON OPEN SPACE. See OPEN SPACE, COMMON.
   (mm)   COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECT. A common interest development in which
an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy
of any apartment located thereon. This use includes apartment complexes that
were converted to allow for individual ownership of units that were not
constructed to condominium building standards.
   (nn)   COMMUNITY CELEBRATION. Those public affairs sponsored by chambers of
commerce or community service groups in unincorporated communities for the
promotion of community spirit by public parades, carnivals, and other outdoor
activities.
   (oo)   COMMUNITY GARDENS. (See Land Use Tables.) A private or public
facility for the non-commercial cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, or
ornamental plants by more than one person or family.
   (pp)   COMMUNITY NOISE EQUIVALENCY LEVEL (CNEL). The CNEL is a measure of
the cumulative noise exposure level in the community. It results from a
summation of average noise levels based on the average energy level of the
sound over a 24-hour period, with an increased weighing factor applied to the
evening and night time period.
   (qq)   COMMUNITY ROOM. A small facility (up to 1,500 sq. ft.), in a
multiple-family project furnished more as a large living room, and may not have
a kitchen or may only have a sink and counter for small meetings and other get-
togethers.
   (rr)   COMPATIBLE. When used in relation to a structure, indicates that the
structure is built so that its appearance is similar to that of the principal
unit to which the structure is accessory or to the general character of the
neighborhood with regards to color, materials, construction, lighting, signs,
or the emission of sounds, noises and vibrations.
   (ss)   COMPATIBLE LAND USES. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (tt)   COMPLIANCE INVESTIGATION. Any building permit inspection, mobile home
setdown inspection, Code compliance investigation, or any review by any County
Agency, Department or office, or their designee to determine compliance with
rules, regulations, standards and conditions of approval established either by
or to implement the provisions of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (uu)   COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A map or plan on file with the Building
and Safety Division that reflects additional information related to the
development of lots created by a Final or Parcel Map recorded after March 1,
1986. Notes on this plan or map are for informational purposes and indicate
conditions and criteria that exist on the property that were known and
identified as of the date of the recordation of the Final or Parcel Map.
Authority for this plan is derived from California Government Code § 66434.2.
   (vv)   COMPLEX SIGN. See SIGN.
   (ww)   COMPLEX OCCUPANT SIGN. See SIGN.
   (xx)   COMPOSTING. Processing waste in a controlled environment to produce a
stable product by microbiologically degrading organic matter under aerobic
conditions.
   (yy)   COMPOSTING OPERATIONS. A facility where organic matter that is
derived primarily from off-site is to be processed by composting and/or is
processed for commercial purposes. Activities of a composting facility may
include management, collection, transportation, staging, composting, curing,
storage, marketing, or use of compost.
   (zz)   COMPRESSED GAS. Any mixture or material having in the container
either an absolute pressure exceeding 40 pounds per square inch at 70°F, or an
absolute pressure exceeding 104 pounds per square inch at 130°F, or both; or
any liquid flammable material having a vapor pressure as defined in § 5415 in
Title 8 (Industrial Relations) of the California Code of Regulations.
   (aaa)   CONDOMINIUM. A condominium consists of an undivided interest in
common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in space
called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded condominium
plan in sufficient detail to locate all boundaries thereof. The area within
these boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water, or any combination
thereof, and need not be physically attached to land except by easements for
access and, if necessary, support.
      (1)   The description of the unit may refer to:
         (A)   Boundaries described in the recorded condominium plan;
         (B)   Physical boundaries, either in existence, or to be constructed,
such as walls, floors, and ceilings of a structure or any portion thereof;
         (C)   An entire structure containing one or more units; or
         (D)   Any combination thereof.
      (2)   An individual condominium within a condominium project may also
include a separate interest in other portions of the real property. A
condominium is an estate in real property. The estate may, with respect to the
duration of its enjoyment, be either:
         (A)   An estate of inheritance or perpetual estate;
         (B)   An estate for life;
         (C)   An estate for years (i.e., leasehold or subleasehold); or
         (D)   Any combination of the foregoing.
   (bbb)   CONDOMINIUM PLAN. A plan consisting of:
      (1)   A description or survey map of a condominium project, which shall
refer to or show monumentation on the ground;
      (2)   A three dimensional description of a condominium project, one or
more dimensions of which may extend for an indefinite distance upwards or
downwards, in sufficient detail to identify the common areas and each separate
interest; and
      (3)   A certificate consenting to the recordation of the condominium plan
in compliance with this Development Code and signed and acknowledged by the
following:
         (A)   Record owner of fee title to the property included in the
condominium project;
         (B)   All lessors and lessees of the estate for years in the case of a
condominium project that will terminate upon the termination of an estate for
years;
         (C)   All life tenants and remainder interests in the case of a
condominium project subject to a life estate;
         (D)   Either the trustee or the beneficiary of each recorded deed of
trust;
         (E)   Mortgagee of each recorded mortgage encumbering the property.
      Owners of mineral rights, easements, rights of way, and other
nonpossessory interests do not need to sign the condominium plan. A condominium
plan may be amended or revoked by a subsequently acknowledged recorded
instrument executed by all the persons whose signatures would be required to
record a condominium plan in compliance with Subdivision (3), above.
   (ccc)   CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. A common interest development consisting of
condominiums.
   (ddd)   CONFERENCE/CONVENTION FACILITY. (See Land Use Tables.) One or more
structures accommodating multiple assembly, meeting, and/or exhibit rooms, and
related support facilities (e.g., kitchens, offices, etc.).
   (eee)   CONSERVATION. The planned management, protection and use of natural
resources in order to prevent the wasteful exploitation, destruction or neglect
of these resources. Implicit in conservation is the concept of wise use as
distinguished from nonuse or preservation.
   (fff)   CONSISTENCY. A review to ensure that all plans and actions conform
to guidelines set forth in the General Plan and any applicable or Specific
Plans.
   (ggg)   CONSTRUCTION AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES AND RENTAL. (See Land Use
Tables.) Retail establishments selling or renting construction, farm, or other
heavy equipment. Examples include cranes, earth moving equipment, tractors,
combines, heavy trucks, etc.
   (hhh)   CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR. (See Land Use Tables.) Office, and indoor
and/or outdoor storage facilities operated by, or on behalf of a contractor
licensed by the State of California for storage of large equipment, vehicles,
and/or other materials commonly used in the individual contractor’s type of
business; storage of scrap materials used for repair and maintenance of
contractor’s own equipment; and buildings or structures for uses such as repair
facilities.
   (iii)   CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS. A construction activity that is subject to
approval of either a County-ministered permit, or approval of a discretionary
decision on a land use application.
   (jjj)   CONTIGUOUS or CONTIGUOUS PROPERTY. In actual close contact;
touching; bounded or traversed by. CONTIGUOUS PROPERTY shall be those
properties that touch property lines of any parcel including those properties
that touch the property lines of a subject parcel when the lines are projected
across public or private rights of way, easements, roads, streets, or railroad
rights of way.
   (kkk)   CONVENIENCE AND SUPPORT SERVICES. (See Land Use Tables.)
Establishments that provide convenience or support services to people in
employment locations or to the traveling public in locations away from
developed commercial centers. These limited services include food, beverage,
gasoline, retail services and minor automobile service.
   (lll)   CONVENIENCE STORE. (See Land Use Tables.) A retail store of 3,500
square feet or less in gross floor area that carries a range of merchandise
oriented to convenience and/or travelers’ shopping needs.
   (mmm)   CONVENTIONAL SPRAY IRRIGATION. Is the use of aerial/overhead
sprinklers to distribute irrigation water to landscaped areas (e.g., pop-up and
fixed spray heads, impact rotors, rotary nozzles, rotors, etc.).
   (nnn)   CONVERSION FACTOR (0.62). 0.62 is the conversion factor for the
Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) and the Estimated Annual Water Use
(EAWU) calculations. This number converts the acre-inches per acre, per year to
gallons per square foot, per year.
   (ooo)   COOLING OPPORTUNITIES, PASSIVE OR NATURAL.  The ability to orient or
site a structure, including a dwelling on its lot in order to take optimum
advantage of prevailing breezes for cooling purposes.
   (ppp)   CORNER LOT. See LOT.
   (qqq)   CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION. (See Land Use Tables.) An incarceration
facility owned and operated by a Federal, State, local government or private
entity.
   (rrr)   CORROSIVE SOILS. See SOIL.
   (sss)   COUNTY. The County of San Bernardino, State of California.
   (ttt)   COUNTY CODE. County of San Bernardino Code.
   (uuu)   COUNTY FIRE DEPARTMENT. See FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (vvv)   COUNTY PROCEDURES. Any policies or procedures that have been adopted
by the Board of Supervisors, and are described, delineated and on file for use
and examination by the public in the Office of Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors.
   (www)   COUNTY STANDARDS. Any current improvement standards or design
standards that have been adopted by the Board of Supervisors, and are
described, delineated and on file for use and examination by the public in the
Office of the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   (xxx)   COUNTY SURVEYOR. The County Surveyor of San Bernardino County, or
authorized designee.
   (yyy)   COUNTY VETERINARIAN. Any veterinarian of the County designated by
the Department of Public Health.
   (zzz)   COURT. An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, that is bounded
on two or more sides by a building or buildings and is created by the required
separation of the buildings.
   (aaaa)   CREMATORIUM. (See Land Use Tables.) A location containing properly
installed, certified apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation.
   (bbbb)   CROP PRODUCTION, HORTICULTURE, ORCHARD, VINEYARD. (See Land Use
Tables.) Commercial agricultural production field and orchard uses, including
the production of the following, primarily in the soil on the site and not in
containers, other than for initial propagation before planting in the soil on
the site, and/or in containers occupying one acre or less:
 
field crops       ornamental crops
flowers and seeds tree nuts
fruits            trees and sod
grains            vegetables
melons            wine grapes and table grapes
      Also includes associated crop preparation services and harvesting
activities, such as mechanical soil preparation, irrigation system
construction, spraying, crop processing and retail sales in the field, not
including sales sheds.
   (cccc)   CULTURAL RESOURCE DAMAGE. Any destruction or harm done to or
inflicted upon any paleontological, archaeological or historical remains that
could contribute to the study and interpretation of biological and cultural
development.
   (dddd)   CURB CUT. The lowering of a curb to permit access by vehicles,
wheelchairs, carts and pedestrians.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4136,
passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4162, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4189, passed - -2012;
Am. Ord. 4213, passed - -2013; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014)
§ 810.01.060 Definitions, D.
   (a)   DAIRY. Any premises where milk is produced for sale or distribution
and where ten or more cows or goats are in lactation.
   (b)   DAYS. Any reference to day or days shall mean calendar days, unless
otherwise specified.
   (c)   DAYS, BUSINESS. Any day a specified Office, Department or other agency
is open to the public for normal business. This term shall normally exclude all
Saturdays, Sundays and any holiday that is recognized and observed by the
specified Office, Department or other agency.
   (d)   DAY CARE, ADULT. (See Land Use Tables.) A state-licensed facility that
provides nonmedical care and supervision for adult clients for periods of less
than 24 hours for any client.
   (e)   DAY CARE, CHILD. (See Land Use Tables.) Facilities that provide non-
medical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than 24
hours. These facilities include the following, all of which are required to be
licensed by the California State Department of Social Services.
      (1)   DAY CARE CENTER. Commercial or non-profit child day care facilities
designed and approved to accommodate 15 or more children. Includes infant
centers, preschools, sick-child centers, and school-age day care facilities.
These may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or as an
independent land use.
      (2)   DAY CARE HOME - FAMILY. As defined by Health and Safety Code §
1596.78, a home that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for
14 or fewer children, in the provider’s own home, for periods of less than 24
hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away.
   (f)   DEBRIS FLOW (MUDFLOW). The downhill movement of saturated debris often
a mixture of mud, rock and vegetation.
   (g)   DECIBEL (dBA). A measure of sound pressure on a logarithmic scale,
with respect to a standard reference value.
   (h)   DECISION. Any decision to approve, disapprove, or modify a request to
develop, divide, or otherwise utilize land or to alter or establish land use
regulations.
   (i)   DENSITY BONUS. A density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable
residential density under the applicable land use plan designation and land use
zoning district. Also, see Government Code § 65915.
   (j)   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Land Use Services of the County of San
Bernardino.
   (k)   DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. See MOBILE HOME, DEPENDENT.
   (l)   DESERT BOTANICAL GARDENS. (See Land Use Tables.) A public or private
facility for the demonstration and observation of the cultivation of desert
flowers, fruits, vegetables, or ornamental desert plants.
   (m)   DESERT NATIVE PLANT. See PLANT, DESERT NATIVE.
   (n)   DESERT NATIVE PLANT EXPERT. See PLANT EXPERT, DESERT NATIVE.
   (o)   DESERT REGION.  DESERT REGION shall mean and include all of the
unincorporated area of San Bernardino County lying north and east of the
Mountain Region as defined in this Division.
   (p)   DESIGN. Includes the planning and engineering of the following:
      (1)   Street alignments, grades and widths;
      (2)   Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignment
and grades thereof;
      (3)   Location and size of all required easements and rights of way;
      (4)   Fire roads and firebreaks;
      (5)   Lot size and configuration;
      (6)   Traffic access;
      (7)   Grading;
      (8)   Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes;
      (9)   Location of proposed and existing structures and improvements; and
      (10)   Other specific physical requirements in the plan and/or
configuration of a subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with,
and implementation of this Development Code, the General Plan, and any
applicable specific plan.
   (q)   DETAILED SITE PLAN. See SITE PLAN, DETAILED.
   (r)   DESIGN FLOOD. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (s)   DEVELOPER. Any person, association, firm, corporation, partnership and
other business entity or public agency installing or constructing a
development. This includes any person, business entity or public agency seeking
to perform earthwork grading on any project or development for which the
conditions of approval require any specific or general features to be
incorporated in the earthwork or which restrict or limit the earthwork grading
in any way, other than in compliance with the grading provisions as prescribed
in the California Building Code.
   (t)   DEVELOPMENT. The use to which land shall be put, the buildings to be
constructed on it, and all alteration of the land and construction incident
thereto. This shall include but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations
or storage of equipment or materials.
   (u)   DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION. Any application, review and/or process acted
upon by the Department. See LAND USE APPLICATION.
   (v)   DEVELOPMENT CODE. A set of land use regulations adopted by San
Bernardino County in conformance with the General Plan. All actions and
undertakings necessary for project planning, land acquisition, demolition or
construction of a project must conform with the County Code before approval.
The Development Code is Title 8 of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (w)   DEVELOPMENT MORATORIUM. A DEVELOPMENT MORATORIUM shall include a water
or sewer moratorium, as well as other actions of public agencies that regulate
land use, development, or the provision of services to the land, other than the
authority of the County to approve or conditionally approve the Tentative Map,
which prevents, prohibits, or delays the approval of a Final or Parcel Map. A
DEVELOPMENT MORATORIUM is also deemed to exist for any period of time during
which a condition imposed by the County could not be satisfied because the
condition was one which, by its nature, necessitated action by the County, and
the County either did not take the necessary action or by its own action or
inaction was prevented or delayed in taking the necessary action before
expiration of the Tentative Map.
   (x)   DEVELOPMENT PERIMETER. A line that indicates the outer perimeter of
structural development or proposed structural development of one structure or a
group of structures within a development project. For the purposes of this
Section, structures within 100 hundred feet of another structure shall be
considered as part of the same group of structures. The DEVELOPMENT PERIMETER
may be derived from one of the following methods:
      (1)   A line formed by interlinking the exterior walls or exterior
building envelope boundaries of a series of proposed or existing structures
that form the perimeter of a development project;
      (2)   Where a development project indicates the location of buildings or
building envelopes on a site plan, a composite development plan or a final
development plan, the DEVELOPMENT PERIMETER may be delineated by the outer
limit of the location of each building. The DEVELOPMENT PERIMETER between the
planned location of each building shall be delineated by the shortest line
between the outer faces of adjacent buildings or building envelopes or;
      (3)   The DEVELOPMENT PERIMETER may be derived through alternate means
provided they meet or exceed the limitations described in Subdivisions (1) and
(2) above.
   (y)   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the Building Official, Fire
Marshall, or Chief of the Environmental Health Services Division for
construction or land disturbance, including, but not limited to, Building
Permits, Mobile Home Setdown Permits and Grading Permits.
   (z)   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A detailed, comprehensive plan of development for a
Special Development. The development plan applies limits and parameters for
development derived from a development suitability analysis to a specific
development scheme. DEVELOPMENT PLANS shall include a detailed description of
the proposed development and its effects including, but not limited to, a
written text, diagrams or maps describing the program for development and the
functional arrangement of structures and uses, the effect of such arrangement
upon the physical characteristics of the site, available public services, the
capacity of the existing circulation system and the existing and planned land
use of adjacent properties. It includes a dimensioned site plan showing the
location of all structures and lots in sufficient detail to permit recordation
and the preparation of construction drawings.
   (aa)   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Any one or a series of related development
applications that constitute a single development proposal.
   (bb)   DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTIONS. Include, but are not limited to, any of the
following restrictions on property:
      (1)   Open space easements.
      (2)   Transfer of development rights.
      (3)   Conveyance of development rights to the County.
      (4)   Land Use Zoning District restrictions on development.
   (cc)   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee consisting of
representatives from various public agencies whose functions are to review and
make recommendations on development proposals.
   (dd)   DEVELOPMENT SUITABILITY ANALYSIS. A comprehensive examination of the
opportunities and constraints affecting development of a given site.
   (ee)   DEVIATIONS. Authorized variances from required distances, setbacks,
areas or physical improvements.
   (ff)   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. See SIGN.
   (gg)   DIRECTOR. The Director of Land Use Services or authorized designee.
   (hh)   DIRECTOR OF AIRPORTS. The Director of the County Airports Department
or an authorized designee.
   (ii)   DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of the County
Department of Public Works or an authorized designee.
   (jj)   DIRECTOR OF SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The Director of the Special Districts
Department or an authorized designee.
   (kk)   DISABLED OR HANDICAPPED PERSON. An individual who has a physical or
mental impairment as defined by Titles II and III of the Americans with
Disabilities Act and applicable state law.
   (ll)   DISMANTLERS. See MOTOR VEHICLE DISMANTLING FACILITY.
   (mm)   DISPLAY SIGN. See SIGN.
   (nn)   DISTRIBUTION. See WHOLESALING AND DISTRIBUTION.
   (oo)   DRAINAGE COURSE. A natural or man-made water course that could convey
runoff either year around or intermittently.
   (pp)   DRAINAGE PLAN, LOCAL AREA. A drainage plan adopted for a particular
drainage area. These plans shall include a map of the area showing its
boundaries, the location of existing and future drainage facilities and an
accompanying text that contains an estimate of the total costs of constructing
the local drainage facilities.
   (qq)   DRIPLINE. A line that may be drawn on the ground around a tree
directly under its outermost branch tips which is projected vertically down to
the ground and which identifies that area where rainwater tends to drop from
the tree.
   (rr)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY. (See Land Use Tables.) A building or
portion thereof used and/or designed as two or more independent dwelling units.
   (ss)   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. (See Land Use Tables.) A detached building
designed and/or used as one dwelling unit.
   (tt)   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED. (See Land Use Tables.) A single
family dwelling that is attached to not more than one other single family
dwelling.
   (uu)   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof, including a
manufactured home or portion thereof, that contains living facilities,
including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation as required
by the California Building Code, for not more than one family, including
domestic employees of the family.
   (vv)   DWELLING USE IN CONJUNCTION WITH COMMERCIAL USE. One or more dwelling
units developed along with one or commercial uses in a mixed-use project.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4065,
passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4163, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4169, passed - -2012;
Am. Ord. 4189, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4341, passed - -2018; Am. Ord. 4400,
passed - -2021)
§ 810.01.070 Definitions, E.
   (a)   EARTH MATERIAL. Rock, natural soil or combination thereof.
   (b)   EASEMENT. A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner
to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another entity,
including:
      (1)   ROAD EASEMENT. Any property that is reserved for or in general use
for road purposes to provide access for the public to otherwise inaccessible
parcels of land, provided that the easements are not included in the definition
herein of STREET.
      (2)   ROAD EASEMENT, PRIVATE. Any property that is reserved for road
purposes to provide access for property owners to their private property,
provided that the easements are not included in the definition of STREET
herein.
   (c)   EDUCATIONAL ANIMAL PROJECT.  An animal husbandry project under the
supervision of an educationally oriented youth program or organization
connected to a school or non-profit organization (e.g., 4-H, Future Farmers of
America, etc.)
   (d)   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS. See SCHOOLS.
   (e)   EFFICIENCY KITCHEN. An area that includes (1) a cooking facility with
appliances and (2) a food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of
reasonable size in relation to the size of unit.
   (f)   ELECTRICAL POWER GENERATION. (See Land Use Tables.) A facility that
generates and distributes electrical energy for sale. The electricity may be
generated from oil, gas, coal or fuels or from “alternate” sources including
water, wind, the sun, bio gas, municipal or agricultural wastes. This includes
COGENERATION, which means the sequential use of energy for the production of
electrical and useful thermal energy. The sequence can be thermal use followed
by electric power production or the reverse. See also WIND ENERGY SYSTEM.
   (g)   EMERGENCY ACCESS ROUTE. See ROAD SYSTEM.
   (h)   EMERGENCY SHELTER.  (See Land Use Tables.) Housing with minimal
supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six
months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied
emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.
   (i)   ENDANGERED ANIMALS. See ANIMALS.
   (j)   ENDANGERED SPECIES. See RARE OR ENDANGERED SPECIES.
   (k)   ENFORCEMENT. For the purposes of this Code, certain words relative to
enforcement are defined as follows:
      (1)    ABATEMENT COSTS. Any and all costs or expenses reasonably related
to the abatement or removal of conditions which violate any provision of this
Code or any permit or any condition of land use approval granted pursuant
thereto or the correction of such violation, and shall include, but not be
limited to, enforcement, investigation, collection, and administrative costs;
and attorney’s fees.
      (2)   ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS. All costs incurred by or on behalf of the
County from the first discovery of the violation of the this Development Code
or any permit or condition of land use approval granted pursuant thereto
through the appeal process and until compliance is achieved, including but not
limited to, staff time in investigating the violation, inspecting the property
where the violation occurred, preparing investigation reports, sending notices,
preparing for and attending any appeal hearing, telephone contacts, and
correspondence.
      (3)   CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY OF SAN BERNARDINO and SAN
BERNARDINO COUNTY CODE and THIS CODE. The San Bernardino County Development
Code (Title 8 of the San Bernardino County Code), including all pertinent
provisions of State codes as adopted therein, enacted by the Board of
Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino acting pursuant to authority
granted under the County Charter, Government Code §§ 25126, 25127, and 25128;
or other applicable law.
      (4)   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any County employee or agent of the County
with the authority to enforce any provision of the Development Code,
specifically:
         (A)   The Deputy Director, each Code Enforcement Supervisor, and each
Code Enforcement Officer or other designated employee of the Code Enforcement
Division of the Land Use Services Department;
         (B)   The Fire Chief/Fire Warden, each Deputy Chief, each Assistant
Chief, each Division Chief, the Fire Marshal, Assistant Fire Marshal, each Fire
Prevention Supervisor, and each Fire Prevention Officer or other designated
employees of the County Fire Department;
         (C)   The Director and each Inspector or other designated employees of
the Environmental Health Services Division of the Department of Public Health;
         (D)   The Program Manager and each Animal Control Officer or other
designated employees of the Animal Care and Control Program of the
Environmental Health Division of the Department of Public Health;
         (E)   The Sheriff-Coroner and each Deputy Sheriff (all ranks) or other
designated employee of the Department of the Sheriff-Coroner;
         (F)   Any other Director and other designated employee of a County
department as designated by the County Administrative Officer.
      (5)   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, association, club, organization,
corporation, partnership, business trust, company or other entity, which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties.
      (6)   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. For the purpose of this Chapter shall mean each
person committing or allowing the violation or causing a condition on a parcel
of real property located within the unincorporated area of the County of San
Bernardino to violate any provision of this Development Code or any permit or
any condition of land use approval granted pursuant thereto; each person who
has an ownership interest in that property; and each person who, although not
an owner, nevertheless has a legal right or legal obligation to exercise
possession and control over that property. In the event the person who commits
the violation or causes the violating condition is a minor, then the minor’s
parents or legal guardian shall be deemed the responsible party for that
violation. In the event the violation or violating condition is most reasonably
attributable to a business and not to an employee, then that business, to the
extent it is a legal entity such that it can sue and be sued in its own name,
and each person who is an owner of that business shall be deemed responsible
parties.
   (l)   ENHANCED SPECIALIZED MOBILE RADIO SERVICE. See WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY.
   (m)   ENTERTAINMENT ASSEMBLY. See SPORTS OR ENTERTAINMENT ASSEMBLY.
   (n)   ENTERTAINMENT SERVICES. See RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT SERVICES.
   (o)   ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS. Environmental factors that limit or inhibit
the potential for land development, including, but not limited to, flood
hazards, seismic hazards, air quality and water supply.
   (p)   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT. Projected long-term or short-term effects
(adverse or beneficial) that a development project or plan may have on the
natural and built environment if the project is carried out.
   (q)   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT (EIR). An environmental impact report
(EIR) is the public document used by a governmental agency to analyze the
significant environmental effects of a proposed project, to identify
alternatives, and to disclose possible ways to reduce or avoid possible
environmental damage.
   (r)   ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW GUIDELINES. Written procedures adopted by the
Board of Supervisors for the purpose of implementing the requirements of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
   (s)   EQUESTRIAN FACILITY. (See Land Use Tables.) A commercial facility for
horses, donkeys, and/or mules. Examples include horse ranches, boarding
stables, riding schools and academies, horse exhibition facilities (for shows
or other competitive events), and barns, stables, corrals and paddocks
accessory and incidental to these uses. Does not include the simple pasturing
of horses, donkeys, and/or mules, which is instead included in ANIMAL KEEPING.
Does not include rodeo arenas, which are under RURAL SPORTS AND RECREATION.
   (t)   EQUIPMENT RENTAL. A service establishment that may offer a wide
variety of household and business equipment, furniture, and materials for
rental. Does not include construction equipment rental, which is separately
defined.
   (u)   EROSION. The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the
movement of wind or water or machine.
   (v)   EROSION, ACCELERATED. Erosion caused by a human induced alteration of
the vegetation, land surface, topography or runoff pattern. Evidence of
accelerated erosion is often indicated by exposed soils, gullies, rills,
sediment deposits or slope failures caused by human activities.
   (w)   EROSION HAZARD. The susceptibility of a site to erode based on
condition of slope, rock type, soil and other site factors. Hazard may be
determined based on a site-specific investigation and the soil disturbance may
be caused by wind, water or machine.
   (x)   ESTABLISHED LANDSCAPE. The Point at which plant material within the
landscaped areas have established a significant root growth. A typical
timeframe for plant material establishment ranges between one to two years of
growth.
   (y)   ESTIMATED ANNUAL WATER USE (EAWU). The estimated total water use per
year for a landscape, as calculated with the formula found in County Code §
83.10.050(a)(4)(B).
   (z)   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any warm-blooded or cold-blooded animal of the
biological kingdom Animalia generally considered as wild, exotic, dangerous,
venomous or not normally domesticated and as determined by County veterinarian.
Includes genetically engineered animals.
   (aa)   EXPANSIVE SOILS. See SOIL.
   (bb)   EXPLORATION or PROSPECTING. The search for minerals by geological,
geophysical, geochemical, or other techniques. These include but are not
limited to, sampling, assaying, drilling, or any surface or underground works
needed to determine the type, extent, or quantity of mineral present.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4136,
passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4400, passed - -2021)
§ 810.01.080 Definitions, F.
   (a)   FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS
I AND II.
   (b)   FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING (MODULAR UNIT). A residential building, dwelling
unit, or an individual dwelling room or combination of rooms thereof, or
building component, assembly, or system manufactured in such a manner that all
concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot be inspected before
installation at the building site without disassembly, damage, or destruction
of the part, including units designed for use as a part of an institution for
resident or patient care, that is either wholly manufactured or is in
substantial part manufactured at an offsite location to be wholly or partially
assembled onsite in accordance with building standards published in the
Building Standards Code and other regulations adopted by the commission
pursuant to § 19990. Factory-built housing does not include a mobile home, as
defined in § 18008, a recreational vehicle, as defined in § 18010.5, or a
commercial modular, as defined in § 18012.5 of the Health and Safety Code
(CHSC).
   (c)   FAIR HOUSING LAWS. The “Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988” (42
U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required by 42
U.S.C. § 3604(f)(3)(B), and the “California Fair Employment and Housing Act”
(California Government Code § 12900 et seq.), including reasonable
accommodation required specifically by California Government Code §§ 12927(c)
(1) and 12955(l), as any of these statutory provisions now exist or may be
amended from time to time.
   (d)   FAMILY. A person or persons living together as a single housekeeping
unit in a dwelling unit.
   (e)   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. See DAY CARE, CHILD.
   (f)   FARM. See RANCH/FARM.
   (g)   FARM VISIT. The activity of visiting a farm for short periods of time
for the purpose of participating in or enjoying farm activities and/or other
attractions offered.
   (h)   FEE SCHEDULE. A schedule of fees established by the Board of
Supervisors in compliance with Division 6 (County Fees) or Title 1 (Government
and Administration) of the San Bernardino County Code.
   (i)   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (j)   FESTIVAL, OUTDOOR. See OUTDOOR FESTIVAL.
   (k)   FINAL MAP. See the Government Code, Title 7, Division 2 definition.
   (l)   FINDINGS. A set of conclusions that are required before specified
permits, land use applications, deviations, ordinance changes or other
entitlements may be granted.
   (m)   FIRE AUTHORITY. The San Bernardino County Fire Marshal, State Forest
Ranger in charge of the California Department of Forestry, U.S. Forest
Supervisor, or if within the jurisdiction of a Fire Protection District, the
Board of Directors of the district.
   (n)   FIRE AUTHORITY, LOCAL. The fire department or agency serving a subject
area as specified by County Code §
23.0105(h).
   (o)   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The San Bernardino County Fire Department.
   (p)   FIRE FLOW. The required rate of flow times duration for fire
protection varies according to density and type of development.
   (q)   FIRE RESISTIVE or FIRE RESISTIVE CONSTRUCTION. Construction to resist
the spread of fire, details of which may be specified in the Building Code of
the jurisdiction.
   (r)   FIRE RESISTIVE RATING. The time that the material or construction will
withstand the standard fire exposure as determined by a fire test made in
conformity with the standard methods of fire tests of buildings, construction
and materials in the U.B.C. Standards.
   (s)   FIRE SAFETY AREAS. See
Chapter 82.15 (Fire Safety Overlay District).
   (t)   FIREWOOD CONTRACTOR. (See Land Use Tables.) A business that cuts,
sells, stores and/or delivers firewood.
   (u)   FIRST FLOOR. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (v)   FITNESS/HEALTH FACILITY. A fitness center, gymnasium, health and
athletic club, which may include any of the following: swimming pool, sauna,
spa or hot tub facilities; indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, archery and
shooting ranges and other indoor sports activities. Does not include adult
entertainment businesses.
   (w)   FIXTURE. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (x)   FIXED WIRELESS. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY.
   (y)   FLAG LOT. See LOT.
   (z)   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid having a flashpoint below 100°F and
having a vapor pressure not exceeding 40 pounds per square inch (absolute) at
100°F. Class I liquids shall include those having flash points below 100°F and
may be subdivided as follows:
      (1)   Shall include those having flash points below 73°F and having a
boiling point below 100°F.
      (2)   Shall include those having flash points below 73°F and having a
boiling point at or above 100°F.
      (3)   Shall include those having flashpoints at or above 73°F and below
100°F.
    (aa)   FLAMMABLE SOLID. A solid substance, other than one classified as an
explosive, that is liable to cause fires through friction, through absorption
of moisture, through spontaneous chemical changes or as a result of retained
heat from manufacturing or processing.
   (bb)   FLOOD. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (cc)   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODING MAP. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (dd)   FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT. The San Bernardino County Flood Control
District.
   (ee)   FLOOD CONTROL ENGINEER. The Engineer of the San Bernardino County
Flood Control District appointed by the Board of Supervisors, or an authorized
designee.
   (ff)   (Repealed).
   (gg)   FLOOD HAZARD. A substantial possibility of damage to life or property
by overflow water, ponded water, or other water on the surface of the land, or
by debris, or silt carried in the water. The following flood related terms are
defined as follows:
      (1)   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, an
accessory structure is one that is either solely for the parking of no more
than two cars or a small, low cost shed for limited storage.
      (2)   ADDITION. For floodplain management purposes, an addition is an
improvement that increases the square footage of a structure. Commonly, this
includes the structural attachment of a bedroom, den, recreational room, garage
or other type of addition to an existing structure.
      (3)   ALLUVIAL FAN. A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or
fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been
eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on
the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows,
debris flows, erosion sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
      (4)   APEX. The point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which
the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur. It is the highest elevation on an alluvial
fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major steam
that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.
      (5)   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. An area designated AO or AH Zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three
feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. The flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
      (6)   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
      (7)   BASE FLOOD. The flood that has a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the 100 YEAR FLOOD).
      (8)   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30, that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
      (9)   CERTIFY. To authenticate or vouch for in writing, and signed by the
certifying party, that the submitted data is true, as represented, or that the
requirements of the regulations have been satisfied.
      (10)   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth,
fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a
floodplain which may impeded or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
      (11)   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of sheets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October
17, 1978.
      (12)   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
      (13)   FIRST FLOOR. The lowest floor in a structure usable for living
purposes, including the basement, which may include working, sleeping, eating,
cooking, recreation or a combination thereof.
      (14)   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); any temporary rise in stream flow or water
surface level that results in significant adverse effects in the floodplain.
Adverse effects of floods may include damages from overflow of land areas,
effects of temporary backwater or sewers and local drainage channels, bank
erosion or channel shifts, unsanitary conditions or other unfavorable
conditions resulting from deposition of materials in stream channels during
flood recessions, rise of ground water coincident with increased stream flow
and interruption of traffic at bridge crossings.
      (15)   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. The following flood hazard zones are shown on the
FIRM:
         (A)   ZONE A. Areas that are subject to inundation by the one percent
annual chance flood event (100-year flood). Because detailed hydraulic analyses
have not been performed, no area flood elevation or depths are shown. Mandatory
flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
         (B)   ZONE AE. Areas that are subject to inundation by the one percent
annual chance flood event (100-year flood) determined by detailed methods. Area
flood elevations are shown within these zones. Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements apply.
         (C)   ZONE AH. Areas that are subject to inundation by one percent
annual chance shallow flooding (100-year flood) (usually areas of ponding)
where average depths are between one and three feet. Area flood elevations
derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone. Mandatory
flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
         (D)   ZONE AO. Areas that are subject to inundation by one percent
annual chance shallow flooding (100-year flood) (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain) where average depths are between one and three feet. Average flood
depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
         (E)   ZONE A1-30. Areas that are subject to inundation by the one
percent annual chance flood event (100-year flood), but which will ultimately
be protected upon completion of an under- construction federal flood protection
system. These are areas of special flood hazard where enough progress has been
made on the construction of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and
levees, to
consider it complete for insurance rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used
when the flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress
toward completion. No area flood elevations or depths are shown. Mandatory
flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
         (F)   ZONE A99. Areas that are subject to inundation by the one
percent annual chance flood event (100-year flood), but which will ultimately
be protected upon completion of an under-construction federal flood protection
system. These are areas of special flood hazard where enough progress has been
made on the construction of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and
levees, to consider it complete for insurance rating purposes. ZONE A99 may
only be used when the flood protection system has reached specified statutory
progress toward completion. No area flood elevations or depths are shown.
Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
         (G)   ZONE D. Unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined,
but flooding is possible. No mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements
apply, but coverage is available in participating communities.
         (H)   ZONE X. Areas that are identified in the community FIS as areas
of moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Local storm water
drainage systems are not normally considered in the community’s FIS. The
failure of a local drainage system creates areas of high flood risk within
these rate zones. Flood insurance is available in participating communities but
is not required by regulation in these zones.
      (16)   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
      (17)   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA. The relatively flat area or
lowlands adjoining the channel of a stream or watercourse and subject to
overflow by flood waters.
      (18)   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
      (19)   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The Director of Public Works or his/her
authorized designee.
      (20)   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This ordinance and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other
application of police power which control development in flood- prone areas.
This term describes Federal, State or local regulations in any combination
thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.
      (21)   FLOODPLAIN REVIEW AREAS. See
Chapter 82.14 (Floodplain Safety Overlay District).
      (22)   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet
flood- proofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
      (23)   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other water course and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Also referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
      (24)   FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the
“regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.
      (25)   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION.  Any exception granted must not cause
fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the
County will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to
government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100
hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the area
flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage
from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole
are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those
increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the
property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be
insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
      (26)   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use that cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
      (27)   HARDSHIP. The exceptional hardship that would result from a
failure to grant a requested variance. The County requires that the variance be
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of
one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship.
All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a
variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property
owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally
intended.
      (28)   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface before construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
      (29)   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
         (A)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (C)   Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs that have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
         (D)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
            (I)   By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
            (II)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
      (30)   LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment,
designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to
contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
      (31)   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee,
or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.
      (32)   LOWEST FLOOR. For floodplain management purposes the LOWEST FLOOR
of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-
resistant enclosure below the lowest floor, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that the enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
      (33)   MANUFACTURED HOME. For floodplain management purposes, a
structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the
term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
      (34)   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. For floodplain management
purposes, means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.
      (35)   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which area flood elevations
shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
      (36)   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures
for which “the start of construction” commenced on or after October 17, 1978,
including any subsequent improvements to the structures.
      (37)   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after October
17, 1978.
      (38)   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall,
wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
      (39)   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD. See BASE FLOOD.
      (40)   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community’s floodplain
management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective
implementation of those floodplain management regulations.
      (41)   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. That the granting of an exception must
not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully
obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable
lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
      (42)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. For floodplain management purposes, a
vehicle that is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when
measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light-duty truck, and designed primarily not for use
as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use when it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.
      (43)   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
      (44)   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development
into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing State
or Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other
development.
      (45)   REHABILITATION. An improvement made to an existing structure which
does not affect the external dimensions of the structure.
      (46)   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
      (47)   SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT. A district
established by act of the State Legislature, empowered to protect the
watercourses of the District and governed by the Board of Supervisors of the
County of San Bernardino acting as ex officio Governing Board of the District.
      (48)   SELECTED FLOOD. A flood of a recurrence interval determined by the
Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors after a recommendation of the
Engineer of the San Bernardino County Flood Control District.
      (49)   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
      (50)   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area in the floodplain
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is
shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, AH or A99.
      (51)   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or  other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
      (52)   STANDARD PROJECT FLOOD. A flood that would result from a storm
that is considered reasonably characteristic of the region in which the
drainage area is located, giving consideration to the runoff characteristics of
the drainage area and excluding rare combinations of meteorologic and
hydrologic conditions. Such a flood provides a reasonable upper limit to be
considered in designing flood control improvements and floodplain limits.
      (53)   STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building that ir principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid
storage tank or a manufactured home.
      (54)   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
      (55)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of
construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
         (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violation of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specification that
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and that are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (B)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation a historic
structure.
      (56)   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this ordinance. A structure or other development without
the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such
time as that documentation is provided.
      (57)   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
   (hh)   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (ii)   FLOODPLAIN. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (jj)   FLOODPLAIN REVIEW AREAS. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (kk)   FLOODWAY. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (ll)   FLOW RATE. The rate in which the water flows through the pipes,
valves, and emission devices of an irrigation system measured in gallons per
minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.
   (mm)   FLOW SENSOR. A device within the irrigation system that detects
irregular flows indicating leaks, breaks, or another problem.
   (nn)   FOOD AND RELATED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS
I AND II.
   (oo)   FREESTANDING LIGHTING. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (pp)   FREESTANDING SIGN. See SIGN.
   (qq)   FREEWAY. Any dedicated or deeded public right-of-way to which the
owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their
abutting lands. In addition, freeway shall include those rights-of-way
designated by official action as freeways by the California State Highway
Commission or the County Board of Supervisors. See ROAD SYSTEM.
   (rr)   FREIGHT CONTAINER. Container primarily used to transport goods on
trucks, railroad cars, ships, aircraft or other forms of transportation.
   (ss)   FRONT LOT LINE. See LOT.
   (tt)   FRONT WALL. The nearest wall of a building or other structure to the
street upon which the building faces, but excluding cornices, canopies, eaves
or any other architectural embellishments that may extend beyond the front
wall, not to exceed a distance of four feet.
   (uu)   FRONT YARD. See YARD.
   (vv)   FRONTAGE, LOT. See LOT.
   (ww)   FRONTAGE ROAD. A minor street that is parallel to, and adjacent to,
an arterial street or freeway, and that provides access to abutting properties
and protection from through and fast traffic.
   (xx)   FUEL BREAK. Areas also known as greenbelts that separate communities
or clusters of structures from native vegetation. Within the fuel break
boundaries the vegetation is thinned out, pruned, modified or landscaped to
effectively reduce the volume and flammability of fuel, thereby substantially
reducing or preventing the rate of spread and intensity of wildland fires.
   (yy)   FUEL DEALER. A retail trade establishment that sells fuel oil,
butane, propane and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), bottled or in bulk, to
consumers.
   (zz)   FUEL MODIFIED AREA. An area where living and dead vegetation is
managed regularly, usually by trimming, removal or substitution of natural
vegetation, in order to reduce fire hazard, by use of mechanical, chemical and
biological means and/or prescribed burning.
   (aaa)   FULLY-SHIELDED FIXTURE. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (bbb)   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (ccc)   FURNITURE AND FIXTURE MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS I.
   (ddd)   FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY. Future right-of-way of streets shown in the
Circulation Element of the General Plan shall be based upon the adopted County
Road Standards assuming an equal dedication of right-of-way on both sides of
the existing centerline, or shall otherwise be determined as shown on any
adopted specific plan.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4136, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4163,
passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4169, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4258, passed - -2014;
Am. Ord. 4280, - -2015; Am. Ord. 4304, passed - -2016; Am. Ord. 4469, passed -
-2024)
§ 810.01.090 Definitions, G.
   (a)   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the
main building designed and/or used for the shelter or storage of motor vehicles
belonging to the occupants of the main building.
   (b)   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building, other than a private or storage garage,
used for the storage, care or repair of motor vehicles and where any vehicles
are equipped for operation or kept for hire or sale.
   (c)   GARAGE, STORAGE. Any building, other than a public or private garage,
used exclusively for the storage of motor vehicles.
   (d)   GENERAL PLAN. The San Bernardino County General Plan, including all
elements, adopted in compliance with Government Code, Title 7, Division 1,
Chapter 3.
   (e)   GENERAL RETAIL. (See Land Use Tables.) Stores and shops selling many
lines of merchandise. Examples of these stores and lines of merchandise
include:
antique      florists and houseplant stores (indoor sales only (outdoor sales are
stores       “Building and Landscape Materials Sales”)
art
galleries,   furniture, furnishings, appliances
retail
art
supplies,
including    hobby materials
framing
services
auto parts
sales with
no           jewelry
installation
services
bicycles     luggage and leather goods
books,
magazines,   musical instruments (small), parts and accessories (large instruments
and          are under “Furniture, Furnishings, and Appliance Store”)
newspapers
cameras and
photographic orthopedic supplies
supplies
clothing,
shoes, and   small wares
accessories
collectibles
(cards,
coins,       specialty shops
comics,
stamps,
etc.)
consumer     sporting goods and equipment
electronics
department   stationery
stores
drug stores
and          toys and games
pharmacies
dry goods    variety stores
fabrics and
sewing       videos, DVDs, records, CDs, including rental stores
supplies
farm supply
and feed
stores
 
      Does not include adult-oriented businesses or second hand stores, which
are separately defined.
   (f)   GLARE. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (g)   GLASS PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS I AND II.
   (h)   GOALS. General statements that describe a desired end state toward
which effort should be directed.
   (i)   GOLF COURSE. Golf courses, and accessory facilities and uses
including: clubhouses with bar and restaurant, locker and shower facilities;
driving ranges; “pro shops” for on-site sales of golfing equipment; and golf
cart storage and sales facilities.
   (j)   GOVERNMENT CODE. The State of California Government Code.
   (k)   GOVERNMENT OFFICE. See OFFICE.
   (l)   GRADING. Excavating, filling, leveling or smoothing, or combination
thereof, for which a grading permit is required by the California Building
Code. MAJOR GRADING is grading in excess of 100 cubic yards, whereas MINOR
GRADING is 100 cubic yards or less.
   (m)   GRADING PROVISIONS. One or more standards in the San Bernardino County
Grading Ordinance.
   (n)   GROCERIES, SPECIALTY FOODS. (See Land Use Tables.) A retail business
where the majority of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food
products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the store. Includes
retail bakeries, where any on-site baking is only for on-site sales.
   (o)   GROUND SHAKING LEVELS. The physical movement of the land surface due
to earthquakes, the extent of which is dependent upon the magnitude of the
tremor, the subsurface material of the area, and the proximity to the epicenter
of the quake. GROUND SHAKING LEVELS may be measured on the Modified Mercali
Intensity Scale.
   (p)   GROUP RESIDENTIAL. (See Land Use Tables.) Shared living quarters,
occupied by two or more persons not living together as a single housekeeping
unit (see SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT ). Includes, without limitation, boarding or
rooming houses (see BOARDING HOUSE ), dormitories, fraternities, sororities and
private residential clubs. Excludes residential care facilities (see
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY ).
   (q)   GROWTH MONITORING. A process that follows the amount and rate of
population growth within a city or other specified area. It normally involves
some estimation of population growth for small areas through the analysis of
development applications (zone changes, subdivisions, etc.) from submittal,
through review, to final approval and issuance of building permits.
   (r)   GUEST HOUSE. (See Land Use Tables.) Residential occupancy of a living
unit, with bathroom plumbing only, separated from the primary dwelling by at
least ten feet, and located on the same parcel as the primary dwelling on a
contiguous parcel in the same ownership. This unit is for use by the occupants
or temporary guests of the occupants of the premises and is not rented or
otherwise used as a separate dwelling, except when approved as a Dependent
Unit.
   (s)   GUEST ROOM. A room that is designed for or used by one or more guests
for sleeping purposes, but in which no provision is made for cooking.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4230,
passed - -2014)
§ 810.01.100 Definitions, H.
   (a)   HABITABLE SPACE (ROOM). Space in a structure for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or
utility space, and similar areas, are not considered habitable space.
   (b)   HALF STORY. See STORY, HALF.
   (c)   HARDSCAPE. Landscaping elements, other than plant materials,
consisting of components such as decorative rock, boulders, masonry work,
woodwork, stone walls, decorative concrete or brick patios, tile paths, wooden
decks and wooden arbors. HARDSCAPE does not include paving for driveways or
parking of vehicles.
   (d)   HAUL ROAD. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (e)   HAZARDOUS AREA. An area subject to or containing elements that pose a
potential threat to life or property. Flood plains, earthquake fault zones,
nuclear or chemical waste disposal sites, or areas of inherently unsafe soil
conditions are examples.
   (f)   HAZARDOUS EXCAVATION, MINING. An unattended pit, shaft, portal or
other surface opening that, if not secured by covering, fencing, or have access
restricted by gates, doors, or other reasonable means, presents a threat to the
physical safety of the public.
   (g)   HAZARDOUS FIRE AREA. Any land that is covered with grass, grain,
brush, or forest, whether privately or publicly owned, that is so situated or
is in such an inaccessible location that a fire originating upon the land would
present an abnormally difficult job of suppression or would result in great and
unusual damage through fire or resulting erosion.
   (h)   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. A material or waste or combination of materials
and wastes, that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical,
or infectious characteristics may either:
      (1)   Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality,
serious irreversible illness or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
   (i)   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Means either of the following:
      (1)   A waste, or combination of wastes, that because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either:
         (A)   Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible, illness.
         (B)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
      (2)   A waste that meets any of the criteria for the identification of a
hazardous waste adopted by the State Department of Health Services in
compliance with Health and Safety Code § 25141.
      (3)   Includes, but is not limited to, RCRA (Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act) hazardous waste.
      (4)   Unless expressly provided otherwise, the term HAZARDOUS WASTE shall
be understood to also include extremely hazardous waste and acutely hazardous
waste.
   (j)   HAZARDOUS WASTE OPERATION OR FACILITY. (See Land Use Tables.) A
hazardous waste operation or facility includes the following.
      (1)   SPECIFIED HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES. Off-site facilities that
accept wastes from more than one generator. A facility must have carefully
engineered and designed means for acceptance, storage, and treatment of the
wastes as well as trained personnel operating the site.
      (2)   TRANSFER AND STORAGE FACILITIES. Facilities that collect small
quantities of hazardous waste and store them until it is economical to transfer
the wastes to a treatment or disposal site.
      (3)   TREATMENT FACILITIES. Facilities that alter the chemical form,
toxicity, or volume of a waste. They do this generally through the use of one
of the following processes:
         (A)   Destruction or detoxification to transform a hazardous waste
into a material safe for disposal;
         (B)   Concentration or volume reduction to facilitate the safe
handling and disposal of hazardous components; and
         (C)   Immobilization to isolate the hazardous components from the
environment.
      (4)   TRANSPORTABLE TREATMENT UNITS (TTUS). Temporary mobile facilities
that treat hazardous waste at the site of generation.
      (5)   INCINERATION FACILITIES. Facilities that burn some wastes such as
organic liquids and solids that cannot be reclaimed economically or are
technically difficult to treat. Incinerators destroy the waste, leaving a small
hazardous waste residue. They can be developed as on-site or off-site
facilities and are often used in hospitals to burn infectious wastes.
      (6)   SOLIDIFICATION and STABILIZATION. The two most common methods of
immobilizing hazardous wastes, and involve changing a liquid to a solid or
altering the characteristics of a solid to immobilize the contaminants. A
variety of materials are used including cement, lime, and polymeric materials.
This method is used for wastes that cannot be recycled, treated or destroyed.
Often, wastes undergo several treatment methods; solidification or
stabilization is usually the last method applied in a treatment train.
      (7)   RECYCLING FACILITIES. Facilities that process hazardous wastes so
that they may be reclaimed, used or reused. See RECYCLING FACILITY.
      (8)   RESIDUALS REPOSITORY. A hazardous waste facility or part of a
facility that is permitted to accept for land disposal only non-liquid, treated
hazardous waste (as defined in Health and Safety Code § 25179.3(l)). Non-liquid
means non-liquid and containing less than 50 moisture by weight as determined
in compliance with the Code of Regulations § 67425.
      (9)   LAND DISPOSAL.
         (A)   Disposal of hazardous wastes on or into the land, including, but
not limited to, landfill, surface impoundment, waste piles, deep-well
injection, land spreading, and co-burial with municipal garbage.
         (B)   Treatment of hazardous wastes on or in the land, such as
neutralization and evaporation ponds and land farming, where the treatment
residues are hazardous wastes and are not removed for subsequent processing or
disposal within one year.
         (C)   Storage of hazardous wastes on or in the land, such as waste
piles and surface impoundments, other than neutralization and evaporation
ponds, for longer than one year.
   (k)   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN (HWMP). The primary planning document
for the management of hazardous waste in San Bernardino County prepared in
compliance with Health and Safety Code §§ 25135 et seq. The HWMP was adopted by
the Board of Supervisors and approved by the California Department of Health
Services in February 1990.
   (l)   HEATING OPPORTUNITIES, PASSIVE OR NATURAL. The ability to orient or
site any structure, including a dwelling on its lot in order to take optimum
advantage of natural solar heating capabilities. Structures should wherever
possible orient their longest/largest axis from east to west and include
special treatment of the south facing wall.
   (m)   HEAVY PROCESSING FACILITY. See RECYCLING FACILITY.
   (n)   HEIGHT. See §
83.02.040 (Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions).
   (o)   HIERARCHY OF SPACE. Defined areas for public space (e.g., streets),
community space (e.g., common open space, play areas, communal laundry,
community center, etc.), and private space (e.g., individual units and private
open space).
   (p)   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (q)   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (r)   HISTORICAL LANDMARK AND STRUCTURE. (See Land Use Tables.) An
individual structure or group of structures on a single lot, a site, an area, a
district, or combination thereof, having a special historical, architectural,
cultural, or aesthetic value.
   (s)   HOLIDAY LIGHTING. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (t)   HOG RANCH. Any premises used for the raising or keeping of ten or more
weaned animals.
   (u)   HOME OCCUPATION. (See Land Use Tables.) Any occupation customarily
conducted entirely within a dwelling by its inhabitants, the purpose being
incidental to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes. These uses are
regulated in
Chapter 84.12 (Home Occupations).
   (v)   Reserved.
   (w)   HOST HOME.  See BED AND BREAKFAST INN.
   (x)   HOSPITAL. See MEDICAL SERVICES, HOSPITAL.
   (y)   HOTEL. (See Land Use Tables.) An establishment that provides guest
rooms or suites for a fee. Access to units is primarily from interior lobbies,
courts, or halls. Related accessory uses may include conference and meeting
rooms, restaurants, bars, and recreational facilities. Guest rooms may or may
not contain kitchen facilities for food preparation (i.e., refrigerators,
sinks, stoves, and ovens). Hotels with kitchen facilities are commonly known as
extended stay hotels. A hotel operates subject to taxation under Revenue and
Taxation Code § 7280. Note: A residential care facility is not a HOTEL , or
vice versa.
   (z)   Reserved.
   (aa)   HOUSING, CARETAKER. See CARETAKER HOUSING.
   (bb)   HOUSING, GROUP. (See Land Use Tables.) See GROUP HOUSING.
   (cc)   HYDROCOLLAPSIBLE SOILS. See SOIL.
   (dd)   HYDROZONE. A portion of the landscaped area that contains plant
material with similar water needs/requirements. A hydrozone may be an irrigated
or non-irrigated area.
   (ee)   HYDROZONE PLAN. A plan that outlines all the separate hydrozone areas
created by planting material within the landscaped areas, both irrigated and
non-irrigated.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4136, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4189,
passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4341, passed - -2018)
§ 810.01.110 Definitions, I.
   (a)   IMPOUND FACILITIES. See MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE/IMPOUND FACILITIES.
   (b)   INCINERATION FACILITIES. See HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (c)   INCOMPATIBLE LAND USES. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (d)   INDIVIDUAL SIGN. See SIGN.
   (e)   IDLE. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (f)   INDOOR STORAGE. See STORAGE, WAREHOUSE.
   (g)   INTERIOR LOT. See LOT.
   (h)   INTERIOR LOT LINE. See LOT.
   (i)   INTERIOR SIDE YARD. See YARD.
   (j)   INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE. See STRUCTURE, BUSINESS OR INDUSTRIAL.
   (k)   INDUSTRIAL USE. One or more of the land use types listed in the tables
of “Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements” in Division 2 (Land Use Zoning
Districts and Allowed Land Uses) under the heading of “Industry, Manufacturing
& Processing, Wholesaling.”
   (m)   INFILTRATION RATE. The rate in which water enters the soil. This rate
is expressed as the depth of water per unit of time (i.e., inches per hour).
   (n)   INTENSITY. The density of development versus open space of an area or
property. For example, a Multiple Dwelling land use is a higher land use
intensity than Single Dwelling land use.
   (o)   INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES. Plant material, which is non-indigenous
species to an area that adversely affects the habitats they invade, either
economically, environmentally, and/or ecologically. Invasive plant species may
be regulated by the County’s agricultural agency as a noxious species. “Noxious
weed” is any weed designated by the Weed Control Regulations in the Weed
Control Act and identified on a Regional District noxious weed control list. A
complete list of invasive plant material can be found in the California
Invasive Plant Inventory and the USDA invasive and noxious weed database.
   (p)   IRRIGATION AUDIT. An in-depth evaluation of the performance of an
irrigation system, which is conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation
Auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to, an inspection, a
systems tune-up, a systems test with distribution uniformity, the reporting of
overspray and/or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an
irrigation schedule.
   (q)   IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY (IE). The measurement of the amount of water
beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency
is derived from measurements and estimates from irrigation system
characteristics and management practices. The minimum irrigation efficiency
rate shall be 0.71.
   (r)   IRRIGATION HEAD. The device that delivers water to landscaped areas by
means of a nozzle or emission device (e.g., pop-up and fixed spray heads,
impact rotors, rotary nozzles, rotors, etc.).
   (s)   IRRIGATION LATERAL LINE. The secondary pressurized pipeline that
delivers water to the emitters, spray/irrigation heads, rotors, etc. from the
valve.
   (t)   IRRIGATION MAINLINE. The main pressurized pipeline that delivers water
from the point-of-connection/water source to the valves or outlets within an
irrigation system.
   (u)   IRRIGATION SCHEDULE. A list of irrigation run times per valve station,
based on water use, plant material, and irrigation efficiency, throughout a
given year.
   (v)   IRRIGATION SYSTEM. The designed networking of piping, valves,
irrigation heads, sensors, and a controller.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4136, passed --2011)
§ 810.01.120 Definitions, J.
   (a)   JUNK AND SALVAGE FACILITY. Primary or accessory use of a parcel of
land for open storage, dismantling and/or selling of old cast off, unused,
scrap or salvage material of any sort. Materials shall include but to be
limited to:
      (1)   Copper, aluminum, brass, ferrous or nonferrous metals, whether
fabricated or not.
      (2)   Rope, rags, paper, glass, rubber, plastic or other polymer
material.
      (3)   Scrap lumber or other construction material.
      (4)   Appliances, batteries or junk, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles
or parts thereof.
      (5)   Trash, debris (organic and inorganic) or other waste material.
   (b)   JOINT LOCATION. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY.
   (c)   JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A unit that is no more than 500 square
feet in size and contained entirely within an existing single-family structure.
A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities, or
may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4383, passed - -2020)
§ 810.01.130 Definitions, K.
   (a)   KENNELS AND CATTERIES. (See Land Use Tables.) Facilities for the care
of dogs and cats.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL KENNEL OR CATTERY. The boarding, breeding, raising or
training of five or more dogs or cats of any age not owned by the owner or
occupant of the premises, and/or for commercial gain. For the purposes of this
Section and of §
84.04.050, a commercial kennel or cattery also includes the breeding of five or
more dogs or cats of any age owned by the owner or occupant of the premises for
commercial gain.
      (2)   PRIVATE KENNELS OR CATTERY. The keeping, raising, showing, or
training of five to 15 dogs or cats over six months of age for personal
enjoyment of the owner or occupants of the property, and for which commercial
gain is not the objective. All such animals shall be spayed or neutered.
   (b)   KEY LOT. See LOT.
   (c)   KITCHEN. Any room, all or any part of which is designed or used for
cooking and the preparation of food.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 810.01.140 Definitions, L.
   (a)   LABOR CAMP. (See Land Use Tables.) Premises used for residential
purposes for temporary or seasonal periods by five or more persons employed to
perform agricultural or industrial labor.
   (b)   LABOR QUARTERS. (See Land Use Tables.) See ACCESSORY DWELLING.
   (c)   LOCAL AGENCY FORMATION COMMISSION (LAFCO). A commission created in
compliance with the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg Local Government Reorganization Act
of 2000 (Government Code §§ 56000 et seq.) to oversee proposals for
organization and boundary changes, including the incorporation and
disincorporation of cities, the formation and dissolution of special districts,
and the consolidation, merger, annexation, and reorganization of cities and
special districts.
   (d)   LAKE. A naturally occurring or artificially created body of water
(impounded above or below surface level) with a designated holding capacity of
at least one acre-foot of water. Does not include POND. See also RESERVOIR.
   (e)   LAMP. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (f)   LAND CLEARING. Removal of vegetation down to duff or bare soil, by any
method.
   (g)   LAND DISPOSAL. See HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (h)   LAND DISTURBANCE. Clearing, excavating, grading or other manipulation
of the terrain.
   (i)   LAND USE. The manner in which land is developed and used. The general
categories of LAND USE include: residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, agricultural, recreational, and planned development.
   (j)   LAND USE APPLICATION. An applicant-initiated request for County
approval of a discretionary permit that is subject to one of the review
processes specified by the County Code in Division 5 (Permit Application and
Review Procedures) Ministerial permit actions (e.g., Building Permits, Mobile
Home Setdown Permits, etc.) are not LAND USE APPLICATIONS.
   (k)   LAND USE TYPES. Land use activities that are grouped together by their
common performance characteristics in the tables in Division 2 (Land Use Zoning
Districts and Allowed Land Uses) (e.g., agricultural, resource, and open
spaces; industry, manufacturing and processing, wholesaling uses, etc.).
   (l)   LAND USE ZONING DISTRICT. A land use regulatory district adopted in
compliance with the provisions of Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and
Allowed Land Uses) and the General Plan, establishing all necessary rules and
regulations necessary to guide development within the area affected by the
district.
   (l)   LAND USE ZONING DISTRICT. A land use regulatory district adopted in
compliance with the provisions of Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and
Allowed Land Uses) and the General Plan, establishing all necessary rules and
regulations necessary to guide development within the area affected by the
district.
   (m)   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. An individual who holds a license to practice
landscape architecture within the State of California per California Business
and Professions Code §5615.
   (n)   LANDSCAPE AREA. All planting areas, turf areas, and water features
within a landscape design plan that are subject to the Maximum Applied Water
Allowance (MAWA, see MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE) calculation. The
landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures,
walkways, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, decomposed granite or stone
walks, areas with pavers, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other
non-irrigated areas that have been designated for non-development purposes
(e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation areas).
   (o)   LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR. An individual who holds a license to construct,
maintain, repair, install, and/or subcontract the development of landscape
systems within the State of California.
   (p)   LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE. A set of plans that includes a title
page, planting plan, irrigation plan, hyrdrozone plan, rough and/or precise
grading plan, soil management report, and that complies with Chapter 83.10,
Landscape Standards.
   (q)   LANDSLIDE. The perceptible downward sliding of a mass of earth and/or
rock.
   (r)   LARGE COLLECTION FACILITY. See RECYCLING FACILITY.
   (s)   LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. See DAY CARE, CHILD.
   (t)   LEACHING. The washing or draining of dissolved minerals or pollutants
from the soil surface to the subsurface.
   (u)   LEAD AGENCY, MINING AND RECLAMATION. For the purposes of mining and
reclamation, a city or county that has the principal responsibility for
approving a surface mining operation, in compliance with the California Public
Resources Code.
   (v)   LEGAL ACCESS. See ACCESS.
   (w)   LIBRARY, MUSEUM, ART GALLERY, OUTDOOR EXHIBIT. (See Land Use Tables.)
Public or quasi-public facilities, examples of which include: aquariums,
arboretums, art galleries and exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites
and exhibits, libraries, museums, planetariums, and zoos. May also include
accessory retail uses (e.g., gift/book shop, restaurant, etc.) Does not include
commercial art galleries, which are included under “General Retail.
   (x)   LIGHTING, OUTDOOR. The following outdoor lighting related terms are
defined as follows:
      (1)   ARCHITECTURAL LIGHTING. Lighting that is either directed towards a
residence with the intent of highlighting an architectural feature or a light
fixture that is architecturally ornamental in nature or purpose.
      (2)   ATTACHED LIGHTING. A light fixture that is attached to a structure.
      (3)   FIXTURE. The assembly that holds the lamp and may include an
assembly housing, a mounting bracket or polo socket, lamp holder, ballast, a
reflector or mirror and a refractor or lens.
      (4)   FREESTANDING LIGHTING. A light fixture that is not attached to a
structure.
      (5)   FULLY-SHIELDED FIXTURE. Outdoor lighting fixture shielded or
constructed so that no light is emitted above the horizontal plane, and light
rays are only emitted by the installed fixtures in a manner that does not
direct light or light trespass onto adjacent property, on any other property
within the line of sight (direct or reflected) of the light source, or to any
member of the public who may be traveling on adjacent roadways or rights-of-
way.
      (6)   GLARE. Direct and unshielded light striking the eye to result in
annoyance, discomfort or reduced visual performance to a reasonable person
under the circumstances.
      (7)   HOLIDAY LIGHTING. Seasonal displays of 60 days or less within one
calendar year, using multiple low wattage bulbs (approximately 15 lumens or
less) provided they do not constitute a fire hazard, create a nuisance, and are
maintained in a safe condition.
      (8)   LAMP. The generic term for an artificial light source installed in
the socket portion of the fixture, to be distinguished from the whole assembly.
Commonly referred to as a BULB.
      (9)   LIGHT POLLUTION. Artificial light generated and emitted into the
night sky.
      (10)   LIGHT TRESPASS. Light from any outdoor lighting onto neighboring
property or property that is within a direct line from the light source that
interferes with viewing of night sky, eliminates the ability to have darkness
on the property or shines on any area on these properties or structures. A
determination of light trespass shall be made in compliance with
Chapter 83.07 (Glare and Outdoor Lighting).
      (11)   NIGHT SKY. A clear sky, between dusk and dawn, with visible stars,
despite necessary or desired illumination of private and public property.
      (12)   PARTIALLY-SHIELDED FIXTURE. A fixture employing a top shield to
reduce upward light, but otherwise does not shield the lamp from view.
      (13)   PEDESTRIAN LIGHTING. Freestanding lighting fixtures not exceeding
a height of 36 inches from ground grade level.
   (y)   LIGHT POLLUTION. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (z)   LIGHT PROCESSING FACILITY. See Recycling Facility.
   (aa)   LIGHT TRESPASS. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (bb)   LIQUEFACTION. A temporary fluid condition in water saturated, loose,
sandy soil caused by shock, such as an earthquake, which can cause serious soil
settlement, slumping or failure of structure foundations.
   (cc)   LIVE/WORK UNIT. (See Land Use Tables). An integrated housing unit and
working space, occupied and utilized by a single household in a structure,
either single-family or multi-family, that has been designed or structurally
modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity, and that
includes:
      (1)   Complete kitchen space and sanitary facilities in compliance with
the Building Code; and
      (2)   Working space reserved for and regularly used by one or more
occupants of the unit.
   (dd)   LIVESTOCK OPERATIONS. (See Land Use Tables.) Intensive commercial
hoofed animal keeping operations including dairies, feedlots, hog ranches, etc.
   (ee)   LOAD. See OCCUPANT LOAD.
   (ff)   LOADING SPACE. An off street space or berth on the same lot with a
building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, which
abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
   (gg)   LOCAL AGENCY. The County of San Bernardino.
   (hh)   LOCAL AREA TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES PLAN. See TRANSPORTATION
FACILITIES PLAN, LOCAL AREA.
   (ii)   LOCAL ORDINANCE. A local ordinance that implements State Planning,
Zoning, and Development Laws, enacted by the Board of Supervisors of the County
of San Bernardino.
   (jj)   LOCAL STREET. See ROAD SYSTEM.
   (kk)   LOCAL WATER PURVEYOR. An entity, including the local agency, a public
agency, or private water company that provides retail water services to
customers within the unincorporated areas of the County of San Bernardino.
   (ll)   LOCATIONAL STANDARDS. Criteria utilized to establish the
circumstances under which a particular base land use zoning district would be
appropriate or desirable for a given area or site.
   (mm)   LODGING SERVICES. Establishments engaged in the provision of lodging
services, normally on a daily or weekly basis with incidental food, alcoholic
beverages, sales and service intended for the convenience of the guests at a
hotel, motel and tourist court.
   (nn)   LOT. An area shown on and created by a final map, official map or
parcel map recorded with the County Recorder. Types of lots include the
following (See
Figure 810-1 - Lot Types):
      (1)   CORNER LOT. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more
streets, or bounded on two or more adjacent sides by street lines, provided
that the angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees.
      (2)   FLAG LOT. A lot having access from the building site to a public
street by means of private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee.
      (3)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot.
      (4)   KEY LOT. The first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner
lot, the front line of which is a continuation of the side line of the reversed
corner lot, exclusive of the width of an alley, and fronting on the street that
intersects or intercepts the street upon which the corner lot fronts.
      (5)   REVERSED CORNER LOT. A corner lot that rears upon the side of
another lot, whether or not across an alley. See Diagram § 812.27005.
      (6)   THROUGH LOT. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
Figure 810-1 Lot Types
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11093.jpg]
 
   (oo)   LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of a lot that has been altered to create
a surface area that is either impervious (i.e., does not absorb water) or is
covered by primary and accessory structures footprints. See BUILDING COVERAGE.
   (pp)   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
   (qq)   LOT DIMENSION RATIO. A land area ratio of width to depth that
determines the shape of a lot.
   (rr)   LOT, FRONTAGE. The dimension of a lot or portion of a lot that abuts
a street or an approved road easement, except the side of a corner lot.
   (ss)   LOT LINE or PROPERTY LINE. Any recorded boundary of a lot. Types of
LOT LINES are as follows:
      (1)   FRONT LOT LINE. In the case of an interior lot, a line separating
the lot from the street; and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the
narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those cases
where the latest tract deed restrictions or the recorded map specify another
line as the FRONT LOT LINE. In the case of a corner lot where precise
dimensions are not readily available and the lot appears to be substantially
equal in street frontage or if the known dimensions of the lot lines are within
ten percent of one another, the reviewing authority shall have the discretion
to determine the FRONT LOT LINE.
      (2)   INTERIOR LOT LINE. Any lot line not abutting a street.
      (3)   REAR LOT LINE. A line that is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line, and in the case of a triangular or other irregularly shaped
lot, a line within the lot ten feet in length, parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line.
      (4)   SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than the front or rear lot lines.
   (tt)   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT. The adjustment of a lot line between two or more
adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent
parcel, and where no additional parcels are thereby created or the number of
parcels reduced.
   (uu)   LOT MERGER. A process by which contiguous lots are merged into one
land holding. In order to be merged, the lots must be held by the same owner
and the lots must have a common lot line. This process is subject to all of the
requirements of the County Code and may be initiated by either the owners of
the lots or the County.
   (vv)   LOT, MOBILE HOME PARK. See MOBILE HOME PARK LOT.
   (ww)   LOT SIZE, MINIMUM. The smallest unit of land permitted through
subdivision within a specific land use zoning district, specified as minimum
lot size in each land use zoning district in Division 2 (Land Use Zoning
Districts and Allowed Land Uses).
   (xx)   LOT, SUBSTANDARD. See SUBSTANDARD LOT.
   (yy)   LOT WIDTH. The following method that yields the smallest dimension
shall be chosen to measure LOT WIDTH:
      (1)   The distance measured at the building setback line (BSL) along a
line or arc that is parallel or concentric to the right-of-way; or
      (2)   The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at right angles to the lot depth.
   (zz)   LOWEST FLOOR. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (aaa)   LOW HEAD DRAINAGE. Drainage from an irrigation head, which is caused
by the flow of water down a system’s lateral lines from a high point of
elevation within the system. Such drainage causes water waste and unnecessary
runoff.
   (bbb)   LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION. The application of irrigation water at low
pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines; and the use of low volume
emitters, such as a drip, drip line, bubblers and micro-sprays, which apply
small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plant material.
   (ccc)   LOW WATER USE LANDSCAPING. Landscaping that has a plant factor of
0.3 or less.
   (ddd)   LUMBER AND WOOD PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS
I AND II.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4057, passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4136,
passed --2011)
§ 810.01.150 Definitions, M.
   (a)   MAINTAINED PUBLIC STREET. Any roadway maintained by a public agency
for public use.
   (b)   MAJOR ARTERIAL HIGHWAY. See ROAD SYSTEM.
   (c)   MAJOR DIVIDED HIGHWAY. See ROAD SYSTEM.
   (d)   MAJOR EVENT. See SPECIAL EVENT, TEMPORARY.
   (e)   MAJOR GRADING. See GRADING.
   (f)   MAJOR HIGHWAY. See ROAD SYSTEM.
   (g)   MAJOR REPAIR/BODY WORK. See VEHICLE SERVICES.
   (h)   MANAGING AGENCY OR AGENT. A person, firm or agency representing the
owner(s) of a private home rental unit(s), or a person, firm or agency owning
one or more private home rental units.
   (i)   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure manufactured on or after June 15, 1976
that meets the requirements of the National Manufactured Housing and Safety Act
of 1974, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is
eight body feet or more in width, or 40 feet or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and designed to be used as a
dwelling unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein; except that such term will include any structure
which meets all the requirements of this Subdivision except the size
requirements and with the respect to which manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification and complies with the standards established under this part. See
also FLOOD HAZARD.
   (j)   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. See FLOOD HAZARD and MOBILE
HOME PARK.
   (k)   MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS. The on-site production of goods by methods
other than agricultural or extractive in nature.
   (l)   MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS I—LIMITED MANUFACTURING. (See Land Use
Tables.) Manufacturing operations that are totally enclosed within a structure
and employ fewer than 20 employees on the largest shift. This land use
generally involves the assembly of specific products rather than the
manufacturing of the various components of the products. Limited exterior
storage is permitted but is fully screened from public view.
      (1)   APPAREL AND OTHER FINISHED PRODUCTS. The manufacture of clothing
and accessories by cutting and sewing purchased woven or knit textile fabrics
and related materials. Typical uses include: garments, leather goods.
      (2)   FOOD AND RELATED PRODUCTS. The processing or production of a
natural or man-made solid or liquid food substances used for human or animal
internal consumption. Typical uses include: food packaging, egg processing,
butter or cheese processing.
      (3)   FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS. The fabrication or further processing
and assembly of metal parts into equipment or machinery. Typical uses include:
coating, engraving and allied services.
      (4)   FURNITURE AND FIXTURES. The assembly of furniture and related
fixtures. Typical uses include: assembly of household, office or other
furniture.
      (5)   LUMBER AND WOOD PRODUCTS. The assembly and finishing of wood
articles, except furniture and related fixtures and miscellaneous household or
office products made wholly or partially of wood. Typical uses include: cabinet
shops.
      (6)   MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURING. The manufacture or repair of products
not included in any other category and mainly consisting of small household or
office luxuries, recreational goods or supplies and large scale printing
operations. Typical uses include: jewelry, silverware and plated ware, and
musical instruments.
      (7)   PAPER AND RELATED PRODUCTS. The manufacture of paper goods
generally from purchased paper materials. Typical uses include: envelopes,
bags, stationery, tablets and related products.
      (8)   PROFESSIONAL AND SCIENTIFIC GOODS. The manufacture of instruments
for measuring, testing, sensing, analyzing and controlling natural or man-made
objects, physical conditions or states. Typical uses include: engineering,
laboratory, scientific, measuring and controlling instruments, optical,
surgical, medical and dental instruments, photographic equipment and supplies,
watches, clocks and clock-operated devices.
      (9)   RUBBER AND MISCELLANEOUS PLASTIC PRODUCTS. The manufacture from
natural, synthetic or reclaimed rubber, and from chemicals or rubber or plastic
products. Typical uses include: fabricated rubber products.
      (10)   STONE, CLAY, AND GLASS PRODUCTS. The manufacture of products from
stone, clay, sand and other nonmetallic minerals, excluding fuels. Typical uses
include: glass products made of purchased glass, pottery and related products.
      (11)   TEXTILE MILL PRODUCTS. The preparation of fiber and subsequent
manufacturing, drying, finishing or coating of fiber, thread, yarn, woven,
knit, or nonwoven fabrics or miscellaneous textiles. Typical uses include:
knitting mills, lace goods.
   (m)   MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS II—GENERAL MANUFACTURING. (See Land Use
Tables.) Manufacturing operations that involve exterior storage, large
equipment, large number of employees, or that have historically been
controversial.
      (1)   APPAREL AND OTHER FINISHED PRODUCTS. The manufacture of clothing
and accessories by cutting and sewing purchased furs and related materials.
Typical uses include: fur dressing and dying.
      (2)   CHEMICALS AND RELATED PRODUCTS. The manufacture or processing of
basic, organic, or inorganic chemicals. This includes chemicals to be used in
making other products and finished chemical products used for direct
consumption or as industrial supplies. Typical uses include: industrial
chemicals, plastics materials, synthetic resins or rubber, paints, varnishes,
lacquers, agricultural chemicals.
      (3)   FOOD AND RELATED PRODUCTS. The processing or production of a
natural or man-made solid or liquid food substances used for human or animal
internal consumption. Typical uses include: slaughter houses, poultry dressing
plants and flour mills.
      (4)   FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS. The fabrication or further processing
and assembly of metal parts into equipment or machinery. Typical uses include:
automobile assembly plants, fabricated structural metal, metal forging and
stampings.
      (5)   FURNITURE AND FIXTURES. The manufacture of furniture and related
fixtures. Typical uses include: manufacture of household, office or other
furniture.
      (6)   LUMBER AND WOOD PRODUCTS. The cutting, planing, compression and
finishing of wood articles, except furniture and related fixtures and
miscellaneous household or office products made wholly or partially of wood.
Typical uses include: logging camps, saw mills.
      (7)   PAPER AND RELATED PRODUCTS. The manufacturing of pulp, paper (both
recycles and paper products from wood), other cellulose fibers, used paper, and
rag cloth. Typical uses include: paper mills, paper coating and glazing.
      (8)   PETROLEUM REFINING AND RELATED INDUSTRIES. The modification,
refining, and mixing or storage of fossil fuels that are composed of petroleum
or coal. Typical uses include: petroleum refining, asphalt batch plants,
lubricating oils and greases.
      (9)   PRIMARY METAL INDUSTRIES. The smelting, refining, rolling, drawing
and alloying of metals, manufacture of metal castings and production of coke.
Typical uses include: blast furnaces, steel works and rolling and finishing
mills, foundries, smelting and refining of nonferrous metals.
      (10)   RUBBER AND MISCELLANEOUS PLASTIC PRODUCTS. The manufacture from
natural, synthetic or reclaimed rubber, and from chemicals or rubber or plastic
products. Typical uses include: tires, inner tubes, rubber and plastic
footwear, rubber and plastic hoses and belts.
      (11)   STONE, CLAY, AND GLASS PRODUCTS. The manufacture of products from
stone, clay, sand and other nonmetallic minerals, excluding fuels. Typical uses
include: brick, tile, dish, glass and insulation manufacturing and concrete
plants.
      (12)   TEXTILE MILL PRODUCTS. The preparation of fiber and subsequent
manufacturing, drying, finishing or coating of fiber, thread, yarn, woven,
knit, or nonwoven fabrics or miscellaneous textiles. Typical uses include:
broad woven fabric mills, dyeing and finishing textiles, floor covering mills.
   (n)   MASONRY CONSTRUCTION. As defined in the California Building Code, 2013
Edition with amendments.
   (o)   MAP ACT. California Subdivision Map Act, Government Code §§ 66410 et
seq.
   (p)   MAY. A permissive or optional provision, regulation or specification.
   (q)   MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE (MAWA). The upper limit of the annual
amount of applied water allowed for an established landscape.
   (r)   MEDICAL SERVICES, HOSPITAL. (See Land Use Tables.) Hospitals and
similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services, and
extensive medical treatment, including surgical and other hospital service.
These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and
equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include on-site
accessory clinics and laboratories, accessory retail uses, and on-site
ambulance dispatch facilities.
   (s)   MEDICAL SERVICES—REHABILITATION CENTER. (See Land Use Tables.) A
facility providing skilled nursing and/or in-patient medical care to persons
recovering from injuries or dependencies.
   (t)   MEETING FACILITY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE. (See Land Use Tables.) A facility
for public or private meetings, including community centers, civic and private
auditoriums, grange halls, mortuaries, union halls, meeting halls for clubs and
other membership organizations, etc. Also includes functionally related
internal facilities such as kitchens, multi-purpose rooms, and storage. Does
not include conference and meeting rooms accessory and incidental to another
primary use that are typically used only by on-site employees and clients, and
occupy less floor area on the site than the offices they support (see OFFICES).
Does not include: sports or other commercial entertainment facilities (see
THEATER, and SPORTS AND ENTERTAINMENT ASSEMBLY); or convention centers (see
CONFERENCE/CONVENTION FACILITY). Related on-site facilities including day care
centers and schools are separately defined. Also see PLACES OF WORSHIP.
   (u)   MENAGERIE. A private collection of three or more wild, exotic or
dangerous animals that are raised, bred, trained and/or maintained without any
public display or exhibition on the site.
   (v)   MICROCLIMATE. The climate of a small, specific landscaped area that
may contrast with the climate of the overall landscaped areas due to varying
factors such as wind, sun/shade exposure, the density of planting material,
and/or the proximity to adjacent reflective surfaces.
   (w)   MINED LANDS. Includes the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an
area where surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been
conducted. This includes private ways and roads appurtenant to any land
excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas where structures, facilities,
equipment, machines, tools or other materials or property that result from, or
are used in, surface mining operations are located. See also SURFACE MINING
OPERATIONS.
   (x)   MINERAL RESOURCES. A collective term for all mineral deposits of a
particular kind, or for mineral deposits in general.
   (y)   MINERALS. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (z)   MINIMUM LOT SIZE. See LOT SIZE, MINIMUM.
   (aa)   MINING AND RECLAMATION LEAD AGENCY. See LEAD AGENCY.
   (bb)   MINING AND RECLAMATION OPERATOR. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (cc)   MINING AND RECLAMATION PLAN. A plan required by the County for all
surface mining operations. The plan requires measures to be taken that provide
for reclamation of mined lands to a usable condition that is readily adaptable
for alternative land use and creates no danger to public health or safety.
   (dd)   MINING HAZARDOUS, EXCAVATION. See HAZARDOUS EXCAVATION.
   (ee)   MINING RECLAMATION. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (ff)   MINING WASTE. Includes the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid,
vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property directly
resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations.
   (gg)   MINI-STORAGE. See STORAGE, PERSONAL.
   (hh)   MINOR GRADING. See GRADING.
   (ii)   MINOR EVENT. See SPECIAL EVENT, TEMPORARY.
   (jj)   MINOR MAINTENANCE/REPAIR. See VEHICLE SERVICES.
   (kk)   MINOR SUBDIVISION PLOT PLAN. Any application plot plan requesting the
subdivision of any parcel or parcels of land shown as a unit or contiguous
units under one or a common ownership, and that is proposed for subdivision for
the purpose of sale, lease, financing, or other conveyance, including gift,
either immediate or in the future, into two, three or four lots, parts or
parcels and a remainder parcel. For the purposes of this definition, a MINOR
SUBDIVISION PLOT PLAN shall also mean a TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP.
   (ll)   MITIGATION MEASURES. Necessary steps taken to lessen potential
impacts of development or actions on the environment.
   (mm)   MIXED LAND USE. The unspecified mixture of compatible land uses
within one building or within a section or sections of a community.
   (nn)   MOBILE HOME, BOAT, OR RV SALES. (See Land Use Tables.) Retail
establishments selling both mobile home dwelling units, and/or various vehicles
and watercraft for recreational uses. Includes the sales of boats, campers and
camper shells, jet skis, mobile homes, motor homes, and travel trailers.
   (oo)   MOBILE HOME, DEPENDENT. A mobile home or travel trailer coach not
equipped with a toilet for sewage disposal.
   (pp)   MOBILE HOME. A structure that was constructed prior to June 15, 1976,
is transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width, or 40 feet or more in length, or, when erected on
site, is 320 or more square feet, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to utilities, and
includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein; except that such term will include any structure which meets
all the requirements of this subsection and complies with the state standards
in effect at the time of construction. MOBILE HOME does not include commercial
modulars, as defined in § 18001.8, factory-built housing, as defined in §
19971, a manufactured home, as defined in § 18007, or a recreational vehicle,
as defined in § 18010 of the California Health and Safety Code (CHSC).
   (qq)   MOBILE HOME PARK/MANUFACTURED HOME LAND-LEASE COMMUNITY. (See Land
Use Tables.) An area or tract of land designed as a single unit where spaces
for two or more mobile homes used for human habitation are rented or leased on
a monthly or greater basis, or owned separately.
   (rr)   MOBILE HOME PARK LOT. A portion of a mobile home park designated or
used for the occupancy of one trailer coach or camping party.
   (ss)   MOBILE HOME, SELF-CONTAINED. A mobile home or trailer equipped with a
toilet, water storage tank for potable water and a sewage holding tank.
   (tt)   MOBILE RECYCLING UNIT. See RECYCLING FACILITY.
   (uu)   MODULAR UNIT (FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING). A residential building,
dwelling unit, or an individual dwelling room or combination of rooms thereof,
or building component, assembly, or system manufactured in such a manner that
all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot be inspected before
installation at the building site without disassembly, damage, or destruction
of the part, including units designed for use as a part of an institution for
resident or patient care, that is either wholly manufactured or is in
substantial part manufactured at an offsite location to be wholly or partially
assembled onsite in accordance with building standards published in the
California Building Standards Code and other regulations adopted by the
commission pursuant to § 19990. FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING does not include a mobile
home, as defined in § 18008, a recreational vehicle, as defined in § 18010.5,
or a commercial modular, as defined in § 18012.5 of the California Health and
Safety Code (CHSC).
   (vv)   MONOPOLE. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY.
   (ww)   MONUMENT SIGN. See SIGN.
   (xx)   MORATORIUM. See DEVELOPMENT MORATORIUM.
   (yy)   MORTUARY SERVICES. (See Land Use Tables.) An establishment providing
services for preparing the human dead for burial or cremation and arranging and
managing funerals. This excludes cemeteries, crematoriums and columbariums.
   (zz)   MOTEL. A building or group of two or more detached, semi-detached or
attached buildings containing guest rooms designed, used and intended, wholly
or in part, for the accommodation of transients for compensation on a daily or
weekly basis. These establishments provide lodging and parking for automobile
travelers and the rooms are usually accessible from outdoor parking areas.
These establishments may include guest rooms with food preparation areas
(kitchenettes) and are designed, intended or used primarily for the
accommodation of automobile travelers. Included are lodging establishments
designated as cabins, motor courts, and similar designations; not including
those facilities defined in residential care facilities or any jail, hospital,
asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison or other building in which human beings
are housed and detained under legal restraint.
   (aaa)   MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled device by which persons or property
may be moved upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   (bbb)   MOTOR VEHICLE DISMANTLING FACILITY. (See Land Use Tables.) Any
premises used for the dismantling or wrecking of vehicles required to be
registered under the Vehicle Code of the State of California. Activities may
include the buying, selling or dealing in vehicles, their integral parts, or
component materials thereof, and the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, wrecked or inoperative vehicles. See also RECYCLING
FACILITIES—SCRAP AND DISMANTLING YARD.
   (ccc)   MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE/IMPOUND FACILITY. (See Land Use Tables.) Any
lot, lot area, or parcel of land used, designed, or maintained for the specific
purpose of storing, impounding, or keeping motor vehicles, but not including
dismantling or wrecking activities.
   (ddd)   MOUNTAIN MAJOR HIGHWAY. See ROAD SYSTEM.
   (eee)   MOUNTAIN REGION. Areas within the following described boundary:
Beginning at the intersection of the boundary line between San Bernardino and
Los Angeles Counties and the north line of Section 31 Township 4 North, Range 7
West, SBB&M, thence generally easterly and southerly along the National Forest
boundary to its intersection with the boundary line between San Bernardino and
Riverside Counties; thence westerly along the County line to the southwest
corner of Township 1 South, Range 1 East; thence generally northerly and
westerly following the National Forest boundary to the intersection of north
boundary of Section 24, Township 1 North, Range 8 West, SBB&M and the boundary
line between San Bernardino and Los Angeles Counties; thence northerly along
the County line to the point of beginning.
   (fff)   MOUNTAIN SECONDARY HIGHWAY. See ROAD SYSTEM.
   (ggg)   MUDSLIDE. The flow of mud and debris in a downslope direction due to
slope failure, caused by poor structural and water retention properties of the
soil. They are generally experienced after heavy precipitation, fast snowpack
melt, an earthquake or any combination thereof.
   (hhh)   MULCH. Organic material such as leaves, bark, or inorganic material
such as pebbles, stones, gravel, decorative sand, and decomposed granite that
is left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of
reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperatures, and
preventing soil erosion.
   (iii)   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROJECTS. Development project in which two
or more attached or detached units are located, including apartments or
condominiums.
   (jjj)   MULTIPLE DWELLING UNIT. (See Land Use Tables.) A multiple dwelling
unit is a series or combination of dwelling units, either attached or detached,
designed to house more than one family with individual, shared or no kitchen
privileges (e.g. apartments, condominiums, boarding houses, residential
hotels). See also DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY.
   (kkk)    MULTI-UNIT MANUFACTURED HOUSING. 
      (1)   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code (CHSC) § 18008.7, MULTI-UNIT
MANUFACTURED HOUSING means either of the following:
         (A)   A structure transportable under permit in one or more sections
designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units, a dormitory,
or an efficiency unit as defined in § 17958.1, to be used with a support system
pursuant to § 18613 or a foundation system pursuant to § 18551.
         (B)   A structure transportable under permit in one or more sections,
designed to be used with a foundation system for either of the following
purposes:
            (I)   Three or more dwelling units, as defined in § 18003.3.
            (II)   A residential hotel, as defined by § 50519(b)(1).
         (2)   MULTI-DWELLING UNIT MANUFACTURED HOUSING shall be constructed in
compliance with all applicable department regulations. The egress and fire
separation requirements of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations (CCR)
applicable to dormitories, hotels, apartment houses, and structures that
contain two dwelling units shall also be applicable to all multi-dwelling
manufactured housing constructed for those purposes. The accessibility and
adaptability requirements of Title 24 of the CCR applicable to dormitories,
hotels and apartment homes shall also be applicable to MULTI-DWELLING UNIT
MANUFACTURED HOUSING containing three or more dwelling units.
         (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all provisions of
law that apply to manufactured homes shall apply to equally to multi-dwelling
unit manufactured housing. For purposes of this Section:
            (A)   DORMITORY means a room or rooms inhabited for the purposes of
temporary residence by two or more persons.
            (B)   EFFICIENCY UNIT has the same meaning as defined in Health and
Safety Code § 17958.1.
   (lll)   MULTI-USE CENTER. An area of service, retail or publicly-oriented
facilities that are centrally located along collector streets or major
arterials and serve the local residents.
   (mmm)   MUSEUM. See LIBRARY, MUSEUM, ART GALLERY, OUTDOOR EXHIBIT.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4136,
passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4140, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4189, passed - -2012;
Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4309, passed - -2016)
§ 810.01.160 Definitions, N.
   (a)   NATIONAL FOREST LANDS. Lands under the jurisdiction of U.S. Forest
Service and within the boundaries of the San Bernardino and Angeles National
Forests.
   (b)   NATIVE TREE. See TREE, NATIVE.
   (c)   NATIVE VEGETATIVE SPECIES. All plant species indigenous to the State
of California and compatible to the climate and elevation of the area to be
landscaped.
   (d)   NATURAL RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT. (See Land Use Tables.) The development
and extraction of mineral deposits, natural vegetation and energy sources,
together with the necessary incidental buildings, apparatus or appurtenances.
   (e)   NATURAL HAZARDS. Any one or combination of naturally occurring
phenomena (e.g., earthquakes, forest and brush fires, landslides, mudslides,
etc.) that pose a potential threat to the man- made environment.
   (f)   NATURE PRESERVE. An area of land maintained in its natural state for
the preservation of habitat or other natural resources.
   (g)   NEW CONSTRUCTION. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (h)   NIGHT CLUB. (See Land Use Tables.) A facility with the primary
function of providing entertainment, examples of which include live music and/
or dancing, comedy, etc., which may serve alcoholic beverages for on-site
consumption. Does not include adult entertainment businesses, which are
separately defined.
   (i)   NIGHT SKY. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (j)   NOISE CONTOUR. A mapped line connecting points where the same sound
pressure level prevails. Contours form bands of width emanating from a noise
source, and approximate true ambient noise levels.
   (k)   NON-ACCESS. See ACCESS.
   (l)   NONCONFORMING or NONCONFORMING USE. Any building, structure or portion
thereof, or use of building or land that does not conform to the regulations of
the San Bernardino County Code or applicable specific plan and that lawfully
existed at the time the regulations, or an amendment thereto, with which it
does not conform became effective.
   (m)   NONVEHICULAR ACCESS. See ACCESS.
   (n)   NOTICE. A method of conveying information pertaining to a pending land
use decision that may affect members of the public.
   (o)   NURSERIES (RETAIL). (See Land Use Tables.) The retail handling of any
article, substance, or commodity related to the planting, maintenance, or
harvesting of garden plants, shrubs, trees, packaged fertilizers, soils,
chemicals, or other nursery goods and related products in small quantities to
the consumer.
   (p)   NURSERIES (WHOLESALE). (See Land Use Tables.) The growing, storage,
and sale of garden plants, shrubs, trees, or vines for resale, including
incidental retail sales conducted from within a building not exceeding 20
percent of the combined wholesale and retail sales volume during any year.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4189, passed - -2012)
§ 810.01.170 Definitions, O.
   (a)   OCCUPANCY GROUP. The California Building Code classification of the
intended use or character of all areas of the structure/building.
   (b)   OCCUPANT LOAD. The number of persons for which the California Building
Code required exiting system must be designed.
   (c)   OFFICE. This Development Code distinguishes between the following
types of offices. See also PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
      (1)   ACCESSORY. (See Land Use Tables.) Office facilities for
administration, and/or on-site business and operations management, that are
incidental and accessory to another business, sales, and/or service activity
that is the primary use.
      (2)   GOVERNMENT. (See Land Use Tables.) Administration, clerical, or
public contact and/or service offices of a local, state, or federal government
agency or service facilities. Includes post offices, but not bulk mailing
distribution centers, which are under TRUCK TERMINAL.
   (d)   OFFICIAL MAP. An Official Map is a map prepared in compliance with
this Development Code and shall be substituted for a final map when it is
certified, filed and bound, but not before.
   (e)   OFF-HIGHWAY OR OFF-ROAD VEHICLE RACE. Any organized sporting event or
rally where motorized vehicles are utilized in a contest of speed, or in a
competitive trial of speed or skill or recreational event, all or a portion of
which is conducted outside dedicated public rights-of-way maintained by a
public agency.
   (f)   ON-SITE DETENTION. Temporary storage of stormwater runoff on the site.
   (g)   ON-SITE RETENTION. Permanent holding of stormwater runoff on the site
through percolation to the ground.
   (h)   OPEN LOT SERVICES. Commercial establishments that are primarily
involved in the delivery of their service from an open lot with relatively few
support structures.
   (i)   OPEN SPACE. Land where basic natural values have been retained. OPEN
SPACE can include wilderness areas, a small park in the middle of a city,
pastures, forested areas, agricultural groves, vineyards, golf courses,
floodwashes, etc. The function of open space may differ, depending upon the
location. It may have a protective function, as in the case of open space in
flood plain areas, where it serves to protect health and safety. It can have a
structural or buffer function to space and separate conflicting land uses. It
may serve a recreational function, or a scenic function to provide aesthetic
views of forests or mountains.
   (j)   OPERATING PRESSURE. Is the pressure, based on the recommendations of
the irrigation equipment manufacturer, for optimal performance, at which an
irrigation system with sprinkler/irrigation heads is designed. Operating
pressure is usually indicated at the base of the sprinkler/irrigation head.
   (k)   OFF-SITE SIGN. See SIGN.
   (l)   ON-SITE SIGN. See SIGN.
   (m)   OPEN SPACE, COMMON. Open space within a single unified development
owned, designed and set aside for all occupants of the development or by
occupants of a designated portion of the development. COMMON OPEN SPACE is not
dedicated to the public and is owned and maintained by a private organization
made up of the open space users.
   (n)   OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE. Open space directly adjoining the living areas of
dwelling units, which is intended for all private enjoyment of the residents of
the dwelling unit. Private open space shall in some manner be defined so that
its boundaries are evident.
   (o)   OPERATOR, MINING AND RECLAMATION. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (p)   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. A structure, of any kind or character, erected or
maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any poster, bill,
printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed,
including statuary, for advertising purposes.
   (q)   OUTDOOR EXHIBIT. See LIBRARY, MUSEUM, ART GALLERY, OUTDOOR EXHIBIT.
   (r)   OUTDOOR FESTIVAL. (See Land Use Tables.) Any music festival, dance
festival, “rock” festival, or similar musical activity or gathering where live
or prerecorded entertainment is presented to the public at facilities without
permanent land use approval for the activity.
   (s)   OUTDOOR LIGHTING. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (t)   OUTDOOR MARKET. See SWAP MEET, OUTDOOR MARKET, AUCTION YARD.
   (u)   OVERBURDEN. Soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a natural
mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal by
surface mining operations.
   (v)   OVERLAY DISTRICTS. An area within which a set of standards and
requirements are employed to deal with special physical characteristics such as
flood plains or geologically hazardous areas. OVERLAY DISTRICTS are described
in Division 2 (Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements) and are mapped and
imposed in conjunction with, and in addition to, the underlying land use zoning
district.
   (w)   OVERSPRAY. The water that is applied beyond the landscaped areas onto
pavement, walkways, structures, and other non-landscaped areas by the
irrigation system.
   (x)   OWNER. A person or persons shown by the most current legally prepared
document that has been recorded by the County Recorder’s Office that transfers,
grants or imports total or partial ownership of a parcel.
   (y)   ORIGINAL PARCEL. See PARCEL, ORIGINAL.
   (z)   OPERATIVE VEHICLES. See VEHICLES, OPERATIVE.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4098, passed - -2010; Am. Ord. 4136,
passed --2011)
§ 810.01.180 Definitions, P.
   (a)   PAPER AND RELATED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS
I AND II.
   (b)   PARCEL. Any real property described or created by map or deed. PARCEL
shall also refer to a legally defined lot, or contiguous group of lots in
single ownership or under single control, and considered a unit for purposes of
development. See also LOT.
   (c)   PARCEL MAP. Means parcel map as defined in Government Code, Title 7,
Division 2, Chapter 2, Article 3.
   (d)   PARCEL, ORIGINAL. Any improved or unimproved land shown on the latest
County equalized assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units.
   (e)   PARCEL, REMAINDER. That portion of an original lot or parcel that is
not a part of the subdivision but, after recordation of the final or parcel map
may be sold subject to the recordation of a certificate of compliance or a
conditional certificate of compliance. The designated remainder shall not be
counted as a parcel for the purposes of determining whether a parcel map or
final map is required.
   (f)   PARCEL, RESERVE. A strip of land not less than one foot wide reserved
for the purpose of regulating access to part width and dead-end streets until
the time that the streets may be completed or extended.
   (g)   PARK. An outdoor recreation facility that may provide a variety of
recreational opportunities including playground equipment, open space areas for
passive recreation and picnicking, and sport and active recreation facilities.
   (h)   PARK AND RIDE. A voluntary system where participants drive to a
centrally located public parking area or transportation facility in order to
carpool or gain access to public transportation to another location.
   (i)   PARKING LOTS AND STRUCTURES, ACCESSORY. (See Land Use Tables.) Off-
street parking spaces within parking lots and/or parking structures on the site
of a primary land use that are intended for use by patrons, employees, and/or
residents of the primary land use.
   (j)   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. (See Land Use Tables.) An open area, other than
a street, used for the temporary parking of automobiles and available for
public use, whether free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients,
customers or employees.
   (k)   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. Space within a public or private parking
area or a building for the temporary parking or storage of one automobile.
   (l)   PAROLEE. An individual who has been convicted of a Federal or State
crime, sentenced to a Federal or State prison or to a term in the California
Youth Authority and has received conditional and revocable release in the
community and is under the supervision of a Federal, State, youth authority or
County probation or parole officer.
   (m)   PAROLEE AND/OR PROBATIONER HOME. Any residential structure or dwelling
unit, whether owned and/or operated by an individual or by a for-profit or
nonprofit entity, which houses more than two parolees and/or probationers
unrelated by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, in exchange for monetary or
nonmonetary consideration given and/or paid by the parolee and/or probationer
and/or any public or private entity or person on behalf of the parolee and/or
probationer.
   (n)   PARTIALLY-SHIELDED FIXTURE. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (o)   PASSIVE THERMAL SYSTEM. See THERMAL SYSTEM, PASSIVE.
   (p)   PAWNSHOPS. See SECOND-HAND STORES.
   (q)   PEDESTRIAN LIGHTING. See LIGHTING, OUTDOOR.
   (r)   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY SIGN. See SIGN.
   (s)   PERCH TREE. A dominant conifer, having open areas (dead limbs) in the
upper portion of the tree located;
      (1)   Within one-quarter mile of the shoreline of Lake Arrowhead, Erwin
Lake, Baldwin Lake or Big Bear Lake; or
      (2)   In an identified area [i.e. Known Day Use Area or Potential Day Use
Area] as shown on the U.S. Forest Service Bald Eagle Habitat Map.
   (t)   PERMITTEE. Any person undertaking development activities upon a site
in compliance with a permit granted by the County.
   (u)   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, company, joint stock
association, corporation, estate, trust, organization, business, business
trust, public agency, school district, the State of California and its
political subdivisions or instrumentalities, receiver, syndicate or any group
or combination thereof, acting as a unit, including any trustee, receiver or
assignee.
   (v)   PERSONAL COMMUNICATION SERVICES (PCS). See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITIES.
   (w)   PERSONAL SERVICES. (See Land Use Tables.) Establishments providing
nonmedical services to individuals as a primary use. Examples of these uses
include:
 
barber and beauty shops                     pet grooming with no boarding
clothing rental                             psychics, palm readers
dry cleaning pick up stores with limited    shoe repair
equipment
home electronics and small appliance repair tailors
laundromats (self service laundries)        tanning salons
locksmiths                                  tattoo and body piercing services
massage (licensed, therapeutic, non-sexual)
 
      These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to
the services provided.
   (x)   PERSONAL STORAGE. See STORAGE - PERSONAL STORAGE, MINI-STORAGE.
   (y)   PERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface or material that allows water to pass
through the material into the underlying surface.
   (z)   PET CEMETERY. See CEMETERY.
   (aa)   PET FARM. A facility in which livestock, farm animals, and other
animals are kept for public exhibition, viewing and contact, regardless of
compensation, and which may include related accessory uses and activities
(e.g., picnic areas, recreational activities, etc.). A PET FARM shall not
include retail pet stores and kennels, horse races, and activities such as
State and County fairs, livestock shows, rodeos, field trials, and horsing
events.
   (bb)   PETROLEUM REFINING AND RELATED INDUSTRIES. See MANUFACTURING
OPERATIONS II.
   (cc)   PHASE. Any contiguous part or portion of a single unified development
project that is developed as a unit in the same time period.
   (dd)   PIPELINES, TRANSMISSION LINES. (See Land Use Tables.) Facilities
primarily engaged in the pipeline transportation of crude petroleum; refined
products of petroleum including gasoline and fuel oils; natural gas; mixed,
manufactured or liquified petroleum gas; or the pipeline transmission of other
commodities. Also includes pipeline surface and terminal facilities, including
pump stations, bulk stations, surge and storage tanks. Power transmission
includes facilities for the transmission of electrical energy for sale,
including transmission lines for a public utility company. Also includes
telephone, telegraph, cable television and other communications transmission
facilities utilizing direct physical conduits. Does not include offices or
service centers (classified in OFFICES ), equipment and material storage yards
(classified under STORAGE YARDS AND SALES LOTS ), distribution substations
(classified under PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES ), or power plants (classified
under ELECTRICAL POWER GENERATION ). See also UTILITY FACILITY.
   (ee)   PLACES OF WORSHIP. (See Land Use Tables.) Facilities operated by
religious organizations for worship, or the promotion of religious activities
and instruction; together with accessory buildings and uses on the same site.
Includes churches, synagogues, mosques, temples, etc. Related on-site
facilities including day care centers and schools are separately defined.
   (ff)   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A large, integrated development consisting of
residential, commercial or industrial uses, or a mixture of these uses and
associated ancillary uses and structures; that is situated on one or more
contiguous parcels or noncontiguous parcels separated solely by a road or other
right-of-way or easement; and that is planned and developed as a unified
project within a single development operation or series of development
operations in compliance with a detailed comprehensive development plan.
   (gg)   PLANNING AGENCY. The PLANNING AGENCY is a reviewing authority with
the powers and charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on
land use application and to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove land
use applications. The Planning Agency of San Bernardino County is described in
Chapter
86.01 (Planning Agency).
   (hh)   PLANNING FEE SCHEDULE. See FEE SCHEDULE.
   (ii)   PLANNING PERMIT. Issued as a result of an approval of a land use
application.
   (jj)   PLANT FACTOR. The factor, when multiplied by the reference
evapotranspiration rate Eto, estimates the amount of water that is needed by
plant material. The plant factor range for low water use plant material shall
be 0 to 0.3, the plant factor for medium water use plant material shall be 0.4
to 0.6, and the plant factor for high water use plant material shall be 0.7 to
1.0. These plant factors have been
derived from the Department of Water Resources publication, Water Use
Classification of Landscape Species third edition (WUCOLS III).
   (kk)   PLANT, DESERT NATIVE. Any tree, shrub, bulb or plant or part thereof,
except its fruit, named in the California Desert Native Plants Act, as amended,
(Food and Agricultural Code §§ 8000a et seq.), which is growing wild. Also
DESERT NATIVE PLANT includes any of the species listed in §
88.01.060(c) (Desert Native Plant Protection - Regulated desert native plants).
      These plants do not include commercial nursery stock or planted
landscaping, including those trees planted and/or growing outside their normal
habitat, except where the plants have been transplanted in compliance with
Chapter 88.01 (Plant Protection and Management).
   (ll)   PLANT EXPERT, DESERT NATIVE. A County Agricultural Commissioner
Biologist, an arborist certified by the Western Chapter of the International
Society of Arborists, or a person certified by the County Agricultural
Commissioner for the desert area.
   (mm)   PLANT MATERIAL. A living organism such as a tree, shrub, groundcover,
succulent, grass (native and turf variety), annual, perennial, vines, herbs,
ferns, and/or conifer used within a landscaped area, and needs permanent and/or
supplemental irrigation.
   (nn)   PLASTIC MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS I AND II.
   (oo)   PLAYGROUND. An area occupied by children’s play equipment, including
climbing equipment, sandboxes, slides, swings, and/or similar equipment.
   (pp)   POLICIES. Statements, more specific than goals, that are guides for
decision-making, imply commitments to goals and define directions for action
toward fulfillment of these goals.
   (qq)   POND. A naturally occurring or artificially created body or water
(impounded above or below surface level) with a designated holding capacity of
less than one acre-foot of water. Does not include LAKE or RESERVOIR.
   (rr)   POTABLE WATER. Water that is meant for human consumption and has been
treated to legal standards.
   (ss)   PRECIPITATION RATE. The application rate of water measured in inches
per hour.
   (tt)   PRESERVE. See NATURE PRESERVE.
   (uu)   PREZONE. The process by which a city or County determines the actual
future land use zoning districts for specified parcels of land before these
parcels are annexed to the city.
   (vv)   PREMATURE DEVELOPMENT. The building or construction of new projects
in areas usually outside city limit boundaries or in areas where necessary
public facilities cannot economically be provided by city or county
jurisdictions.
   (ww)   PRESSURE REGULATOR. A device used within an irrigation system to
regulate pressure and maintain irrigation head radius control.
   (xx)   PRIMARY METAL INDUSTRIES. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS II.
   (yy)   PRIMARY USE. A primary, principal or main use of a subject property
that is allowed by the applicable land use zoning district independent of any
other use of the property. A property may have more than one primary use of the
property (e.g., a warehouse and an off-site sign could be both primary uses of
a property. See also USE.
   (zz)   PRIVATE GARAGE. See GARAGE, PRIVATE.
   (aaa)   PRIVATE MEETING FACILITY. See MEETING FACILITY.
   (bbb)   PRIVATE OPEN SPACE. See OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE.
   (ccc)   PRIVATE STABLE. See STABLE, PRIVATE.
   (ddd)   PROBATIONER. A person who has been convicted of a crime and who has
received a suspension in the imposition or execution of their sentence and has
received conditional and revocable
release in the community under the supervision of a probation officer, as
provided under Penal Code § 1203 or its successor.
   (eee)   PROCESSING FACILITY. See RECYCLING FACILITY.
   (fff)   PRODUCE STAND. A temporary business established and operated for a
specific time, selling raw, unprocessed fruits, vegetables, nuts, and other
produce in its raw or natural state, and that is accessory to an on-site or
adjacent agricultural operation.
   (ggg)   PROFESSIONAL AND SCIENTIFIC GOODS MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING
OPERATIONS I.
   (hhh)   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. (See Land Use Tables.) Establishments that
provide advice, designs, information, medical treatment, commercial education,
consultation, travel, job placement, advertising, finance, insurance and real
estate services, generally from an office with no on- site storage
of goods. This category includes all types of business offices and service-type
businesses where service is basically on an individual-to-individual or firm-
to-firm basis as opposed to services that are performed on objects or personal
property.
   (iii)   PROJECTING SIGN. See SIGN.
   (jjj)   PROPERTY LINE. See LOT.
   (kkk)   PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION. A private organization composed of
property owners of a single unified project that may own common property and
shall be responsible for the maintenance and management of commonly owned
property.
   (lll)   PUBLIC BUILDING. A structure used for public assembly purposes in
conjunction with an institutional use.
   (mmm)   PUBLIC DIRECTIONAL SIGN. See SIGN.
   (nnn)   PUBLIC FACILITIES. Any civic or service oriented facility available
to the general public such as schools, fire protection, water and sewering,
rapid or mass transit routes, public golf courses, libraries, public health
centers, etc.
   (ooo)   PUBLIC GARAGE. See GARAGE, PUBLIC.
   (ppp)   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. Includes traffic controls, streets, roads,
highways, freeways, bridges, overcrossings, street interchanges, flood control
or storm drain facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities, lighting
facilities, and any other service and/or infrastructure improvement that is
publicly maintained and operated by a public agency and/or quasi public agency,
excepting utilities and common carriers.
   (qqq)   PUBLIC MEETING FACILITY. See MEETING FACILITY.
   (rrr)   PUBLIC PARKING AREA. See PARKING AREA, PUBLIC.
   (sss)   PUBLIC STABLE. See STABLE, PUBLIC.
   (ttt)   PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY. (See Land Use Tables.) A facility operated
by a public agency including fire stations, other fire prevention and fire
fighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including
interim incarceration facilities. May include ambulance dispatch facilities on
the same site.
   (uuu)   PUBLIC WAY. Includes street, highway, avenue, boulevard, parkway,
road, lane, walk, alley, channel, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, public
easement, public right-of-way, and other ways in which a public agency has a
proprietary right.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4085, passed - -2009; Am. Ord. 4136,
passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4331, passed - -2017)
§ 810.01.190 Definitions, Q.
   (a)   QUALITY CONTROL ENGINEER. A registered civil engineer working under a
contract with the County who is responsible to the County to assure compliance
by the developer with the conditions of approval adopted by the County. This
definition does not include the civil engineer responsible for professional
inspection as required by the California Building Code.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 810.01.200 Definitions, R.
   (a)   RAISED SLEEPING BEDS. A piece of furniture on, or in, which to lie and
sleep and which is elevated off of the floor at least two feet. For the
purposes of this definition, a single (or twin) bed will accommodate one
person, while a double, queen or king bed will each accommodate two persons.
   (b)   RANCH/FARM. An establishment primarily engaged in growing crops and
raising animals. A RANCH/FARM may consist of a single tract of land or a number
of separate tracts that may be held under different tenures (i.e., the ranch/
farm operator may own one tract and rent another). A RANCH/FARM may be operated
by the owner alone or with the assistance of members of the household or hired
employees. See also AGRICULTURE, AGRICULTURAL USE, and AGRITOURISM. Does not
include AGRICULTURAL SUPPORT SERVICE.
   (c)   RARE OR ENDANGERED SPECIES. As used in the Development Code or the San
Bernardino County Environmental Review Guidelines, shall be as defined in §
15380 of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines.
   (d)   REAR LOT LINE. See LOT.
   (e)   REAR YARD. See YARD.
   (f)   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION. The following reasonable accommodation terms
are defined as follows:
      (1)   MINOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION. Any deviation requested and/or
granted from the strict application of the laws, rules, policies, practices
and/or procedures of the County, including land use and zoning regulations of
this Code, resulting in a physical modification to the property which can be
removed or terminated in 90 days or less after the need for the reasonable
accommodation ends.
      (2)   MAJOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION.
         (A)   PHYSICAL MODIFICATION. Any deviation requested and/or granted
from the strict application of the laws, rules, policies, practices and/or
procedures of the County, including land use and zoning regulations of this
Code, resulting in a physical modification to the property which cannot be
restored or terminated within 90 days or less after the reasonable
accommodation is terminated.
         (B)   LAND USE MODIFICATION (RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY). Any land use
deviation requested and/or granted from the strict application of the land use
and zoning regulations of this Code for the establishment and operation of a
residential care facility.
   (g)   RECLAMATION. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (h)   RECREATION HALL. A relatively large room or hall (over 3,000 sq. ft.)
within a multiple-family project with a kitchen for hosting fairly large events
and concerts (60-80+ people) and may have an area set up, more or less
permanently, for indoor games (e.g. ping pong tables, pool tables, foosball
tables, etc.), for a library, for small gatherings, or for use as a mini
cinema.
   (i)   RECREATIONAL AND ENTERTAINMENT SERVICES. Establishments that provide
leisure time activities and services that involve many people in a public
assembly use where people either participate individually or are entertained by
an activity. See also RURAL SPORTS AND RECREATION.
   (j)   RECREATIONAL CABIN. Existing legal non-conforming structure authorized
under the Small Tract Act of 1938, 43 U.S.C.A. § 682a, or other Homestead Act
enacted by Congress. The structure is not considered a dwelling as defined in
the California Residential Code or primary use of a parcel, but is allowed
limited use under provisions of this Development Code.
   (k)   RECREATIONAL USE. Public use of land for walking, hiking, skiing,
riding, driving, picnicking, camping, swimming, boating, fishing, hunting or
other outdoor games or sports for which land or facilities are provided for
public participation.
   (l)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper
or camping trailer, with or without self-propelled motive power, designed for
human habitation for recreational or emergency occupation, and that may be
moved upon a public highway without a special permit or chauffeur’s license or
both without violating any provision of the California Vehicle Code. A SELF
CONTAINED RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall be a recreational vehicle with a kitchen
sink, cooking appliance, refrigeration facilities, and a separate bathroom
containing a water closet with a flush toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
A SELF-CONTAINED RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall have adequate provisions for the
sleeping, bathing, sanitation, food preparation and eating by the number of
people occupying the self contained recreational vehicle.
   (m)   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (RVP). (See Land Use Tables.) An area or
tract of land, within an area where the land use zoning district allows
recreational uses and where one or more lots are rented or leased or held out
for rent, or lease to owners or users of recreational vehicles for temporary
occupancy. Incidental food, alcoholic beverages, sales and service intended for
the convenience of the guests at the recreational vehicle park are allowed.
   (n)   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Reusable material including but not limited to
metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture,
or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. RECYCLABLE
MATERIAL does not include refuse or hazardous material. RECYCLABLE MATERIAL may
include used motor oil collected and transported in compliance with Health and
Safety Code §§ 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4).
   (o)   RECYCLING FACILITY. (See Land Use Tables). A center for the collection
and/or processing of recyclable materials. A CERTIFIED RECYCLING FACILITY or
CERTIFIED PROCESSOR is a recycling facility certified by the California
Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California
Beverage Container recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A RECYCLING
FACILITY does not include storage containers or processing activity located on
the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely
for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business
or manufacturer. RECYCLING FACILITIES may include the following:
      (1)   COLLECTION FACILITY. A center for the acceptance, by donation,
redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. The facility
does not use power-driven processing equipment except as provided by this
Title. Collection facilities may include the following:
         (A)   REVERSE VENDING MACHINE(S). As defined below.
         (B)   SMALL COLLECTION FACILITY. Occupies an area of not more than 500
square feet and may include:
            (I)   A mobile unit;
            (II)   Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse
vending machines occupying more then 50 square feet;
            (III)   Kiosk type units, which may include permanent structures;
            (IV)   Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable
materials.
         (C)   LARGE COLLECTION FACILITY. May occupy an area of more than 500
square feet and may include permanent structures.
      (2)   PROCESSING FACILITY. A building or enclosed space used for the
collection and processing of recyclable material. Processing means the
preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user’s
specifications, by means such as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening,
grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and
remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following:
         (A)   LIGHT PROCESSING FACILITY. Occupies an area of under 45,000
square feet of gross collection, processing, and storage area and has up to an
average of two outbound truck shipments per day. LIGHT PROCESSING FACILITIES
are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding
and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable
materials sufficient to qualify as a Certified Processing Facility. A LIGHT
PROCESSING FACILITY shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than
food and beverage containers.
         (B)   HEAVY PROCESSING FACILITY. Any processing facility other than a
LIGHT PROCESSING FACILITY.
      (3)   REVERSE VENDING MACHINE. An automated mechanical device that
accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers, including, but
not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and cartons, and
issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the
container’s redemption value as determined by the State. A REVERSE VENDING
MACHINE may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire
process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily
store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their
relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a
recycling facility, multiple grouping of REVERSE VENDING MACHINES may be
necessary. A BULK REVERSE VENDING MACHINE is a reverse vending machine that is
larger than 50 square feet; is designed to accept more than one container at a
time; and will pay by weight instead of by container.
      (4)   MOBILE RECYCLING UNIT. An automobile, truck, trailer or van,
licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, which is used for the collection
of recyclable materials. A MOBILE RECYCLING CENTER also means the bins, boxes
or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the
collection of recyclable materials.
      (5)   SCRAP AND DISMANTLING YARD. Outdoor establishments primarily
engaged in assembling, breaking up, sorting, and the temporary storage and
distribution of recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials, including
auto wreckers engaged in dismantling automobiles for scrap, and the incidental
wholesale or retail sales of parts from those vehicles. Includes light and
heavy processing facilities for recycling (see the definitions above). Does not
include: pawn shops, and other secondhand stores; the sale of operative used
cars; or landfills or other waste disposal sites. See also MOTOR VEHICLE
DISMANTLING FACILITY and SALVAGE OPERATIONS.
   (p)   RECYCLING FACILITY, ACCESSORY. (See Land Use Tables.) A recycling
facility as defined above, that is incidental to a primary industrial or
commercial use.
   (q)   RECYCLED WATER. See NON-POTABLE WATER.
   (r)   REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION RATE (Eto). The quantity of water, which
evaporates from adjacent soils and/or other surfaces, and which also is
transpired by plant material during a specified time. Specified times are
normally collected as monthly and daily readings. Monthly and daily Eto’s can
be found on the California Irrigation Management Information Systems (CIMIS)
website.
   (s)   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (t)   REHABILITATION. The restoration of deteriorated structures,
neighborhoods and public facilities. It may involve repair, renovation,
conversion, expansion, remodeling, reconstruction or any combination thereof.
   (u)   REHABILITATION CENTER. See MEDICAL SERVICES - REHABILITATION CENTER.
   (v)   REHABILITATED LANDSCAPE. A re-landscaping project that meets the
applicability requirements of
Chapter 83.10, Landscaping Standards.
   (w)   RELATED LAND USE. A land use that is supportive of the predominant
land use of an area. For example, a neighborhood commercial center is a
supportive use in the residential land use category.
   (x)   RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY FACILITY. See MEETING FACILITY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
and PLACES OF WORSHIP.
   (y)   REMAINDER PARCEL. See PARCEL, REMAINDER.
   (z)   REMOTE UNIT. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   (aa)   REPAIR SERVICES (NON-AUTOMOTIVE). (See Land Use Tables.)
Establishments engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals,
households and firms.
   (bb)   RESERVE PARCEL. See PARCEL, RESERVE.
   (cc)   RESERVOIR. A naturally occurring or artificially created body of
water (impounded above or below surface level) with a designated holding
capacity of at least one acre-foot of water. Does not include POND. See also
LAKE.
   (dd)   RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. (See Land Use Tables.) See
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
   (ee)   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY.
      (1)   LICENSED (SEVEN OR MORE PERSONS). A place, site or building, or
groups of places, sites or buildings, licensed by the State, in which seven or
more individuals with a disability reside who are not living together as a
single housekeeping unit (see SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT ) and in which every
person residing in the facility (excluding the licensee, members of the
licensee’s family, or persons employed as facility staff) is an individual with
a disability. Does not include GROUP RESIDENTIAL .
      (2)   UNLICENSED (SEVEN OR MORE PERSONS). A place, site or building, or
groups of places, sites or buildings, which is not licensed by the State, and
is not required by law to be licensed by the State, in which seven or more
individuals with a disability reside who are not living together as a single
housekeeping unit (see SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT ) and in which every person
residing in the facility (excluding persons employed as facility staff) is an
individual with a disability. Does not include GROUP RESIDENTIAL .
      (3)   LICENSED (SIX OR FEWER PERSONS). State-licensed facilities that
provide care, services, or treatment in a community residential setting for six
or fewer adults, children, or adults and children and which are required by
State law to be treated as a single housekeeping unit for zoning purposes.
Small licensed residential care facilities shall be subject to all land use and
property development regulations applicable to single housekeeping units (see
SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT ). Does not include GROUP RESIDENTIAL .
      (4)   UNLICENSED (SIX OR FEWER PERSONS). A place, site or building, or
groups of places, sites or buildings, which is not licensed by the State and is
not required by law to be licensed by the State, in which six or fewer
individuals with a disability reside who are not living together as a single
housekeeping unit and in which every person residing in the facility (excluding
persons employed as facility staff) is an individual with a disability. Does
not include GROUP RESIDENTIAL .
   (ff)   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. A project containing one or more residential
dwelling units, including mobile homes, or a subdivision of land for the
purpose of constructing one or more residential dwelling units.
   (gg)   RESIDENTIAL HOTEL. See HOTEL, RESIDENTIAL.
   (hh)   RESIDENTIAL USE. One or more of the dwelling unit types listed in the
tables Division 2 (Land Use Zoning Districts and Allowed Land Uses) under the
heading of Residential.
   (ii)   RESIDUALS DEPOSITORY. See HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (jj)   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. Any person who creates a condition that may lead
to accelerated erosion. If a specific person cannot be identified, the owner of
the land where the condition exists shall be considered the responsible person.
   (kk)   RESTAURANT, CAFÉ, COFFEE SHOP. (See Land Use Tables.) A retail
business selling ready-to-eat food and/or beverages for on- or off-premise
consumption. These include eating establishments where customers are served
from a walk-up ordering counter for either on- or off-premise consumption
( COUNTER SERVICE ); and establishments where customers are served food at
their tables for on-premise consumption ( TABLE SERVICE ), that may also
provide food for take-out.
   (ll)   RETAIL, GENERAL. See GENERAL RETAIL.
   (mm)   RETAIL SALE. A sale of commodities or goods for personal household or
farm consumption directly to the ultimate consumer. Sales are normally in small
quantities and may include the rendering of services incidental to and
supportive of the sale of the merchandise.
   (nn)   REVERSED CORNER LOT. See LOT.
   (oo)   REVERSE VENDING MACHINE. See RECYCLING FACILITY.
   (pp)   REVERSION TO ACREAGE. The process by which subdivided real property
may be reverted to acreage.
   (qq)   REVIEW AUTHORITY. Person, body or agency authorized to render land
use decisions or provide technical recommendations to the Planning Agency.
   (rr)   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any strip or area of land, including surface, overhead,
or underground, granted by easement, for construction and maintenance according
to a designated use, such as drainage canals and ditches, electric power and
telephone lines, gas, oil, water, and other pipelines, highways and roads and/
or flowage or impoundment of surface waters.
   (ss)   RIGHT-OF-WAY, TRANSPORTATION. See TRANSPORTATION RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (tt)   RIPARIAN HABITAT. A natural plant community located along, and
dependent upon, a water body or water course (e.g., sides of canyon bottoms,
creeks, streams, rivers, etc.)
   (uu)   ROAD or ROADWAY. An open way for vehicular traffic.
   (vv)   ROAD EASEMENT. See EASEMENT.
   (ww)   ROAD EASEMENT, PRIVATE. See EASEMENT.
   (xx)   ROAD SYSTEM. The classification of streets and highways by their
diverse functions and design. The following is the commonly used hierarchy of
streets and highways for planning purposes:
      (1)   LOCAL STREET. A roadway allowing access to abutting land, serving
local traffic only.
      (2)   COLLECTOR. A street used by traffic to travel from local streets to
secondary or major highways; usually it allows direct access to abutting
properties.
      (3)   EMERGENCY ACCESS ROUTE. A two-lane street of high standards,
designed, constructed and specifically identified as an emergency access route
to serve as a collector or distributor of neighborhood traffic and as an
alternative access route in an emergency situation.
      (4)   MOUNTAIN SECONDARY HIGHWAY. A controlled access, moderate speed,
two-lane highway, designed and constructed to accommodate high volumes of
intercommunity traffic.
      (5)   MOUNTAIN MAJOR HIGHWAY. A limited access, high speed, four-lane
highway, designed and constructed to accommodate large volumes of
intercommunity traffic. The mountain expressway connects intensely developed
areas and points of interest. It is a four-lane highway with intersections at
grade. It is striped for two lanes with shoulders in each direction. Turn lanes
at intersections when necessary will require additional rights-of-way and
roadway widths.
      (6)   SECONDARY HIGHWAY. A street serving traffic from collector streets
and major highways that provides for traffic movement to and from traffic
generators and attractors; the street is subject to controlled access from the
properties fronting on the right-of-way; intersecting streets are subject to
appropriate spacing. It is a four-lane highway with intersections at grade. It
is striped for two lanes with shoulders in each direction. Turn lanes at
intersections when necessary will require additional rights-of-way and roadway
widths.
      (7)   MAJOR HIGHWAY. A street or thoroughfare that serves through traffic
movement across urban areas or to major traffic generators and attractors; it
is subject to controlled access from properties fronting on the right-of-way;
intersecting streets are subject to appropriate spacing. It is a four-lane
highway with intersections at grade. It is striped for two lanes with shoulders
in each direction with turn lanes at intersections. Additional rights-of-way
and roadway widths may be necessary for turn lanes.
      (8)   MAJOR DIVIDED HIGHWAY. A road or thoroughfare that serves through
traffic movement across urban areas, subject to controlled access from
properties fronting on the right-of-way; intersecting streets are subject to
appropriate spacing. It is a divided four-lane road with intersection at grade.
It is striped for two lanes with shoulders in each direction with a raised
median and turn lanes. Additional rights-of-way and roadway widths may be
necessary for turn lanes.
      (9)   MAJOR ARTERIAL HIGHWAY. A road or thoroughfare that serves through
traffic movement across urban areas, subject to controlled access from
properties fronting on the right-of-way; intersecting streets are subject to
appropriate spacing. It is a six-lane highway that may have grade separations
at intersections. It is striped for three lanes with shoulders in each
direction with turn lanes at intersections. Additional rights-of-way and
roadway widths may be necessary for turn lanes.
      (10)   FREEWAY. A multilane highway with full grade separation (i.e.,
intersections are separated by under or overpasses), median strips and fencing
or landscaping strips along the sides. It basically services intercity and
interstate traffic. See also FREEWAY.
   (yy)   ROCKFALL. Failure and rapid downhill movement of rocks as a result of
gravity, which can be initiated by earthquake shaking.
   (zz)   ROOF SIGN. See SIGN.
   (aaa)   ROOT BARRIER. A plastic wall-like structure that is installed
underground and designed to prevent the roots from trees from causing damage to
streets, sidewalks, walkways, foundations, and other hardscapes.
   (bbb)   RUBBER MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS I AND II.
   (ccc)   RUMPUS ROOM. See RECREATION ROOM.
   (ddd)   RUNOFF. Water that is not absorbed by the soil or the landscape in
which it has been applied and flows from the landscaped area onto adjacent
surfaces, creating water waste.
   (eee)   RURAL SPORTS AND RECREATION. (See Land Use Tables.) Facilities for
sports and recreational activities requiring large sites and/or remote
locations, including hunting and fishing clubs, off-road vehicle parks, and
shooting (rifle, pistol, and archery) ranges, ski resorts. See also
RECREATIONAL USE.
   (fff)   RV SALES. See MOBILE HOME, BOAT OR RV SALES.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4057,
passed - - 2008; Am. Ord. 4136, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4169, passed - -2012;
Am. Ord. 4189, passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4230, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4393,
passed - -2020)
§ 810.01.210 Definitions, S.
   (a)   SALVAGE OPERATIONS. (See Land Use Tables.) Establishments involved in
the storage, sale, wholesale and processing of salvage materials. This land use
classification does not include any of the sub-classifications of recycling
collection facilities (RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITIES) except “Scrap and
Dismantling Yard.” See also JUNK AND SALVAGE FACILITY.
      (1)   CONTAINED. These uses are conducted entirely within enclosed
structures and provide environmentally sound practices in collecting and
recycling oils and other toxic materials. No outside storage of parts occurs,
and establishments are monitored annually to ensure they are maintained
appropriately.
      (2)   GENERAL. These uses create major environmental disruption even when
carefully regulated. Dust, dirt, noise and unsightly conditions often prevail
with these operations.
   (b)   SCENIC CORRIDOR. The area outside a highway or an adopted trail right-
of-way that is generally visible to persons traveling on the highway or trail.
   (c)   SCHOOL. (See Land Use Tables.) A public or private academic
educational institution that offers instruction in the several branches of
learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Education
Code of the State of California. Schools types include:
         boarding school
         community college, college, or university
         elementary, middle, and junior high schools
         high school
         military academy
      Also includes schools providing specialized education/training. Examples
include the following:
           art school
         ballet and other dance school
         business, secretarial, and vocational school
         computers and electronics school
         drama school
         driver education school
         establishments providing courses by mail
         language school
         martial arts
         music school
         professional school (law, medicine, etc.)
         seminaries/religious ministry training facility
      Also includes facilities, institutions and conference centers that offer
specialized programs in personal growth and development, such as fitness,
environmental awareness, arts, communications, and management. Does not include
pre-school and child day care facilities (see also DAY CARE FACILITY).
   (d)   SCIENTIFIC GOODS MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS I.
   (e)   SCREENING. The use of landscaping, earth, fences, walls, trees,
shrubs, or other materials for visual, background, noise or sun exposure
control.
   (f)   SCRAP METAL PROCESSING FACILITY. (See Land Use Tables.) Any
establishment or place of business that is maintained, used, or operated solely
for the processing and preparing of scrap metals for remelting by steel mills
and foundries.
   (g)   SEAL. A metal, tamperproof clamp issued in compliance with the
California Desert Native Plants Act (Food and Agricultural Code §§ 80001 et
seq.) by the Agricultural Commissioner used to permanently affix a tag to a
native plant.
   (h)   SEARCHLIGHT. See SIGN.
   (i)   SECOND HAND STORES, PAWNSHOPS. (See Land Use Tables.) Retail
establishments that buy and sell used products, including clothing, furniture
and household goods, jewelry, appliances, musical instruments, business
machines and office equipment, tools, motors, machines, instruments, firearms,
or any similar secondhand articles or objects; includes indoor flea markets.
Does not include bookstores (GENERAL RETAIL); secondhand farm and construction
equipment (CONSTRUCTION, FARM, AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES); junk dealers, or
scrap/dismantling yards (RECYCLING FACILITIES—SCRAP AND DISMANTLING YARDS); the
sale of antiques and collectibles (GENERAL RETAIL); the sale of cars and other
used vehicles (AUTO AND VEHICLE SALES, LEASING, AND RENTAL, USED).
   (j)   SECONDARY HIGHWAY. See ROAD SYSTEM.
   (k)   SECTION. A section of the this Development Code, unless in reference
to some other specified statute, ordinance, chapter, division or title; or the
survey term regarding the subdivision of a Township into normally 36 equal
parts, each of which is approximately 640 acres.
   (l)   SECURITY QUARTERS. Temporary residential occupancy of a dwelling unit,
commercial coach, or travel trailer utilized to provide temporary quarters to
security personnel hired to guard part or all of the property on which the
security quarters are located as an accessory use. Does not include caretaker
housing (CARETAKER HOUSING).
   (m)   SEDIMENT. Eroded earth material that is carried by runoff and/or
deposited in a stream, drainage course, natural watercourse, lake or other
area.
   (n)   SEICHE. The high frequency fluctuation of an enclosed body of water,
which can be initiated by earthquake shaking.
   (o)   SEISMIC SAFETY HAZARD AREAS. Areas where a potential hazard exists due
to ground rupture from earthquakes. SEISMIC SAFETY HAZARD AREAS encompass
active or potentially active faults within the County (includes Alquist-Priolo
Special Studies Zones). Hazard area boundaries extend approximately 660 feet on
each side of known active or potentially active faults.
   (p)   SELECTED FLOOD. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (q)   SELF-CONTAINED MOBILE HOME. See MOBILE HOME, SELF-CONTAINED.
   (r)   SEMIPASSIVE THERMAL SYSTEM. See THERMAL SYSTEM, SEMIPASSIVE.
   (s)   SENSITIVE VIEWSHED. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   (t)   SERVICE STATION. (See Land Use Tables.) A site where the primary
activity is the retail sale and dispensing of motor fuels or oils, the retail
sale of lubricants, tires, batteries and other automobile accessories, and the
installation and servicing of the lubricants, tires, batteries and other
automobile accessories.
   (u)   SETBACK. The distance by which a structure, parking area or other
development feature must be separated from a lot line, other structure or
development feature, or street centerline. See also YARD, and §
83.02.070 (Setback Regulations and Exceptions). See Figure 810-2 (Setbacks).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/077ce14e8f069782a1cf20d82356beeb9fd26121/
IMAGES/0-0-0-11095.jpg]
Figure 810-2
Setbacks
   (v)   SETBACK, STREET. See YARD, FRONT and YARD, SIDE STREET.
   (w)   SETBACK LINE, STREET. A line that defines the depth of the required
street setback, front yard, or side yard or side street where the yard or yards
abut a street. The street setback line shall be parallel or concentric with the
street right-of-way line.
   (x)   SEWAGE DISPOSAL AREA. An area utilized for the holding, leaching and
percolation of sewage wastes including an area that would provide a 100 percent
expansion of the leaching and percolation field for future use.
   (y)   SEWAGE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL FACILITY. (See Land Use Tables.) A site
with equipment and other facilities to treat sewage effluent transmitted to the
site via underground sewer lines to the water quality standard required by the
California Regional Water Quality Control Board.
   (z)   SHALL. A mandatory provision, regulation or specification.
   (aa)   SHOPPING CENTER. (See Land Use Tables.) A shopping center is two or
more business establishments under a single ownership, unified control or
designated as a unit located on a single parcel or combination of contiguous
parcels having a minimum frontage of 150 feet.
   (bb)   SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTALS. See
Chapter 84.28, “Short-Term Residential Rentals.”
   (cc)   SHRUB. Any woody, perennial plant having multiple stems and bearing
foliage from the ground up, commonly maintained at less than eight and more
than two feet in height when fully grown, adaptable to trimming, shaping and
pruning without injury to the plant itself.
   (dd)   SIDE LOT LINE. See LOT.
   (ee)   SIDE YARD. See YARD.
   (ff)   SIGN. Words, letters, numerals, emblems, designs, or other marks
shown on any flag, card, cloth, paper, metal, painted surface, glass, wood,
plaster, stone or other device of any kind or character by which anything is
made known and used to attract attention, including lighting devices the as
searchlights. SIGNS include four basic categories, (i.e., off-site, on-site,
directional and temporary) and may take many forms (e.g. freestanding,
monument, wall, roof, projecting walkway, display, etc.) Also signs are located
individually or in clusters (i.e., shopping center complex). The following
definitions clarify the differences between these categories and types:
      (1)   OFF-SITE SIGN. A sign that is allowed only in certain specified
land use zoning districts as an independent use of the property not dependent
upon the location of another structure or use. The signs often advertise or
identify a business, function, establishment or product at a location other
than the property on which a business is located or a product is manufactured
or sold. The signs may advertise political viewpoints, political campaigns and
other noncommercial messages.
      (2)   ON-SITE SIGN. A sign that is allowed only in conjunction with
another use as an accessory use. The signs often advertise or identify a
commodity, service, business or profession that is sold, produced, conducted or
offered as one of the major functions of the primary use on the same site. The
signs may advertise political viewpoints, political campaigns and other
noncommercial messages. The signs may also advertise any commercial message.
      (3)   COMPLEX SIGN. A sign that is allowed in conjunction with a shopping
center, business, or other complex that is under a single ownership or unified
control having two or more establishments located on a single parcel or
combination of contiguous parcels.
      (4)   COMPLEX OCCUPANT SIGN. A sign that is allowed in conjunction with
an individual occupant within a shopping center, business, or other complex.
      (5)   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Signs that provide directional or traffic flow
information.
         (A)   PUBLIC DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Signs containing directional
information about public places owned or operated by Federal, State or local
governments or their agencies. Also included are historic, cultural, scientific
and educational signs, signs relating to publicly-owned natural phenomena,
publicly-owned or operated areas of natural scenic beauty, and areas naturally
suited for outdoor recreation, deemed to be in the interest of the traveling
public.
      (6)   DISPLAY SIGN. A single-faced sign that is affixed to any type of
display window or is adjacent to a display window.
      (7)   FREESTANDING SIGN. A single- or multi-faced sign that is not
attached to any building or structure.
      (8)   INDIVIDUAL SIGNS or ACCESSORY BUSINESS SIGN. Accessory signs that
are allowed in conjunction with a nonresidential use that is not located within
a complex (e.g., shopping center).
      (9)   MONUMENT SIGN. A single- or double-faced sign that is designed and
constructed as part of and placed on a monument base.
      (10)   PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY SIGN. An accessory sign hung from or on a
canopy and being oriented to pedestrian traffic.
      (11)   PROJECTING SIGN. A single- or double-faced sign attached to a
structure that extends in a perpendicular plane from the wall to which it is
attached.
      (12)   ROOF SIGN. A single-faced sign that is affixed to a roof of a
building or structure.
      (13)   SEARCHLIGHT. An apparatus containing a light source and a
reflector for projecting a strong, far-reaching beam greater than 200 feet in
any direction.
      (14)   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign that provides temporary information and/or
directions. The signs often are subject to the issuance of Temporary Use
Permits and often provide information regarding residential developments,
political candidates or issues, and real estate signs.
      (15)   WALL SIGN. A single-faced sign that is in any manner affixed to
any exterior wall of a structure, the exposed face of which is in a plane
parallel to the plane of the wall.
   (gg)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. (See Land Use Tables.) See DWELLING, SINGLE-
FAMILY.
   (hh)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, ATTACHED. (See Land Use Tables.) See
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED.
   (ii)   SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. The functional equivalent of a traditional
family or one household, whose members are an interactive group of persons
jointly occupying a single dwelling unit, including the joint use of and
responsibility for common areas, and sharing household activities and
responsibilities (e.g., meals, chores, household maintenance, expenses, etc.)
and where, if the unit is rented, all adult residents have chosen to jointly
occupy the entire premises of the dwelling unit, under a single written lease
or rental agreement with joint use and responsibility for the premises, and the
makeup of the household occupying the unit is determined by the residents of
the unit rather than the landlord or property manager.
   (jj)   SINGULAR PLURAL. Words used in the singular number include the plural
and words used in the plural number include the singular.
   (kk)   SITE. A parcel of land or contiguous parcels where land alterations,
including grading, clearing or construction are performed or proposed.
   (ll)   SITE PLAN, DETAILED. A drawing, to scale, on one sheet of paper of
the entire land parcel showing buildings, improvements, other physical features
and all dimensions.
   (mm)   SITE PLANNING. A process to develop a plan that shows how a parcel of
land may be developed, taking into consideration the natural and man-made
characteristics of the parcel.
   (nn)   SKILLED NURSING FACILITY. A health facility that provides skilled
nursing care and supportive care to patients whose primary need is for
availability of skilled nursing care on an extended basis.
   (oo)   SMALL FAMILY DAY CARE HOME. See DAY CARE, CHILD.
   (pp)   SMALL COLLECTION FACILITY. See RECYCLING FACILITY.
    (qq)   “SMART" IRRIGATION CONTROLLER. An irrigation controller that is
weather and soil moisture-based, and monitors and uses historical environmental
conditions for the specific location in which a landscape is located, by
automatically adjusting irrigation watering times based on the information
collected.
   (rr)   SOBER LIVING FACILITY. An unlicensed residential care facility with
more than two residents who are not living together as a single housekeeping
unit (see SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT), which is not licensed by the State and is
being used as a drug and alcohol recovery facility for persons who are
recovering from drug and/or alcohol addiction and in which all residents,
except for a house manager, are considered disabled under State or Federal law
and are actively enrolled and participating in an alcohol and/or drug recovery
program.
   (ss)   SOIL. The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the
immediate surface of the earth.
      (1)   CORROSIVE SOILS. Natural soils that, as a result of their chemical
makeup, may aggressively deteriorate concrete, metal or other susceptible
building material.
      (2)   EXPANSIVE SOILS. Natural clays that swell when saturated and shrink
when dry.
      (3)   HYDROCOLLAPSIBLE SOILS. Natural soils that collapse or compact
after a wetting event.
   (tt)   SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT. A report that shall be submitted with the
Landscape Documentation Package, as outlined by
Chapter 83.10, Landscaping Standards, that outlines the result of the soil
tests along with recommendation for soil amendments.
   (uu)   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Any solar collector solar device, or structural
design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the
collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating or
cooling; for domestic, recreational, therapeutic, or service water heating; for
the generation of electricity; for the production of process heat; and for the
production of mechanical work. SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS include passive thermal
systems, semipassive thermal systems, active thermal systems and photovoltaic
systems. This category does not include parabolic mirror and devices of a
similar nature.
   (vv)   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. A site used for the final disposal of
solid waste, which may also include facilities for separating and
differentiating waste products, and/or recycling the waste products. Includes
landfills.
   (ww)   SOLID WASTE. Any variety of waste, including household garbage,
metal, glass, shattered concrete, bricks from demolished houses, radioactive
wastes and mining talus.
   (xx)   SOLIDIFICATION AND STABILIZATION. See HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (yy)   SPECIAL DISTRICT. A governmental entity created in a given area to
provide services within that area. SPECIAL DISTRICTS can provide services such
as water, sewers, fire protection, and parks and recreation.
   (zz)   SPECIAL EVENTS, TEMPORARY. (See Land Use Tables.) All carnivals,
community celebrations, off-road vehicle races, outdoor festivals, music
events, sporting events, parades, fairs, animal races, religious festivals,
revival meetings, food truck events and similar public gatherings at locations
and facilities without an approved Conditional Use Permit, Minor Use Permit, or
Site Plan Permit. SPECIAL EVENTS shall be categorized based upon scope,
longevity, magnitude and use, into one of the following event types.
      (1)   MINOR EVENT.
         (A)   CLASS I. Anticipated attendance of 500 to 1,000 persons per day;
or a community celebration, religious festivals, revival meetings, food truck
events and similar public gatherings with anticipated attendance of 500 or
more. Staging events of off-highway motor vehicles, as defined and regulated in
Chapter 4 of Division 8 of Title 2, shall also be included as a CLASS I MINOR
EVENT.
         (B)   CLASS II. Intensive sporting events, the as off-road vehicle
races or rodeos, etc., and music events with an anticipated attendance of 200
to 500 persons per day. Included in this class are any events that are
advertised by a means of mass media (i.e., radio, television, newspaper,
Internet, phone trees, fliers, etc.) provided that a means of limiting
attendees to 500 persons per day is available and is strictly enforced.
      (2)   MAJOR EVENT.
         (A)   CLASS I. Anticipated attendance of over 1,000 persons per day.
         (B)   CLASS II. Intensive sporting events, such as off-road vehicle
races or rodeos, etc., or music events with an anticipated attendance of over
500 persons per day. Included in this class are any events that are advertised
by a means of mass media (i.e., radio, television, newspaper, Internet, phone
trees, fliers, etc.) where a means of limiting attendees is not available.
   (aaa)   SPECIAL FLOOD. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (bbb)   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (ccc)   SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA. Are those areas of landscape that are
dedicated to edible plant material, those areas that are irrigated with non-
potable/recycled water, and those areas that are dedicated to active play such
as parks, sports fields, golf courses, or where turf provides a playing
surface.
   (ddd)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. See ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   (eee)   SPECIFIED HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES. See HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (fff)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. See ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   (ggg)   SPECIMEN TREE. See TREE, SPECIMEN.
   (hhh)   SPHERE OF INFLUENCE. A SPHERE OF INFLUENCE is the probable ultimate
physical boundary of a city as established by the San Bernardino Local Agency
Formation Commission (LAFCO) in compliance with the Cortese-Knox-Hertzberg
Local Government Reorganization Act of 2000 (Government Code §§ 56000 et seq.).
A SPHERE OF INFLUENCE contains unincorporated County land that is outside a
city's boundaries and that relates to the city's planning.
   (iii)   SPORTS OR ENTERTAINMENT ASSEMBLY. (See Land Use Tables.) A large-
scale indoor or outdoor facility accommodating spectator-oriented sports,
concerts, and other entertainment activities. Examples of this land use include
amphitheaters, race tracks, rodeo arenas, stadiums and coliseums. May also
include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above uses,
including bars and restaurants, gift shops, video game arcades, etc.
   (jjj)   STABLE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building for the keeping of
horses, burros or mules owned by the occupants of the premises and not for
remuneration, hire or sale.
   (kkk)   STABLE, PUBLIC. A stable other than a private stable for keeping of
horses, burros or mules.
   (lll)   STANDARD PROJECT FLOOD. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (mmm)   START OF CONSTRUCTION. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (nnn)   STATE. State of California.
   (ooo)   STATE GEOLOGIST. Individual holding office as provided in the Public
Resources Code, § 677, Article 3, Chapter 2, Division 1.
   (ppp)   STATIC WATER PRESSURE. The pressure of the pipeline or municipal
water supply when the water is not flowing.
   (qqq)   STATION. An area that is served by an automatic irrigation valve
that has been programmed into the “smart” irrigation controller as a specific
number, which is to be recognized and controlled.
   (rrr)   STEALTH FACILITY. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   (sss)   STOCK COOPERATIVE. A common interest development in which a
corporation is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title
to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, and
all or substantially all of the shareholders of the corporation receive a right
of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is
held by the corporation. The owner’s interest in the corporation, whether
evidenced by a share of stock, a certificate of membership, or otherwise, shall
be deemed to be an interest in a common interest development and a real estate
development for purposes of the Corporations Code § 25100(f). In a STOCK
COOPERATIVE, both the separate interest, as defined in Civil Code § 4190 and
the correlative interest in the stock cooperative corporation, however
designated, are interests in real property. Includes a limited equity housing
cooperative, which is a STOCK COOPERATIVE that meets the criteria of the Health
and Safety Code § 33007.5.
   (ttt)   STONE PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS I AND II.
   (uuu)   STORAGE, GARAGE. See GARAGE, STORAGE.
   (vvv)   STORAGE/IMPOUND FACILITY. See MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE/IMPOUND
FACILITY.
   (www)   STORAGE—PERSONAL STORAGE, MINI-STORAGE. (See Land Use Tables.)
Structures containing generally small, individual compartmentalized or lockers
rented as individual storage spaces and characterized by low parking demand.
   (xxx)   STORAGE—VEHICLES STORAGE. (See Land Use Tables.) A facility for the
storage of operative cars and other fleet vehicles, trucks, buses, recreational
vehicles, and other motor vehicles. Includes facilities for the storage and/or
servicing of fleet vehicles. Also includes the parking of a vehicle on private
property for more than 72 hours without operation. Does not include commercial
parking lots, or dismantling yards (classified in RECYCLING—SCRAP AND
DISMANTLING YARDS).
   (yyy)   STORAGE—WAREHOUSE, INDOOR STORAGE. (See Land Use Tables.) Facilities
for the storage of furniture, household goods, or other commercial goods of any
nature. Includes cold storage. Does not include: warehouse, storage or mini-
storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public
(STORAGE—PERSONAL STORAGE, MINI-STORAGE); warehouse facilities primarily used
for wholesaling and distribution (see WHOLESALING AND DISTRIBUTION); or
terminal facilities for handling freight (see TRUCK TERMINAL).
   (zzz)   STORM, TEN YEAR. See TEN YEAR STORM.
   (aaaa)   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor immediately above it, or, if there is no
floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling immediately above
it.
   (bbbb)   STORY, HALF. A story with at least two of its opposite sides
meeting a sloping roof, nor more than two feet above the floor of the story.
   (cccc)   STREAM. Any watercourse designated by a solid line or dash and
three dots symbol on the largest scale of the United States Geological Survey
map most recently published, or as indicated in the development permit when it
has been field determined that a watercourse either:
      (1)   Supports fish at any time of the year;
      (2)   Has a significant water flow after any rainstorm; or
      (3)   Has a well-defined channel.
   (dddd)   STREAM BED SKIMMING. See SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS.
   (eeee)   STREET. Any public or private thoroughfare, with a width of 20 feet
or more, that affords a primary means of access to abutting property. See ROAD
SYSTEM.
   (ffff)   STREET LINE. The boundary line between a street and abutting
property.
   (gggg)   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a
structure, such as the bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders.
   (hhhh)   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, built, or installed by man, an
edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, including, but
without limitation; buildings, towers, smokestack, and overhead lines.
   (iiii)   STRUCTURE, APPROVED. A structure, paved area of impervious
substance or sewage disposal area that has been approved by the Building
Official or the Chief of the Environmental Health Services Division as an
improvement of the site, and that complies with all codes, ordinances and
regulations of San Bernardino County.
   (jjjj)   STRUCTURE, BUSINESS OR INDUSTRIAL. An occupied, permanent building,
attached to a permanent foundation, approved for the use under the California
Building Code, where one or more persons are employed on an eight hour shift,
at least five days per week.
   (kkkk)   STRUCTURE ENVELOPE. The interior of a parcel outside of the
building setback lines.
   (llll)   STRUCTURE FOOTPRINT. The area of a parcel included within the
surrounding exterior walls of a structure. In the absence of surrounding
exterior walls, the STRUCTURE FOOTPRINT shall be the area under the horizontal
projection of the roof.
   (mmmm)   STRUCTURE HEIGHT. See §
83.02.040 (Height Measurement and Height Limit Exceptions). For buildings see
BUILDING HEIGHT.
   (nnnn)   SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a
subdivision for himself or for others except that employees and consultants of
these persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not SUBDIVIDERS.
   (oooo)   SUBDIVISION. The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units
of improved or unimproved land, or any portion of land thereof, shown on the
latest equalized County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for
the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, except
for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes (i.e., the
cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock).
Property shall be considered as contiguous units even if it separated by roads,
streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. SUBDIVISION includes a
condominium project, as defined in Civil Code § 1350, or a community apartment
project, as defined in Business and Professions Code § 11004 or the conversion
of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in
Business and Professions Code § 11003.2. A conveyance of land to or from a
governmental agency, public entity, public utility, common carrier or
subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to the public utility for rights-
of-way shall not be considered a division of land for the purpose of computing
the number of parcels. See also MINOR SUBDIVISION PLOT PLAN.
   (pppp)   SUBSIDENCE. The sinking of the earth’s surface, usually due to
mining, groundwater extraction, oil and gas withdrawal, earthquakes or other
physical forces.
   (qqqq)   SUBSTANDARD LOT. A unit of land, the area, width or other
characteristic that fails to meet the requirements of the land use zoning
district in which it is located.
   (rrrr)   SUBSTANDARD HOUSING UNIT. A dwelling unit that is either
dilapidated or unsafe, thus endangering the health or safety of the occupant,
or does not have adequate plumbing or heating facilities.
   (ssss)   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (tttt)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (uuuu)   SUPPLEMENTAL IRRIGATION. See TEMPORARY IRRIGATION.
   (vvvv)      SUPPORTIVE HOUSING. Housing with no limit on length of stay,
that is occupied by the target population, as defined by Health and Safety Code
§ 50675.14, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the
resident to retain the housing, improve his or her health status, maximize
their ability to live and, when possible, to work in the community. SUPPORTIVE
HOUSING that is provided in single-, two-, or multi-family dwelling units,
group residential, parolee-probationer home, residential care facilities, or
boarding house uses shall be permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited
in the same manner as the other single-, two- or multi-family dwelling units,
group residential, parolee-probationer home, residential care facilities, or
boarding house uses under this Code.
   (wwww)   SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS. (See Land Use Tables.) All, or any part
of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing
overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open pit mining of
minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying,
or surface work incident to an underground mine. SURFACE MINING OPERATIONS
include, but are not limited to, in place distillation or retorting or
leaching, the production and disposal of mining waste, prospecting and
exploratory activities, borrow pitting, streambed skimming, and segregation and
stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of same). The following
definitions shall further clarify mining issues:
      (1)   AREA OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE. An area designated by the State
Mining and Geology Board that is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the
extraction of which is judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs
for minerals in a particular region of the State within which the minerals are
located, and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land
uses, could result in the permanent loss of minerals that are of more than
local significance.
      (2)   AREA OF STATEWIDE SIGNIFICANCE. An area designated by the Board
that is known to contain a deposit of minerals, the extraction of which is
judged to be of prime importance in meeting future needs for minerals in the
State and which, if prematurely developed for alternate incompatible land uses,
could result in the permanent loss of minerals that are of more than local or
regional significance.
      (3)   BORROW PITS. Excavations created by the surface mining of rock,
unconsolidated geologic deposits or soil to provide material (borrow) for fill
elsewhere.
      (4)   COMPATIBLE LAND USES. Land uses inherently compatible with mining
and/or that require a minimum public or private investment in structures, land
improvements, and that may allow mining because of the relative economic value
of the land and its improvements. Examples of these uses may include, but shall
not be limited to, very low density residential, geographically extensive but
low impact industrial, recreational, agricultural, silvicultural, grazing, and
open space.
      (5)   HAUL ROAD. A road along which material is transported from the area
of excavation to the processing plant or stockpile area of the surface mining
operation.
      (6)   IDLE. Surface mining operations curtailed for a period of one year
or more, by more than 90 percent of the operation’s previous maximum annual
mineral production, with the intent to resume those surface mining operations
at a future date.
      (7)   INCOMPATIBLE LAND USES. Land uses inherently incompatible with
mining and/or that require public or private investment in structures, land
improvements, and landscaping and that may prevent mining because of the
greater economic value of the land and its improvements. Examples of these uses
may include, but shall not be limited to, high density residential, low density
residential with high unit value, public facilities, geographically limited but
impact intensive industrial, and commercial.
      (8)   MINED LANDS. The surface, subsurface, and ground water of an area
in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted,
including private ways and roads appurtenant to any area, land excavations,
workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment,
machines, tools, or other materials or property that result from, or are used
in, surface mining operations are located.
      (9)   MINERALS. Any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or
groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic
substances, including, but not limited to, coal, peat, and bituminous rock, but
excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum.
      (10)   OPERATOR. Any person who is engaged in surface mining operations,
or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his or her behalf, except
a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages
as his or her sole compensation.
      (11)   RECLAMATION. The combined process of land treatment that minimizes
water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat,
flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations,
including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that
mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition that is readily adaptable for
alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The
process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require
backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization,
or other measures.
      (12)   STREAM BED SKIMMING. Excavation of sand and gravel from stream bed
deposits above the mean summer water level or stream bottom, whichever is
higher.
      (13)   VESTED RIGHT. For the purpose of mining and reclamation, a person
shall be deemed to have vested rights, if, before January 1, 1976, the person
has, in good faith and in reliance upon a permit, (if the permit or other
authorization was required, and was in compliance with County regulations),
diligently commenced surface mining operations and incurred substantial
liabilities for work and necessary materials. Expenses incurred in obtaining
the enactment of an ordinance in relation to a particular operation or the
issuance of a permit shall not be deemed liabilities for work or materials.
   (xxxx)   SWAP MEET, OUTDOOR MARKET, AUCTION YARD. (See Land Use Tables.) The
sale of used and/or new merchandise by individual vendors in a temporary or
permanent facility operated and managed by a different proprietor or business
entity, provided that the operator may also be engaged in sales. An INDOOR SWAP
MEET OR FLEA MARKET occupies a building typically designed for retail sales
with tables, booths, or other spaces for the individual vendors.
   (yyyy)   SWING JOINT. An irrigation component that provides a flexible,
maneuverable, leak-free connection between the irrigation head body and
irrigation lateral pipeline, allowing for movement in any direction helping to
prevent equipment damage.
   (zzzz)   SYSTEM HEIGHT. See WIND ENERGY SYSTEM.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008; Am. Ord. 4136,
passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4245, passed - -2014; Am. Ord. 4280, passed - -2015;
Am. Ord. 4331, passed - -2017)
§ 810.01.220 Definitions, T.
   (a)   TAG. A paper or cloth label issued in compliance with the California
Desert Native Plants Act (Food and Agricultural Code §§ 80001 et seq.) by the
Agricultural Commissioner that can be attached to a native plant or a
commercial load by means of a string and a Seal. A TAG specifies a serial
number, type of plant, fee required, location of origin, date of removal,
witnessing authority, applicant, destination, and proposed use (e.g.,
commercial processing, commercial landscaping, etc.).
   (b)   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY, WIRELESS. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION
FACILITY.
   (c)   TEMPORARY IRRIGATION. Irrigation solely for the purposes of
establishing plant material, or irrigation that will not continue after plant
material establishment. TEMPORARY/SUPPLEMENTAL IRRIGATION is intended for a
period of six months or less.
   (d)   TEMPORARY SIGN. See SIGN.
   (e)   TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENTS. See SPECIAL EVENTS, TEMPORARY.
   (f)   TENTATIVE MAP. A map made for the purpose of showing the design and
improvements of the proposed subdivision, to include the street pattern, lot
layout, easements that are to remain, and existing and proposed subdivision.
The TENTATIVE MAP need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey
of the property. See also VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.
   (g)   TEN YEAR STORM. A storm of an intensity that would be exceeded on the
average only once every ten years. The intensity for the storm shall be
determined according to San Bernardino County Hydrology Manual. The duration of
the storm used in runoff calculation shall be equivalent to the concentration
time for the area that drains through the project.
   (h)   TERMINALS, TRUCK. See TRUCK TERMINALS.
   (i)   TEXTILE MILL PRODUCTS. See MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS I AND II.
   (j)   THEATER. An indoor facility for public assembly and group
entertainment, other than sporting events. Examples include:
 
civic theaters, and facilities for “live” theater and concerts
movie theaters
similar public assembly facilities
 
      See also MEETING FACILITY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE and SPORTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
ASSEMBLY.
   (k)   THERMAL SYSTEM, ACTIVE. A system that utilizes solar devices thermally
isolated from the living space to provide for collection, storage, and
distribution of solar energy for heating or cooling.
   (l)   THERMAL SYSTEM, PASSIVE. A system that utilizes the structural
elements of the building, and is not augmented by mechanical components, to
provide for collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for heating
or cooling.
   (m)   THERMAL SYSTEM, SEMIPASSIVE. A system that utilizes the structure of a
building and is augmented by mechanical components to provide for collection,
storage, and distribution of solar energy for heating or cooling.
   (n)   THROUGH LOT. See LOT.
   (o)   TRAILER CAMP OR PARK. (See Land Use Tables.) A site where space for
house trailers is rented for compensation on a daily basis, or where free
occupancy or camping is permitted to house trailer owners or users, but not
including automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied house trailers
are parked for inspection and sales.
   (p)   TOWER HEIGHT. See WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   (q)   TRAILER COACH. A mobile home, trailer, recreation trailer, travel
trailer, camp car or other vehicle with or without motive power, designed and
constructed to travel on the public thoroughfare in compliance with the
provisions of the California Motor Vehicle Code and designed or used for human
habitation.
   (r)   TRAILER, TRAVEL. A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, that is
designed or used for human habitation and for travel or recreational purposes,
that does not exceed eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, and that may be
moved upon a public highway without a special permit and/or chauffeur’s license
without violating any provisions of the California Vehicle Code.
   (s)   TRANSFER AND STORAGE FACILITIES. See HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (t)   TRANSITIONAL HOUSING. Rental housing operating under program
requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of
the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined
future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. TRANSITIONAL
HOUSING that is provided in single-, two- or multi-family dwelling units, group
residential, parolee-probationer home, residential care facilities, or boarding
house uses shall be permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited in the
same manner as the other single-, two-, or multi-family dwelling units, group
residential, parolee-probationer home, residential care facilities, or boarding
house uses under this Code.
   (u)   TRANSMISSION LINES. See PIPELINES, TRANSMISSION LINES.
   (v)   TRANSPORTABLE TREATMENT UNIT (TTU). Hazardous waste or groundwater
contamination treatment works that are designed to be moved either intact or in
modules and that are intended to be operated at a given location for a limited
period of time.
   (w)   TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES. (See Land Use Tables.) Roads or bridges,
and the appurtenant improvements necessary for the safe and efficient movement
of vehicular traffic including but not limited to the following: signalization
and other traffic controls; sidewalks; bikeways when they are within the
ultimate right-of-way of a road or bridge. It also includes airports, bus
terminals, bus stops, and train stations.
   (x)   TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES PLAN, LOCAL AREA. A transportation plan
adopted by the Board of Supervisors for a particular transportation facilities
area. A plan shall include a map of the area showing its boundaries, the
location of the proposed Transportation Facilities, and an accompanying text
that contains a description of all proposed Transportation Facilities that will
be needed to serve new development within the boundaries of the Plan and the
cost of constructing each proposed transportation facility within the
boundaries of the plan. Costs may include, but are not limited to, engineering
studies, acquisition of rights-of-way, construction of bridges, tunnels,
roadways, traffic signals and any other appurtenant Transportation Facilities.
The plan shall also include a schedule of fees, a detailed description of the
methods that will be utilized to finance the proposed Transportation
Facilities, including any fee calculations needed, and a construction priority
listing of the proposed Transportation Facilities.
   (y)   TRANSPORTATION RIGHT-OF-WAY. The acquired right that an agency
possesses to pass across and improve the lands of another for access purposes.
   (z)   TREATMENT FACILITIES. See HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (aa)   TRAVEL TRAILER. See TRAILER, TRAVEL.
   (bb)   TREE. Any woody perennial plant, normally having a single, elongated
main stem or trunk bearing the foliage or crown, a formed crown, and generally
with few or no branches on its lower part. For tree removal purposes, it shall
mean a tree attaining somewhere in its natural or planted range a height of at
least six feet and a diameter of not less than two inches, measured at average
ground level.
   (cc)   TREE, DAMAGED. Any tree certified by a tree expert, as defined in
this Code, that is damaged by insects, smog, fire, disease or other natural or
man-made causes (including, but not limited to, any artificial attachments such
as wires or signs).
   (dd)   TREE EXPERT. A California Registered Professional Forester, a County
Agricultural Commissioner Biologist, an arborist certified by the Western
Chapter of the International Society of Arborists or a person certified by the
County Agricultural Commissioner for practice in one or more regions of the
County.
   (ee)   TREE, NATIVE. Trees that grow or live naturally in San Bernardino
County, including smog resistant trees introduced as part of a reforestation
program. This shall not be construed to mean orchards, commercial nursery stock
or planted landscaping. Trees planted and/or growing outside their normal
habitat, except where the trees have been transplanted in compliance with
Chapter 88.01 (Plant Protection and Management) shall not be considered to be
native trees.
   (ff)   TREE REMOVAL. Any intentional act that will cause a tree to die,
including, but not limited to acts that inflict damage upon root systems, bark,
or other parts of the tree by fire, application of toxic substances, operation
of equipment or machinery, changing the natural grade of land by excavation or
filling the drip line area around the trunk, or to cut down, fell, push over,
dig up, poison, burn, or severely prune, trim or top, so that death of the tree
results, or such that the tree is severely damaged and/or is destroyed in any
manner, by any cause.
   (gg)   TREE, SPECIMEN. Any tree with a root ball greater than a 20-gallon
container.
   (hh)   TRUCK STOP. (See Land Use Tables.) A facility that provides
convenience services primarily for the trucking community. These services
include but are not limited to food, beverage, gasoline and retail services.
   (ii)   TRUCK TERMINAL. (See Land Use Tables.) A lot, lot area or parcel of
land used, designed or maintained for the purpose of storing, parking,
refueling, repairing, dispatching, servicing or keeping motor trucks and
associated equipment, together with those facilities necessary to service,
dispatch, store or maintain aforementioned vehicles, and their cargos and
crews.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4136, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4230,
passed - -2014)
§ 810.01.230 Definitions, U.
   (a)   U-PICK FARM AND/OR ORCHARD. (See Land Use Tables.) A farm and/or
orchard where customers personally harvest fruit, vegetables, flowers, or
herbs. A variety of activities in addition to fruit/vegetable picking may be
offered (e.g., pet farms, hayrides, puppet shows, etc.). Restroom facilities
may or may not be offered. U-pick farms may also operate a produce stand
selling the produce grown on the farm, along with other value-added products
(e.g., home-made pies, preserves, cider, candies, etc.).
   (b)   UNINCORPORATED COMMUNITIES. A definable urban area that is not legally
a city, but has the physical characteristics of one. An unincorporated
community does not have independent jurisdiction for land use planning within
its boundaries.
   (c)   URBAN SERVICES. The provision of water, gas, electricity, schools,
recreational facilities, fire and police protection, waste disposal,
circulation and other services that are necessary for high intensity uses.
   (d)   USE. The purpose for which the land or a building is arranged,
designed or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be
occupied or maintained. A primary, principal or main use is the use that
occupies the majority of the subject land, a building, business production or
activity as opposed to an accessary use. See Accessary use.
   (e)   UTILITY FACILITY. (See Land Use Tables.) A fixed base structure or
facility serving as a junction point for transferring electric utility services
from one transmission voltage to another or to local distribution and service
voltages, and similar facilities for water supply and natural gas distribution.
These uses include any of the following facilities that are not exempted from
County permit requirements by Government Code § 53091:
 
electrical substations and switching stations
natural gas regulating and distribution facilities
public water system wells, treatment plants and storage, water tanks
pumping plants
reservoirs
telephone switching facilities
utility corporation and maintenance yards
 
      These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified
in OFFICES). See also PIPELINES, TRANSMISSION LINES.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 810.01.240 Definitions, V.
   (a)   VALLEY REGION. The unincorporated area of the southwest portion of San
Bernardino County lying south and west of the Mountain Region as herein
defined.
   (b)   VARIANCE. A process for County consideration of requests to modify
certain standards of this Development Code when, because of special
circumstances applicable to the property, including location, shape, size,
surroundings, topography, or other physical features, the strict application of
the development standards otherwise applicable to the property denies the
property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and
in the same land use zoning district.
   (c)   VEHICLE, MOTOR. See MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (d)   VEHICLE SERVICES. (See Land Use Tables.) The repair, servicing,
alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning, or finishing of
automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a
primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle
parts as an accessory use. This use includes the following categories.
      (1)   MAJOR REPAIR/BODY WORK. These establishments include towing,
collision repair, other body work, and painting services; tire recapping; truck
maintenance.
      (2)   MINOR MAINTENANCE/REPAIR. Minor facilities providing limited repair
and maintenance services. Examples include: minor auto repair with no exterior
overnight storage of vehicles; muffler and radiator shops; quick-lube services;
tire and battery sales and installation (not including recapping).
      Does not include automobile parking (see PARKING FACILITIES), repair
shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on the same site (see AUTO AND
VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL and MOBILE HOME, RV, AND BOAT SALES AND RENTAL); gas
stations, which are separately defined; or dismantling yards, which are
included under RECYCLING - SCRAP AND DISMANTLING YARDS.
   (e)   VEHICULAR ACCESS RIGHTS. See ACCESS.
   (f)   VEHICLES, OPERATIVE. A new or used vehicle that is self propelled or
capable of being self-propelled with the installation of minor parts (e.g.
batteries, tires, plugs).
   (g)   VESTED RIGHT (MINING AND RECLAMATION). See Surface Mining Operations.
   (h)   VESTING TENTATIVE MAP. A tentative map for a residential subdivision,
as defined in the County Code, that shall have printed conspicuously on its
face the words VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.
   (i)   VETERINARIAN, COUNTY. See COUNTY VETERINARIAN.
   (j)   VETERINARY CLINIC, ANIMAL HOSPITAL. (See Land Use Tables.) Office and
indoor medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and
small animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. See also KENNEL.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4043, passed - -2008)
§ 810.01.250 Definitions, W.
   (a)   WALL SIGN. See SIGN.
   (b)   WAREHOUSE. See STORAGE - WAREHOUSE.
   (c)   WAREHOUSE RETAIL. (See Land Use Tables.) A retail store that
emphasizes the packaging and sale of products in large quantities or volumes,
some at discounted prices, where products are typically displayed in their
original shipping containers. Sites and buildings are usually large and
industrial in character. Patrons may be required to pay membership fees.
   (d)   WATERCOURSE. Any natural or man-made channel where water is
concentrated or collected from a tributary drainage area. A lake, river, creek,
stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which
waters flow at least periodically. WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated
areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
   (e)   WATER-INTENSIVE LANDSCAPING. Landscaping that has a plant factor of
0.7 or greater.
   (f)   WATERING WINDOW. The time within a 24-hour period in which an
irrigation system is allowed to operate.
   (g)   WATER USE CLASSIFICATION OF LANDSCAPE SPECIES (WUCOLS). The third
edition of the publication from the University of California Cooperative
Extension, the Department of Water Resources, and the Bureau of Reclamation
regarding plant material and their water use needs.
   (h)   WATER-SENSING DEVICES. Irrigation components that detect adverse
weather conditions (e.g., rain, wind, frost, etc.) and will automatically
override the pre-programmed irrigation schedule during adverse weather events.
   (i)   WHOLESALE. A sale of commodities or goods to others for resale and not
normally to the ultimate consumer. Sales can normally employ warehouses, open
enclosures and office space for the assembly, storage, distribution and display
of merchandise for large quantity sales to community or regional retailers,
manufacturers, and agricultural, commercial, industrial, institutional and
professional uses. Sales may include the rendering of services incidental to
and supportive of the sale of merchandise.
   (j)   WHOLESALING AND DISTRIBUTION. (See Land Use Tables.) Establishments
engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to contractors, industrial,
commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or
selling merchandise to persons or companies. Examples of these establishments
include:
 
 
agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants
assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of
farm products
merchant wholesalers
stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning
supplies and equipment
 
      Also includes storage, processing, packaging, and shipping facilities for
mail order and e- commerce retail establishments.
   (k)   WINE TASTING. A facility or area within a winery where wine and
related products are offered for retail sale, where wine may be tasted for a
fee, or without charge.
   (l)   WILDLAND. Timber, range, watershed and brush lands not under
cultivation and in which development is essentially nonexistent; usually rugged
open space terrain.
   (m)   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. (See Land Use Tables.) A system that utilizes wind
energy to pump a fluid or gas, or to drive a mechanical device to generate
electricity. Related wind energy terms are defined as follows:
      (1)   ACCESSORY WIND ENERGY SYSTEM. An accessory wind energy system
consists of one or more wind turbines that generate electricity of which more
than 50 percent shall be used on site. An accessory wind energy system includes
all the wind turbines on a single lot or on multiple parcels in common
ownership with a single, common land use. An accessory wind energy system
typically has a rated capacity of not more than 50 kilowatts. This capacity may
be increased to a maximum of the actual demonstrated energy use for a specific
site in question.
      (2)   SYSTEM HEIGHT. The combined height of the tower, the turbine and
any blade when at the 12 o'clock position.
      (3)   TOWER HEIGHT. The height above grade of the fixed portion of the
tower, excluding the wind turbine.
      (4)   WIND TURBINE. A device which converts the kinetic energy of wind
into a usable form of electric energy. A wind turbine may consist of a tower,
turbine, support structures, electrical wires, guy wires and other related
equipment.
   (n)   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY (TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY). (See
Land Use Tables.) A land use that sends and/or receives radio frequency
signals, including, but not limited to, cell towers, antennas, microwave dishes
or horns, structures or towers to support receiving and/or transmitting
devices, accessory development and structures, and the land on which they all
are situated. For the purposes of this Title, wireless telecommunication
facilities shall refer to the non- broadcast services identified in the rules
and regulations promulgated in compliance with the Federal Telecommunication
Act of 1996 as amended. Non-broadcast services require special equipment for
transmissions and/or reception and serve specific users. Services include
commercial wireless CRS (Cellular Radiotelephone Services), ESMR (Enhanced
Specialized Mobile Radio Service), and PCS (Personal Communication Services).
Amateur users are specifically excluded in this definition as they are governed
by FCC PRB-1. Commercial radio and television systems are considered broadcast
services and shall not be included in this definition. The following terms
related to non-broadcast wireless telecommunication facilities are defined as
follows:
      (1)   ANTENNA. Any structure or device used to radiate or collect
electromagnetic fields or waves. Specifically, a device of one or more
electrical parts that converts radio frequency electrical energy into radiated
electromagnetic energy and/or vice versa.
      (2)   CO-LOCATED WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. A telecommunication
facility used by more than one public or private entity.
      (3)   COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE. A wireless communications service
that is provided for profit (i.e., with the intent of receiving compensation or
monetary gain), is an interconnected service, and is available to the public,
or to classes of eligible users so as to be effectively available to a
substantial portion of the public.
      (4)   CAMOUFLAGE FACILITY. A wireless telecommunications facility that is
designed or located so that it blends to the maximum extent possible with the
predominant viewing background.
      (5)   CRS (CELLULAR RADIOTELEPHONE SERVICE). Commercial Mobile Radio
Services (Cellular) normally operating in the frequency range between 824 to
849 MHZ, and between 869 to 894 MHZ and other frequency bands as may be
authorized by the FCC.
      (6)   ENHANCED SPECIALIZED MOBILE RADIO SERVICE. One of the wireless
communication services regulated by the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau
(WTB) of the FCC operating at 800 MHZ or 900 MHZ and other frequency bands as
may be authorized by the FCC. In general, a wide geographic area Commercial
Mobile Radio Service that offers real-time, two-way switched voice service that
is interconnected with the public switched network, either on a stand-alone
basis or packaged with other telecommunications services, including dispatch
and paging services to specialized customers in a non-cellular system
configuration not interconnected to the public switched network.
      (7)   FIXED WIRELESS. A local operation providing services such as local
and long distance telephone and high-speed Internet to residential and business
customers by means of a small equipment installation (the “Camouflage Remote
Unit”) on the exterior of each home or business that elects to use this
service.
      (8)   JOINT LOCATION. The location of a telecommunication facility on a
parcel where two or more towers or structures supporting one or more antennas
have already been sited. A JOINT LOCATION SITE is also referred to as an
ANTENNA FARM.
      (9)   MONOPOLE. A wireless communication facility that consists of a
vertical unguyed structure, erected to support wireless communication antennas
and connecting appurtenances. As defined  here, a monopole may, without
limitation, be designed to look like a pole, tree, light standard, flag pole or
other similar structure.
      (10)   PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES (PCS). One of the Commercial
Mobile Radio Services regulated by the Wireless Telecommunication Bureau (WTB)
of the FCC under 47 C.F.R. part 24; also identified as one of the Personal
Wireless Services regulated by the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The PCS
provide a wide array of mobile and ancillary fixed communications services to
individuals and businesses including unlicensed wireless services and common
carrier wireless exchange access services as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)
(C)(i).
      (11)   REMOTE UNIT. A small equipment box that is attached to the
exterior of a residence or business that elects to use “fixed wireless”
technology for their local and long distance telephone and high- speed Internet
service.
      (12)   SENSITIVE VIEWSHED. A feature or vista that provides scenic value
as discussed in the Scenic Resources Section of the General Plan, specifically
in Policy OR-50.
      (13)   STEALTH FACILITY. A wireless telecommunications facility that is
designed or located so that the equipment installed at the facility is not
readily recognizable as telecommunications equipment.
   (o)   WOOD RECEIPT. A receipt that is to accompany one or more cords of
harvested wood and that is issued in compliance with the California Desert
Native Plants Act (Food and Agricultural Code §§ 80001 et seq.) by the
Agricultural Commissioner. A WOOD RECEIPT specifies a serial number, species of
wood, fee required, location of origin, date of removal, witnessing authority,
applicant, destination, and proposed use of the wood (e.g., commercial
processing, commercial landscaping, etc.).
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4136, passed - -2011; Am. Ord. 4163,
passed - -2012; Am. Ord. 4188, passed - -2012)
§ 810.01.260 Definitions, X.
   (a)   XERISCAPE.  A landscaping method that has been developed especially
for those climates that are susceptible to drought conditions and that utilize
water-conserving techniques, such as drought tolerant plant material, mulches,
and efficient irrigation practices.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4136, passed - -2011)
§ 810.01.270 Definitions, Y.
   (a)   YARD. An open space on a lot or parcel extending between a lot line
and a setback, other than a court, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground
upward except for projections allowed by this Development Code. See SETBACK and
§
83.02.070 (Setback Regulations and Exceptions).
      (1)   FRONT YARD. An area extending across the full width of the lot
between the front lot line or the existing or future street right-of-way and a
street setback line parallel thereto.
      (2)   INTERIOR SIDE YARD. An area extending from the required front yard
or, where there is no required front yard, from the front lot line to the
required rear yard or, where there is no required rear yard, to the rear lot
line and from the interior side lot line to a setback line parallel thereto.
      (3)   REAR YARD. An area extending across the full width of the lot
between the rear lot line and a setback line parallel thereto.
      (4)   SIDE STREET YARD. An area extending from the required front yard
or, where there is no required front yard, from the front lot line to the rear
lot line, and from the side street lot line, or the existing or future side
street right-of-way (whichever is greater) to a street setback line parallel
thereto.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007)
§ 810.01.280 Definitions, Z.
   (a)   ZONE, ZONE DISTRICT, OR ZONING DISTRICT. See LAND USE ZONING DISTRICT.
   (b)   ZONES A, AE, AH. AO, A99, AR, D, AND X. See FLOOD HAZARD.
   (c)   ZOO. (See Land Use Tables.) A zoological garden or other collection of
wild, exotic or dangerous animals that are raised, bred, trained and/or
maintained for regular public display and exhibition on the site. See also
LIBRARY, MUSEUM, ART GALLERY, OUTDOOR EXHIBIT.
(Ord. 4011, passed - -2007; Am. Ord. 4189, passed - -2012)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to California Codes
References to Ordinances
References to Special Districts Ordinances
References to Flood Control District Ordinances
References to Inland Counties Emergency Medical Agency Ordinances
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES
BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONS CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONS CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
§§ 5200 et seq.     83.13.060
§§ 8700 et seq.     84.22.030
§ 8765(c)            87.04.030
§ 11003.2            810.01.210
§ 11004              810.01.210
§ 11010.8            87.04.080
§ 19300 et seq.      84.34.010,
                      84.34.040
§ 19300.5            84.34.020
§ 23817.7            85.04.020
§ 23958              85.04.020
§ 23958.4            85.04.020
 
CIVIL CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
CIVIL CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 51.12              83.03.030,
                      83.03.060
§ 51.3               83.03.030,
                      83.03.060
§§ 798 et seq.      87.04.080
§ 798.76             83.03.030
§ 799.5              83.03.030
§§ 801 et seq.      86.06.090
§ 1104               86.06.090
§§ 1350 et seq.     87.04.080
§ 1350               810.01.210
§ 1351               83.03.080,
                      87.04.030
§ 1940               84.28.030
§§ 3114 et seq.     87.07.040
§ 4100               83.03.030
§ 4190               810.01.210
§§ 8410 et seq.     87.07.040
 
 
CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE
California Code Cites Code Section
CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 409                86.09.120
§ 771.010            87.05.040
§ 1094.8             85.21.060
§§ 1230.010 et seq. 87.03.090
§§ 1255.410 et seq. 87.03.090
§ 1822.50            88.02.050
§ 1822.50 - 1822.59  86.09.030
 
CODE OF REGULATIONS
California Code Cites Code Section
CODE OF REGULATIONS
California Code Cites  Code Section
Title 3, § 4902       84.35.050
Title 4                83.13.060
Title 4, Chapter 1     83.13.060
Title 4, Chapter 4     83.13.060
Title 4, § 2270       83.13.060
Title 24               84.02.050,
                       810.01.150
Title 24, Chapter 2-71 83.11.060
Title 25               84.14.020,
                       87.04.080
Title 25, Division 1   84.14.050
§ 1000                84.14.050
§ 1333                84.21.030
§ 1334                84.21.030
§§ 3500 et seq.      88.03.010,
                       88.03.020
§§ 3500-3505         88.03.090
§§ 3700-3713         88.03.090
§ 5415                810.01.050
§ 67425               810.01.100
                       
 
 
CORPORATION CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 25100(f)           810.01.050,
                      810.01.210
 
 
EDUCATION CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 66025.9            83.03.030
 
 
FISH AND GAME CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 1363               88.01.050
§§ 2800 et seq.     88.01.030
 
FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
§§ 8000a et seq.    810.01.180
§§ 11401 et seq.    88.01.090
                      81.01.030,
                      88.01.050,
§§ 80001 et seq.    88.01.060,
                      810.01.210,
                      810.01.220,
                      810.01.250
§ 81000              84.35.040
§ 81013              84.35.050
                      
 
GOVERNMENT CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
GOVERNMENT CODE
California Code Cites                     Code Section
Chapter 1, Article 2                      87.01.080
Chapter 3, Article 1.5                    87.04.060
Chapter 3, Article 1.7                    87.04.060
Chapter 3, Article 7                      87.03.120
Division 3                                87.04.050
Chapter 4, Article 3.5                    87.06.030
Chapter 4, Article 6                      87.06.020
Chapter 4, Article 7                      87.08.010
Chapter 4, Article 9                      87.06.050
Chapter 6, Article 1                      87.04.070
Chapter 7, Article 1, Division 2          87.01.120
Chapter 7, Article 2, Division 2          87.01.120
Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3            810.01.090
Title 7, Division 2                       810.01.080
Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 2, Article 3 810.01.180
§§ 12900 et seq.                        810.01.080
§ 12927(c)(1)                            810.01.080
§ 12955(l)                               810.01.080
§ 18541                                  83.03.030
§ 24845                                  84.34.010
§ 25126                                  810.01.070
§ 25127                                  810.01.070
§ 25128                                  810.01.070
§ 27280                                  86.09.130
§§ 50485 et seq.                        81.01.030
                                          81.01.030,
§§ 51200 et seq.                        82.08.020,
                                          82.08.040
§ 51201(e)                               82.08.040
§ 51201(n)                               82.08.040
§ 51238.5                                84.29.035
§ 51243                                  87.02.060
§ 51243.5                                87.02.060
§ 51245                                  86.10.020,
                                          87.02.060
§ 51282                                  86.10.020,
                                          87.02.060
§ 51293(d)                               82.08.040
§ 51296                                  87.02.060
                                          84.34.010,
§ 53069.4                                86.09.080,
                                          86.09.110
§ 53091                                  810.01.230
§§ 56000 et seq.                        810.01.140,
                                          810.01.210
                                          81.01.030,
§§ 65000 et seq.                        86.01.010,
                                          86.01.020
§ 65090                                  86.07.020
                                          85.21.030,
§ 65091                                  85.21.050,
                                          86.07.020
§ 65092                                  86.07.020
§ 65093                                  86.07.020
§ 65094                                  86.07.020
§ 65302                                  82.14.010
§ 65356                                  86.12.050
§ 65560                                  82.14.010
§ 65583.2(i)                             83.03.040
§ 65589.5(d)(2)                          83.03.050,
                                          83.03.130
§ 65643                                  86.08.010
§ 65800                                  82.14.010
§ 65850                                  84.34.010
§ 65850.5                                85.18.030
§ 65857                                  86.12.050
§ 65858                                  86.12.020
§§ 65864 et seq.                        86.13.010
§ 65864                                  86.13.010
§ 65865.1                                86.13.060,
                                          86.13.070
§ 65868                                  86.13.060
§§ 65870 et seq.                        86.06.090
§ 65892.13                               84.26.010,
                                          85.18.010
§§ 65900 et seq.                        86.01.020
§ 65905                                  85.21.030,
                                          85.21.050
§ 65906.5                                85.17.060
§ 65915                                  83.03.010,
                                          810.01.060
§§ 65915 et seq.                        83.03.010
§ 65915(b)(1)(F)                         83.03.030
§ 65915(c)                               83.03.080
§ 65915(e)                               83.03.130
§ 65915(i)                               83.03.020
§ 65915.5                                83.03.020
§§ 65920 et seq.                        86.06.060
§ 65927                                  85.03.100
§ 65928                                  85.03.100
§ 65943                                  81.01.090
                                          85.03.100,
§ 65956                                  86.06.030,
                                          87.01.090
§ 66001                                  89.01.060,
                                          89.03.080
§ 66004                                  89.01.020,
                                          89.03.020
                                          81.01.030,
§§ 66410 et seq.                        87.01.010,
                                          810.01.150
§ 66411                                  87.01.080
§ 66412                                  87.01.080
§ 66412(d)                               87.04.030
§ 66412.1                                87.01.080
§ 66412.2                                87.01.080
§ 66424.6                                87.02.060
§ 66426                                  87.01.080
§ 66426(a)                               87.02.050
§ 66426(b)                               87.02.050
§ 66426(c)                               87.02.050
§ 66426(d)                               87.02.050
§ 66426.5                                87.01.080
§ 66427.1                                87.04.030,
                                          87.04.080
§ 66427.1(a)                             87.02.060,
                                          87.04.080
§ 66427.4                                87.04.080
§ 66428                                  87.01.080,
                                          87.03.030
§ 66428(b)                               87.04.030
§ 66428.1                                87.04.030,
                                          87.04.080
§ 66434.2                                87.03.110,
                                          810.01.050
66436                                     87.07.040
§ 66442                                  87.03.100
§ 66450                                  87.03.060
§ 66451                                  87.02.060
§ 66451.19                               87.04.060
                                          85.03.080,
§ 66451.3                                87.04.030,
                                          87.04.080
§ 66452                                  87.02.060,
                                          87.02.110
§ 66452.1                                87.01.090,
                                          87.02.050
§ 66452.10                               87.02.060,
                                          87.04.030
§ 66452.2                                87.01.090
§ 66452.3                                87.02.040
§ 66452.4                                87.01.090
                                          87.01.110,
§ 66452.5                                87.01.120,
                                          87.02.050,
                                          87.02.110
                                          86.06.060,
§ 66452.6                                87.02.110,
                                          87.02.130
§ 66452.8                                87.02.060,
                                          87.04.030
§ 66452.9                                87.01.030,
                                          87.02.060
§ 66456.2                                87.07.020
§ 66457                                  87.03.090
§ 66462                                  87.03.100
§ 66463(b)                               87.03.060
§ 66463.5                                87.02.130
§ 66469                                  87.03.120
§ 66472.1                                87.03.120
§ 66473                                  87.01.090
§ 66473.1                                87.06.030
§ 66473.5                                87.01.090
                                          87.01.090,
§ 66474                                  87.02.060,
                                          87.03.120
                                          87.02.040,
§ 66474.2                                87.02.060,
                                          87.02.070,
                                          87.02.110
§ 66474.4                                87.02.060
§ 66474.4(c)                             87.02.060
§ 66474.4(c)(1)                          87.02.060
§ 66474.4(c)(2)                          87.02.060
§ 66474.4(e)                             87.02.060
§ 66474.6                                87.02.060
§ 66477.2                                87.03.100
§ 66484                                  87.06.050,
                                          89.03.020
§§ 66485 et seq.                        87.06.020
§§ 66498.1 et seq.                      87.02.110
§ 66499-1/2                              87.04.060
§ 66499-3/4                              87.04.060
§ 66499(a)(1)                            87.07.040
§ 66499(a)(2)                            87.07.040
§ 66499(a)(3)                            87.07.040
§ 66499(b)                               87.07.040
§ 66499.1                                87.07.040
§ 66499.2                                87.07.040
§ 66499.3(c)                             87.07.040
§ 66499.7                                87.07.040
§ 66499.16                               87.04.070
§ 66499.20-1/2                           87.03.120,
                                          87.04.060
§ 66499.20-1/4                           87.04.070
§ 66499.20 3/4                           87.04.060
§ 66499.34                               87.04.020
§ 66499.35                               87.04.020
§ 66499.52                               87.04.050
§ 65091(a)(3)                            86.07.020
§ 65915(d)(3)                            83.03.120
§§ 66453 through 66455.7                87.02.030
                                          
 
HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
California Code Cites    Code Section
Chapter 1, Division 2    84.34.050
Chapter 2, Division 2    84.34.050
§§ 1250 et seq.        84.34.050
Chapter 3.01, Division 2 84.34.050
§§ 1568.01 et seq.     84.34.050
Chapter 3.2, Division 2  84.34.050
§§ 1569 et seq.        84.34.050
§ 1596.78               810.01.060
Chapter 8, Division 2    84.34.050
Chapter 8.05, Division 2 84.34.050
§§ 8100 et seq.        84.06.040
§ 11054                 85.21.050
§ 11055                 85.21.050
§ 11056                 85.21.050
§ 11057                 85.21.050
§ 11058                 85.21.050
§ 11362.5               84.34.040
§ 11362.7 et seq.       84.34.020,
                         84.34.040
§ 11362.83              84.34.010
§ 11362.765(c)          84.34.040
§ 11362.768(g)          84.34.010
§ 17920.3               84.25.070
§ 17958.1               810.01.150
§ 18001.8               810.01.150
§ 18003.3               810.01.150
§ 18007                 810.01.150
§ 18008                 810.01.080,
                         810.01.150
§ 18008.7               810.01.150
§ 18010                 810.01.150
§ 18010.5               810.01.080,
                         810.01.150
§ 18012.5               810.01.080,
                         810.01.150
                         81.01.030,
§§ 18200 et seq.       84.14.020,
                         84.14.040,
                         84.14.050
§ 18551                 84.21.030,
                         810.01.150
§ 18613                 810.01.150
§§ 18901 et seq.       83.03.050
§ 19971                 810.01.150
§ 19990                 810.01.150
§§ 25135 et seq.       810.01.100
§ 25141                 810.01.100
§ 25143.2(b)(4)         810.01.200
§ 25179.3(l)            810.01.100
§ 25200.4               84.11.030
§ 25250.11              84.19.090,
                         810.01.200
§ 33007.5               810.01.210
§ 33334.2(e)            83.03.080
                         83.03.050,
§ 50052.5               83.03.080,
                         810.01.030
                         83.03.030,
§ 50053                 83.03.050,
                         83.03.080
                         83.03.030,
§ 50079.5               83.03.040,
                         83.03.050,
                         88.01.030
                         83.03.030,
§ 50093                 83.03.080,
                         87.03.090
§ 50105                 83.03.030,
                         810.01.060
§ 50519(b)(1)           810.01.150
§ 50675.14              83.03.060,
                         810.01.210
§ 51312                 83.03.060
 
PENAL CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
PENAL CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
§§ 311—313.4   85.21.050
§ 315                85.21.050
§ 316                85.21.050
§ 318                85.21.050
§ 836.5              86.09.080
§ 647b(b)            85.21.050
 
PUBLIC RESOURCES CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
PUBLIC RESOURCES CODE
California Code Cites                   Code Section
Division 13 (commencing with § 21000)  87.02.050
§ 677, Article 3, Chapter 2, Division 1810.01.210
§ 2207                                 88.03.010,
                                        88.03.020
§§ 2621 et seq.                       81.01.030,
                                        810.01.030
                                        81.01.030,
§§ 2710 et seq.                       88.03.010,
                                        88.03.020
§ 2762                                 88.03.070
§ 2770(d)                              88.03.060
§§ 2772-2773                          88.03.060,
                                        88.03.090
§ 2774                                 88.03.060
§ 2774(d)                              88.03.060
§ 2774.1                               88.03.130
§ 2774.2                               88.03.130
§ 4290                                 82.13.050
                                        81.01.030,
§§ 4526 et seq.                       88.01.030,
                                        88.01.070,
                                        88.02.030
§ 4526                                 88.01.050
§§ 14500 et seq.                      84.19.060
                                        81.01.030,
§§ 21000 et seq.                      86.07.020,
                                        88.03.060
§ 21080.5                              88.01.030
§ 21081                                87.02.060
§ 21080(b)(2)                          86.15.070
§ 21080(b)(3)                          86.15.070
§ 21083.4                              88.01.030,
                                        88.01.050
§ 21151.5                              87.02.050
 
 
PUBLIC UTILITIES CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 230                87.01.080
§§ 21001 et seq.    84.26.030
§ 21661.5            82.09.050
 
 
STREETS AND HIGHWAYS CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
Part 3 of Division 9  87.03.100
 
 
VEHICLE CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 22511.8            83.11.060
 
 
WATER CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
§§ 13000 et seq.    87.02.040
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section/Disposition
Ord. Date       Code Section/Disposition
No.  Passed
1    - -        Repealed
2    - -        Repealed
3    - -        Repealed
4    - -        Franchise
5    - -        Repealed
6    - -        Repealed
7    - -        Repealed
8    - -        Repealed
9    - -        Repealed
10   - -        Repealed
11   - -        Repealed
12   - -        Repealed
13   - -        Repealed
14   - -        Repealed
15   - -        Repealed
16   - -        Repealed
17   - -        Repealed
18   - -        Repealed
19   - -        Franchise
20   - -        Repealed
21   - -        Repealed
22   - -        Repealed
23   - -        Repealed
24   - -        Repealed
25   - -        Repealed
26   - -        Repealed
27   - -        Repealed
28   - -        Repealed
29   - -        Repealed
30   - -        Repealed
31   - -        Repealed
32   - -        Repealed
33   - -        Repealed
34   - -        Repealed
35   - -        Repealed
36   - -        Repealed
37   - -        Repealed
38   - -        Repealed
39   - -        Repealed
40   - -        Repealed
41   - -        Repealed
42   - -        Repealed
43   - -        Repealed
44   - -        Repealed
45   - -        Repealed
46   - -        Repealed
47   - -        Repealed
48   - -        Repealed
49   - -        Repealed
50   - -        Repealed
51   - -        Repealed
52   - -        Repealed
53   - -        Repealed
54   - -        Repealed
55   - -        Repealed
56   - -        Repealed
57   - -        Repealed
58   - -        Repealed
59   - -        Franchise
60   - -        Franchise
61   - -        Franchise
62   - -        Franchise
63   - -        Franchise
64   - -        Franchise
65   - -        Franchise
66   - -        Franchise
67   - -        Franchise
68   - -        Franchise
69   - -        Franchise
70   - -        Franchise
71   - -        Franchise
72   - -        Franchise
73   - -        Franchise
74   - -        Franchise
75   - -        Franchise
76   - -        Franchise
77   - -        Franchise
78   - -        Franchise
79   - -        Franchise
80   - -        Franchise
81   - -1901    42.0201,
                42.0202
82   - -        Franchise
83   - -        Repealed
84   - -        Repealed
85   - -        Repealed
86   - -        Franchise
87   - -        Repealed
88   - -        Repealed
89   - -        Franchise
90   - -        Franchise
91   - -        Repealed
92   - -        Franchise
93   - -        Franchise
94   - -        Repealed
95   - -        Repealed
96   - -        Repealed
97   - -        Repealed
98   - -        Repealed
99   - -        Repealed
100  - -        Repealed
101  - -        Repealed
102  - -        Repealed
103  - -        Franchise
104  - -        Repealed
105  - -        Repealed
106  - -        Repealed
107  - -        Repealed
108  - -        Franchise
109  - -        Repealed
110  - -        Repealed
111  - -        Repealed
112  - -        Franchise
113  - -        Repealed
114  - -        Repealed
115  - -        Repealed
116  - -        Franchise
117  - -1906    22.0105
118  - -        Franchise
119  - -        Franchise
120  - -1907    53.0101
122  - -        Repealed
123  - -        Franchise
124  - -        Franchise
125  - -        Repealed
126  - -        Franchise
127A - -        Repealed
127  - -        Franchise
128  - -        Repealed
129  - -        Franchise
130  - -        Franchise
131  - -        Repealed
132  - -        Repealed
133  - -        Franchise
134  - -        Franchise
135  - -        Repealed
136  - -        Repealed
137  - -        Franchise
138  - -        Repealed
139  - -        Franchise
140  - -        Repealed
141  - -        Repealed
142  - -        Repealed
143  - -        Franchise
144  - -        Repealed
145  - -        Franchise
146  - -        Franchise
147  - -        Franchise
148  - -        Repealed
149  - -        Repealed
150  - -        Charter
151  - -        Charter
152  - -        Repealed
153  - -        Franchise
154  - -        Not enacted
155  - -        Repealed
156  - -        Repealed
157  - -        Franchise
158  - -        Franchise
159  - -        Franchise
160  - -        Repealed
161  - -        Repealed
162  - -        Repealed
163  - -        Franchise
164  - -        Franchise
165  - -        Repealed
166  - -        Repealed
167  - -        Repealed
168  - -        Repealed
169  - -        Franchise
170  - -        Franchise
171  - -1915    41.0701
172  - -        Franchise
173  - -        Repealed
174  - -        Repealed
175  - -        Repealed
176  - -        Repealed
177  - -        Franchise
178  - -        Repealed
179  - -        Repealed
180  - -        Repealed
181  - -        Repealed
182  - -        Repealed
183  - -        Repealed
184  - -        Repealed
185  - -        Franchise
186  - -        Repealed
187  - -        Repealed
188  - -        Repealed
189  - -        Repealed
190  - -        Repealed
191  - -        Repealed
192  - -        Repealed
193  - -        Franchise
194  - -        Repealed
195  - -        Repealed
196  - -        Repealed
197  - -1921    12.1001
198  - -        Franchise
199  - -        Franchise
200  - -        Repealed
201  - -        Repealed
202  - -        Franchise
203  - -        Repealed
204  - -        Repealed
205  - -        Franchise
206  - -        Repealed
207  - -        Repealed
208  - -        Repealed
209  - -        Franchise
210  - -        Repealed
211  - -        Franchise
212  - -        Repealed
213  - -        Franchise
214  - -        Repealed
215  - -        Franchise
216  - -        Franchise
217  - -        Franchise
218  - -1923    12.0604
219  - -        Repealed
220  - -        Repealed
221  - -        Repealed
222  - -        Franchise
223  - -        Franchise
224  - -        Franchise
                53.0401,
225  - -1924    53.0402,
                53.0403
226  - -        Repealed
227  - -        Repealed
228  - -        Franchise
229  - -        Franchise
230  - -        Repealed
231  - -        Franchise
232  - -        Repealed
233  - -        Repealed
234  - -        Repealed
235  - -        Repealed
236  - -        Repealed
237  - -        Repealed
238  - -        Repealed
239  - -        Repealed
240  - -        Repealed
241  - -        Franchise
242  - -        Repealed
243  - -        Repealed
244  - -        Repealed
245  - -        Repealed
246  - -        Repealed
247  - -        Repealed
248  - -        Repealed
249  - -        Repealed
250  - -        Repealed
251  - -        Repealed
252  - -        Repealed
253  - -        Franchise
254  - -        Repealed
255  - -        Repealed
256  - -        Repealed
257  - -        Repealed
258  - -        Repealed
259  - -        Repealed
260  - -        Repealed
261  - -        Repealed
262  - -1925    53.0201
263  - -        Repealed
264  - -        Franchise
265  - -        Franchise
266  - -        Repealed
267  - -        Repealed
268  - -        Repealed
269  - -        Repealed
270  - -        Repealed
271  - -        Repealed
272  - -        Repealed
273  - -        Repealed
274  - -        Repealed
275  - -        Repealed
276  - -        Repealed
277  - -        Repealed
278  - -        Franchise
279  - -        Repealed
280  - -        Repealed
281  - -        Repealed
282  - -        Repealed
283  - -1927    12.1001
284  - -        Repealed
285  - -        Repealed
286  - -        Repealed
287  - -        Repealed
288  - -        Repealed
289  - -        Repealed
290  - -        Repealed
291  - -        Franchise
292  - -        Repealed
293  - -        Repealed
294  - -1928    32.0601—
                32.0607
295  - -        Repealed
296  - -        Repealed
297  - -        Repealed
298  - -        Repealed
299  - -        Repealed
300  - -        Repealed
301  - -        Repealed
302  - -        Repealed
303  - -        Repealed
304  - -        Repealed
305  - -        Franchise
306  - -        Repealed
307  - -        Franchise
308  - -        Repealed
309  - -1928    22.0109
310  - -        Forestry Permit
311  - -        Franchise
312  - -        Repealed
313  - -        Repealed
314  - -        Repealed
315  - -        Franchise
316  - -        Repealed
317  - -        Repealed
318  - -        Big Bear Pound
319  - -1929    12.0504
320  - -        Bond Issue
321  - -        Repealed
322  - -        Repealed
323  - -        Repealed
324  - -        Repealed
325  - -        Repealed
326  - -        Repealed
327  - -        Repealed
328  - -        Repealed
329  - -        Repealed
330  - -        Repealed
331  - -        Repealed
                27.0301,
332  - -1930    27.0302,
                27.0401
333  - -        Franchise
334  - -        Franchise
335  - -        Franchise
336  - -        Franchise
337  - -        Repealed
338  - -        Franchise
339  - -        Repealed
340  - -        Repealed
341  - -        Repealed
342  - -        Repealed
343  - -        Repealed
344  - -        Repealed
345  - -        Repealed
346  - -        Repealed
347  - -        Repealed
348  - -        Repealed
349  - -        Repealed
350  - -        Franchise
351  - -        Repealed
352  - -        Repealed
353  - -        Repealed
354  - -        Repealed
355  - -        Franchise
356  - -        Repealed
357  - -        Franchise
358  - -        Repealed
359  - -        Repealed
360  - -        Repealed
361  - -        Repealed
362  - -        Repealed
363  - -        Repealed
364  - -        Repealed
365  - -        Franchise
366  - -        Franchise
367  - -        Repealed
368  - -        Repealed
369  - -        Repealed
370  - -        Repealed
371  - -        Franchise
372  - -        Repealed
373  - -        Repealed
374  - -        Repealed
375  - -        Repealed
376  - -        Repealed
377  - -        Repealed
378  - -1933    41.0501—
                41.0512
379  - -        Repealed
380  - -        Repealed
381  - -1933    41.0601,
                41.0602
382  - -        Repealed
383  - -        Repealed
384  - -        Repealed
385  - -        Repealed
386  - -        Repealed
387  - -        Repealed
388  - -        Repealed
389  - -        Repealed
390  - -        Repealed
391  - -        Bond Issue
392  - -        Bond Issue
393  - -        Bond Issue
394  - -        Bond Issue
395  - -        Bond Issue
396  - -        Bond Issue
397  - -        Repealed
398  - -        Bond Issue
399  - -        Repealed
400  - -        Repealed
401  - -        Bond Issue
402  - -        Repealed
403  - -        Repealed
404  - -        Franchise
405  - -        Franchise
406  - -1934    27.0101,
                27.0102
407  - -        Repealed
408  - -        Repealed
409  - -        Repealed
410  - -        Repealed
411  - -        Repealed
412  - -        Repealed
413  - -        Repealed
414  - -        Repealed
415  - -        Repealed
416  - -        Repealed
417  - -        Repealed
418  - -        Repealed
419  - -        Repealed
420  - -        Franchise
421  - -        Repealed
422  - -        Repealed
423  - -        Repealed
424  - -        Repealed
425  - -        Franchise
426  - -        Repealed
427  - -        Repealed
428  - -        Repealed
429  - -        Repealed
430  - -        Repealed
431  - -        Repealed
432  - -        Repealed
433  - -        Repealed
434  - -        Repealed
435  - -        Repealed
436  - -        Repealed
437  - -        Franchise
438  - -        Repealed
439  - -        Franchise
440  - -        Repealed
441  - -        Repealed
442  - -        Repealed
443  - -        Repealed
444  - -        Repealed
445  - -1937    41.0601,
                41.0602
446  - -        Repealed
447  - -        Franchise
448  - -        Repealed
449  - -        Repealed
450  - -        Repealed
451  - -        Repealed
452  - -        Repealed
453  - -        Repealed
454  - -        Repealed
455  - -        Repealed
456  - -        Repealed
457  - -1937    41.0301—
                41.0316
458  - -        Repealed
459  - -        Repealed
460  - -        Repealed
461  - -        Repealed
462  - -        Repealed
463  - -        Repealed
464  - -        Repealed
465  - -        Repealed
466  - -        Repealed
467  - -        Repealed
468  - -        Repealed
469  - -        Repealed
470  - -        Repealed
471  - -        Repealed
472  - -        Repealed
473  - -        Repealed
474  - -1939    42.0101—
                28.0101
474  - -1950    Repealed by Ord. 4272
475  - -        Repealed
476  - -        Repealed
477  - -        Repealed
478  - -        Repealed
479  - -        Repealed
480  - -        Repealed
481  - -        Repealed
482  - -        Franchise
483  - -        Repealed
484  - -        Repealed
485  - -        Franchise
486  - -1940    28.0101
487  - -1940    28.0101
488  - -        Franchise
489  - -        Repealed
490  - -        Repealed
491  - -        Repealed
492  - -        Repealed
493  - -        Robbins
494  - -        Robbins
495  - -        Repealed
496  - -        Repealed
497  - -        Franchise
498  - -        Repealed
499  - -        Repealed
500  - -        Repealed
501  - -        Repealed
502  - -        Repealed
503  - -        Repealed
504  - -        Deleted by Ord. 2425
505  - -        Franchise
506  - -        Repealed
507  - -        Franchise
508  - -        Repealed
509  - -        Franchise
510  - -        Repealed
511  - -        Repealed
512  - -        Franchise
513  - -        Repealed
514  - -        Repealed
515  - -        Franchise
516  - -1942    27.0201
517  - -        Repealed
518  - -        Repealed
519  - -        Repealed
520  - -        Repealed
521  - -        Repealed
522  - -        Repealed
523  - -        Repealed
524  - -        Repealed
525  - -        Repealed
526  - -        Repealed
                33.0101,
                33.0102,
                33.0103,
                33.0104,
527  - -1942    33.0105,
                33.0106,
                33.0107,
                33.0108,
                33.0109
                31.0101—
                31.0104,
                31.0201,
                31.0202,
                32.0401—
527  - -1958    32.0409,
                32.0502—
                32.0510,
                34.0301—
                34.0311,
                34.0501,
                34.0502
528  - -        Repealed
529  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3726
530  - -        Repealed
531  - -        Repealed
532  - -        Repealed
533  - -        Repealed
534  - -        Repealed
535  - -        Franchise
536  - -        Repealed
537  - -        Repealed
538  - -        Repealed
539  - -        Franchise
540  - -        Repealed
541  - -        Repealed
542  - -        Repealed
543  - -        Repealed
544  - -        Repealed
545  - -        Repealed
546  - -        Repealed
547  - -        Repealed
548  - -        Deleted
549  - -        Repealed
550  - -        Repealed
551  - -        Repealed
552  - -        Franchise
553  - -        Franchise
554  - -        Repealed
555  - -        Repealed
556  - -        Repealed
557  - -        Franchise
558  - -        Repealed
559  - -        Salary
560  - -        Repealed
561  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3896
562  - -        Repealed
563  - -        Repealed
564  - -        Repealed
565  - -        Repealed
566  - -        Repealed
567  - -        Franchise
568  - -        Repealed
569  - -        Repealed
570  - -        Repealed
571  - -        Repealed
572  - -        Repealed
573  - -        Repealed
574  - -        Repealed
575  - -        Salary
576  - -        Salary
577  - -        Salary
578  - -        Salary
579  - -        Salary
580  - -        Repealed
581  - -        Franchise
582  - -        Repealed
583  - -        Salary
584  - -        Repealed
585  - -        Franchise
586  - -        Salary
587  - -        Repealed
588  - -        Repealed
589  - -        Repealed
590  - -        Repealed
591  - -        Repealed
592  - -1947    Repealed by Ord. 4272
593  - -        Salary
594  - -        Repealed
595  - -        Salary
596  - -1947    52.0101—
                52.0130
597  - -        Repealed
598  - -1947    52.0101—
                52.0130
599  - -        Repealed
600  - -        Repealed
601  - -        Repealed
602  - -        Repealed
603  - -        Repealed
604  - -        Repealed
605  - -        Repealed
606  - -        Repealed
607  - -        Repealed
608  - -        Repealed
609  - -        Repealed
610  - -        Repealed
611  - -        Deleted
612  - -        Repealed
613  - -        Repealed
614  - -        Repealed
615  - -        Cemetery
616  - -        Repealed
617  - -        Repealed
618  - -        Repealed
619  - -        Repealed
620  - -        Repealed
621  - -        Repealed
622  - -        Repealed
623  - -        Repealed
624  - -        Repealed
625  - -        Repealed
626  - -        Repealed
627  - -1949    25.0101,
                25.0102
628  - -        Repealed
629  - -        Repealed
630  - -        Salary
631  - -        Repealed
632  - -        Repealed
634  - -        Repealed
635  - -        Repealed
636  - -        Franchise
637  - -        Repealed
638  - -        Repealed
639  - -        Repealed
640  - -        Repealed
641  - -1949    11.0401,
                11.0402
642  - -        Repealed
643  - -        Franchise
644  - -        Repealed
645  - -        Repealed
646  - -        Repealed
647  - -        Repealed
648  - -        Repealed
                41.1401—41.1413 (Repealed by Ord. 4272) ,
649  - -1950    42.0101—
                42.0112
650  - -        Repealed
651  - -        Repealed
652  - -        Repealed
653  - -        Repealed
654  - -        Repealed
655  - -        Repealed
656  - -        Repealed
657  - -        Repealed
658  - -        Repealed
659  - -        Repealed
660  - -        Repealed
661  - -1950    41.0301—
                41.0316
662  - -        Repealed
663  - -        Repealed
664  - -        Repealed
665  - -        Salary
666  - -        Repealed
667  - -        Repealed
668  - -        Repealed
669  - -        Repealed
670  - -        Repealed
671  - -        Repealed
672  - -        Repealed
673  - -        Repealed
674  - -        Repealed
675  - -        Repealed
676  - -        Repealed
677  - -        Orchard heaters
678  - -1951    41.0301—
                41.0316
679  - -        Repealed
680  - -        Repealed
681  - -        Repealed
682  - -        Repealed
683  - -1951    41.0401—
                41.0416
684  - -        Repealed
685  - -        District Map
686  - -        Repealed
687  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3726
688  - -        District Map
689  - -1952    Repealed by Ord. 4284
690  - -        Repealed
691  - -        Franchise
692  - -        District Map
693  - -        Salary
694  - -        Franchise
695  - -        Bond Issue
696  - -        Repealed
697  - -        District Map
698  - -        Salary
699  - -1952    22.0101
700  - -        Repealed
701  - -1953    12.0401—
                12.0408
702  - -1953    52.0101—
                52.0130
703  - -        District Map
704  - -        Franchise
705  - -        Repealed
706  - -        Repealed
707  - -        Franchise
708  - -        Repealed
709  - -        Repealed
710  - -        District Map
711  - -        Repealed
712  - -        Salary
713  - -        Franchise
714  - -        Franchise
715  - -        Franchise
716  - -        District Map
717  - -        Franchise
718  - -        Repealed
719  - -        Repealed
720  - -1953    12.0405
721  - -        District Map
722  - -        Repealed
723  - -        Repealed
724  - -        District Map
725  - -        Repealed
726  - -1954    27.0201
727  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3896
728  - -        Repealed
729  - -        Repealed
730  - -        Repealed
731  - -        Repealed
732  - -1954    41.0301—
                41.0316
733  - -        Repealed
734  - -        Repealed
735  - -1954    12.0502
736  - -        Repealed
737  - -1954    Salary,
                12.0303
738  - -        Salary
739  - -        District Map
740  - -        Franchise
741  - -        Repealed
742  - -        Repealed
743  - -        Salary
744  - -        Repealed
745  - -        Repealed
746  - -        District Map
747  - -        Repealed
748  - -1950    Repealed by Ord. 4272
749  - -        Repealed
750  - -        District Map
751  - -        Repealed
752  - -        Repealed
753  - -        Repealed
754  - -        Repealed
755  - -        Repealed
756  - -        Repealed
757  - -        District Map
758  - -        Repealed
759  - -        District Map
760  - -        Franchise
761  - -        Repealed
762  - -        Deleted
763  - -        Repealed
764  - -        Salary
765  - -        District Map
766  - -        Repealed
767  - -        Repealed
768  - -        District Map
769  - -        Salary
770  - -        District Map
771  - -        Repealed
772  - -        Repealed
773  - -        District Map
774  - -        Repealed
775  - -        District Map
776  - -        District Map
                26.0201,
777  - -1955    26.0202,
                26.0203,
                26.0204
778  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
779  - -        Franchise
780  - -        District Map
781  - -        Franchise
782  - -        Repealed
783  - -        District Map
784  - -        Repealed
785  - -        Charter Amendment
786  - -        District Map
787  - -        Franchise
788  - -        District Map
789  - -        Franchise
790  - -        Repealed
791  - -        Salary
792  - -1952    Repealed,
                22.0101
793  - -        Repealed
794  - -        Franchise
795  - -        District Map
796  - -        District Map
797  - -        Franchise
798  - -        Bond Issue
799  - -        District Map
800  - -        Repealed
801  - -        District Map
802  - -        Franchise
803  - -        Deleted by Ord. 2425
804  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3560
805  - -        Repealed
806  - -        District Map
807  - -        Franchise
808  - -        District Map
809  - -        District Map
                33.0101,
                33.0102,
                33.0103,
                33.0104,
810  - -1956    33.0105,
                33.0106,
                33.0107,
                33.0108,
                33.0109
811  - -        Repealed
812  - -        Salary
813  - -        Salary
814  - -        District Map
                51.0101—
                51.0120,
                51.0201—
                51.0213,
                51.0301,
                51.0302,
815  - -1957    51.0303,
                51.0304,
                51.0306,
                51.0307,
                51.0308,
                51.0310,
                51.0501—
                51.0509
816  - -        Repealed
817  - -        District Map
818  - -        Repealed
819  - -1957    Repealed by Ord. 4090
820  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
821  - -        Deleted
822  - -        District Map
823  - -        Repealed
824  - -        Repealed
825  - -        Salary
826  - -        District Map
827  - -        Repealed
828  - -        District Map
829  - -        Repealed
830  - -        Repealed
831  - -        Franchise
832  - -        Repealed
833  - -        Salary
834  - -        Repealed
835  - -        District Map
836  - -1956    12.0302
837  - -        District Map
838  - -        Repealed
839  - -        Franchise
840  - -        Franchise
841  - -        Repealed
842  - -        Repealed
843  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3560
844  - -        Repealed
845  - -1957    Repealed by Ord. 4212
846  - -        Repealed
847  - -        District Map
848  - -        District Map
849  - -        District Map
                33.0101—
850  - -1958    33.0109,
                33.0200—
                33.0210
851  - -        District Map
852  - -        District Map
853  - -        Salary
854  - -        District Map
855  - -        Charter Amend
856  - -        District Map
857  - -        District Map
858  - -        Repealed
859  - -        Superseded by California Code
860  - -        District Map
861  - -        District Map
862  - -        Repealed
863  - -        District Map
864  - -        District Map
865  - -        Repealed
866  - -        Repealed
867  - -1958    Repealed by Ord. 4090
868  - -        District Map
869  - -        District Map
870  - -1958    23.0201
871  - -        Repealed
872  - -        Charter amend
873  - -        Repealed
874  - -        District Map
875  - -        Repealed
876  - -        Repealed
877  - -        Repealed
878  - -        District Map
879  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
880  - -        District Map
881  - -        District Map
882  - -        District Map
883  - -        Repealed
884  - -        Deleted
885  - -        Repealed
886  - -        District Map
887  - -        Franchise
888  - -        District Map
889  - -        Deleted
890  - -        District Map
891  - -        Salary
892  - -1959    41.0401—
                41.0416
893  - -1959    Repealed by Ord. 4291
894  - -        Franchise
895  - -        Franchise
896  - -        District Map
897  - -        District Map
898  - -        District Map
899  - -        District Map
900  - -        District Map
901  - -        Repealed
902  - -        District Map
903  - -        District Map
904  - -        Repealed
905  - -        District Map
906  - -        Repealed
907  - -        Repealed
908  - -        Repealed
909  - -        District Map
910  - -        District Map
911  - -1959    12.0503
912  - -        District Map
913  - -        District Map
914  - -1960    22.0106, 22.0107, 22.0108, 22.0110
915  - -        District Map
916  - -        District Map
917  - -        District Map
918  - -        District Map
919  - -        District Map
920  - -1960    22.0107
921  - -        District Map
                51.0101—
922  - -1960    51.0120,
                51.0202—
                51.0213
923  - -        Repealed
924  - -        Repealed
925  - -        District Map
926  - -        Salary
927  - -1960    42.0301—
                42.0312
928  - -        Repealed
929  - -        District Map
930  - -        Repealed
931  - -        District Map
932  - -        District Map
933  - -        Deleted
934  - -1960    14.0101—
                14.0115
935  - -        Franchise
936  - -        District Map
937  - -        Repealed
938  - -        Repealed
939  - -1960    53.0601—
                53.0606
940  - -        District Map
941  - -        District Map
942  - -        Repealed
943  - -        Deleted
944  - -        Repealed
945  - -        District Map
946  - -        District Map
947  - -        District Map
948  - -        Subdivision
949  - -        District Map
950  - -        Franchise
951  - -        Deleted
952  - -        District Map
953  - -        Salary
954  - -        Repealed
955  - -        Salary
956  - -        District Map
957  - -        District Map
958  - -        District Map
959  - -        Deleted
960  - -        District Map
961  - -        Deleted
                32.0101—
962  - -1961    32.0111,
                32.0113—
                32.0118
963  - -        Deleted
964  - -1961    14.0115
965  - -        District Map
966  - -        Franchise
967  - -        Repealed
968  - -        Repealed
969  - -1961    41.0101—
                41.0104
970  - -1961    32.0501
971  - -        District Map
972  - -        Repealed
973  - -        District Map
974  - -1961    12.0101
975  - -1961    11.0101—
                11.0113
976  - -        District Map
977  - -        Repealed
978  - -1962    41.0301—
                41.0316
979  - -        District Map
980  - -        Repealed
981  - -        District Map
982  - -        Repealed
983  - -        Repealed
984  - -        Salary
985  - -        Franchise
                12.0807,
986  - -1962    12.0901,
                12.0902,
                12.0903
987  - -        Deleted
988  - -        District Map
989  - -        District Map
990  - -        Franchise
991  - -        District Map
992  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3325
993  - -        District Map
994  - -        District Map
995  - -        District Map
996  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3484
997  - -        District Map
998  - -        District Map
999  - -        Repealed
1000 - -        Salary
1001 - -        District Map
1002 - -        Deleted
1003 - -        District Map
1004 - -        Deleted
1005 - -        District Map
1006 - -        District Map
                41.0101—
                41.0104,
                41.0401—
                41.0416,
                41.0501—
                41.0512,
1007 - -1962    41.0601,
                41.0602,
                41.0701, 41.0801—41.0810 (Repealed by Ord. 4272), 41.1401—41.1413 (Repealed by
                Ord. 4272) ,
                43.0101,
                43.0102,
                43.0103
1008 - -        District Map
1009 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3484
1010 - -        District Map
1011 - -        Franchise
1012 - -        District Map
1013 - -        Incorporating
1014 - -        District Map
1015 - -1962    22.0101,
                22.0102
1016 - -        District Map
1017 - -        District Map
1018 - -        Repealed
1019 - -        District Map
1020 - -        Repealed
1021 - -1962    12.0405
1022 - -        District Map
1023 - -        District Map
1024 - -        Repealed
1025 - -        District Map
1026 - -        District Map
1027 - -1962    53.0601—
                53.0606
1028 - -        District Map
1029 - -        Franchise
1030 - -        District Map
1031 - -        Franchise
1032 - -        District Map
1033 - -        District Map
1034 - -        District Map
1035 - -        Deleted
1036 - -        Repealed
1037 - -        Repealed
1038 - -        Referendum validation
1039 - -        Repealed
1040 - -        Repealed
1041 - -        District Map
1042 - -        District Map
1043 - -        District Map
1044 - -        Franchise
1045 - -        District Map
1046 - -        District Map
1047 - -        District Map
1048 - -        Repealed
1049 - -        Repealed
1050 - -        Repealed
1051 - -        Repealed
1052 - -        Repealed
1053 - -        District Map
1054 - -        District Map
1055 - -        District Map
1056 - -        District Map
1057 - -        Deleted
1058 - -        District Map
1059 - -        Franchise
1060 - -        District Map
1061 - -        Repealed
1062 - -        Repealed
1063 - -        District Map
1064 - -        District Map
1065 - -        District Map
1066 - -        Franchise
1067 - -        District Map
1068 - -        District Map
1069 - -        District Map
1070 - -        Repealed
1071 - -        District Map
1072 - -        Repealed
1073 - -1963    12.0501
1074 - -        Deleted
1075 - -        District Map
1076 - -        Franchise
1077 - -        District Map
1078 - -        District Map
1079 - -        Repealed
1080 - -        District Map
1081 - -        District Map
1082 - -        Salary
1083 - -        District Map
1084 - -1963    53.0501
1085 - -        District Map
1086 - -        District Map
1087 - -        District Map
1088 - -        Repealed
1089 - -        Repealed
1090 - -        Repealed
1091 - -        District Map
1092 - -        District Map
1093 - -1963    32.0301—
                32.0307
1094 - -        Franchise
1095 - -        District Map
1096 - -        District Map
1097 - -1963    Repealed by Ord. 4272
1098 - -        Franchise
1099 - -        District Map
1100 - -        District Map
1101 - -1963    Repealed by Ord. 4291
1102 - -        District Map
1103 - -        District Map
1104 - -        District Map
1105 - -        Repealed
1106 - -        District Map
1107 - -        District Map
1108 - -        District Map
1109 - -        Repealed
1110 - -        District Map
1111 - -        District Map
1112 - -1963    41.0601,
                41.0602
1113 - -        District Map
1114 - -        District Map
1115 - -1963    11.0301—
                11.0306
1116 - -        District Map
1117 - -1963    Repealed by Ord. 4272
1118 - -        Salary
1119 - -1963    52.0101—
                52.0130
1120 - -1963    12.0504
1121 - -        District Map
1122 - -        Repealed
1123 - -        District Map
1124 - -        Deleted
1125 - -1963    42.0401—
                42.0405
1126 - -        District Map
1127 - -        District Map
1128 - -        Repealed
1129 - -        District Map
1130 - -        Deleted
1131 - -        Deleted
1132 - -        District Map
1133 - -        District Map
1134 - -        District Map
1135 - -        Deleted
1136 - -        District Map
1137 - -1964    41.0401—
                41.0416
1138 - -        Deleted
1139 - -1964    32.0701,
                32.0702
1140 - -        District Map
1141 - -        Repealed
1142 - -        District Map
1143 - -        District Map
1144 - -        Franchise
1145 - -        Franchise
1146 - -        District Map
1147 - -        Franchise
1148 - -        Franchise
1149 - -        District Map
1150 - -        District Map
1151 - -        Deleted
1152 - -        District Map
1153 - -        District Map
1154 - -        District Map
1155 - -        Franchise
1156 - -        Franchise
1157 - -        District Map
1158 - -        District Map
1159 - -        District Map
1160 - -        Deleted
1161 - -        District Map
1162 - -        District Map
1163 - -        District Map
1164 - -        Salary
1165 - -        District Map
1166 - -        District Map
1167 - -        Repealed
1168 - -        Deleted
1169 - -        District Map
1170 - -        District Map
1171 - -        District Map
1172 - -        Deleted
1173 - -        Deleted
1174 - -        Repealed
1175 - -        District Map
1176 - -1964    41.0401—
                41.0416
1177 - -        District Map
1178 - -        District Map
1179 - -        District Map
1180 - -        Repealed
1181 - -        District Map
1182 - -        District Map
1183 - -        Salary (Working hours hospital)
1184 - -        District Map
1185 - -        District Map
1186 - -        District Map
1187 - -        District Map
1188 - -        District Map
1189 - -        Franchise
1190 - -        District Map
1191 - -        District Map
1192 - -        District Map
1193 - -        District Map
1194 - -        District Map
1195 - -        District Map
1196 - -        Repealed
1197 - -        District Map
1198 - -        District Map
1199 - -        District Map
1200 - -1964    11.0403
1201 - -        District Map
1202 - -        District Map
1203 - -        District Map
1204 - -        District Map
1205 - -        Deleted
1206 - -        District Map
1207 - -        District Map
1208 - -        District Map
1209 - -        Repealed
1210 - -        District Map
1211 - -        Franchise
1212 - -        Repealed
1213 - -        District Map
1214 - -        Franchise
1215 - -        District Map
1216 - -        District Map
1217 - -        District Map
1218 - -        Deleted
1219 - -        District Map
1220 - -        District Map
1221 - -        Franchise
1222 - -        District Map
1223 - -        District Map
1224 - -1965    12.0102
1225 - -        District Map
1226 - -        Repealed
1227 - -        District Map
1228 - -        Deleted
1229 - -        District Map
1230 - -        District Map
1231 - -        District Map
1232 - -        Deleted
1233 - -1965    52.0201—
                52.0209
1234 - -1965    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1235 - -        District Map
1236 - -        District Map
1237 - -        District Map
1238 - -        District Map
1239 - -        District Map
1240 - -        Repealed
1241 - -        District Map
1242 - -        Salary
1243 - -        District Map
1244 - -        Deleted
1245 - -        District Map
1246 - -        District Map
1247 - -1965    22.0101
1248 - -        District Map
1249 - -        District Map
1250 - -        Repealed
1251 - -        District Map
1252 - -        Franchise
1253 - -        District Map
1254 - -        District Map
1255 - -1965    12.0506
1256 - -        District Map
1257 - -        District Map
1258 - -        Land Use Map
1259 - -        District Map
1260 - -        District Map
1261 - -        District Map
1262 - -        District Map
1263 - -        District Map
1264 - -        District Map
1265 - -        Repealed
1266 - -        District Map
1267 - -        District Map
1268 - -        Repealed
1269 - -        District Map
1270 - -        District Map
1271 - -        District Map
1272 - -        District Map
1273 - -        District Map
1274 - -        District Map
1275 - -        District Map
1276 - -        District Map
1277 - -        Deleted
1278 - -        District Map
1279 - -        Salary
1280 - -        District Map
1281 - -1966    42.0501—
                42.0556
1282 - -        District Map
                12.1301,
1283 - -1966    12.1302,
                12.1303
1284 - -        District Map
1285 - -        District Map
1286 - -        District Map
1287 - -1966    51.0401—
                51.0418
1288 - -        District Map
1289 - -        Deleted
1290 - -        District Map
1291 - -        District Map
1292 - -        District Map
1293 - -        Repealed
1294 - -        Land Use Map
1295 - -        District Map
1296 - -1966    12.1401
1297 - -        Not Adopted
1298 - -        District Map
1299 - -        Repealed
1300 - -        District Map
1301 - -        District Map
1302 - -        District Map
1303 - -        District Map
1304 - -        District Map
1305 - -1966    52.0208
1306 - -        District Map
1307 - -        District Map
1308 - -        District Map
1309 - -        Charter, Article V
1310 - -        District Map
1311 - -        District Map
1312 - -        District Map
1313 - -        Repealed by Ord. 1970
1314 - -        District Map
1315 - -        District Map
1316 - -        District Map
1317 - -        District Map
1318 - -        Repealed by Ord. 1970
1319 - -        Deleted
1320 - -        District Map
1321 - -        Repealed
1322 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1323 - -        Not Adopted
1324 - -        District Map
1325 - -        District Map
1326 - -        District Map
1327 - -1966    51.0213,
                51.0305
1328 - -        District Map
1329 - -1966    Repealed by Ord. 4284
1330 - -        District Map
1331 - -        District Map
1332 - -        District Map
1333 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1334 - -        District Map
1335 - -1967    33.0200—
                33.0210
1336 - -        District Map
1337 - -        Repealed
1338 - -        Repealed
1339 - -        District Map
1340 - -        District Map
1341 - -        District Map
1342 - -        District Map
1343 - -1967    Repealed by Ord. 4284
1344 - -        Repealed
1345 - -        District Map
1346 - -        Repealed
1347 - -1967    11.0101—
                11.0113
1348 - -        Repealed
1349 - -        Deleted
1350 - -1967    12.1401
1351 - -1967    12.1601—
                12.1607
1352 - -        Deleted
1353 - -1967    31.0204
1354 - -        District Map
1355 - -1967    Repealed by Ord. 4284
1356 - -        Deleted
1357 - -        District Map
1358 - -        Consolidation of judicial districts
1359 - -        District Map
1360 - -        District Map
1361 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1362 - -        District Map
1363 - -        District Map
1364 - -        Franchise
1365 - -        District Map
1366 - -        District Map
1367 - -        Repealed
1368 - -        Repealed
1369 - -        District Map
1370 - -        District Map
1371 - -        District Map
1372 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1373 - -        Repealed
1374 - -        District Map
1375 - -        District Map
1376 - -        Repealed
1377 - -        District Map
1378 - -        District Map
1379 - -        Deleted
1380 - -        District Map
1381 - -        Airport approach map district
1382 - -        District Map
1383 - -        District Map
1384 - -        Repealed
1385 - -        District Map
1386 - -        District Map
1387 - -        District Map
1388 - -        District Map
1389 - -        District Map
1390 - -        Deleted
1391 - -        District Map
1392 - -        District Map
1393 - -        District Map
                14.0301—
1394 - -1967    14.0312,
                14.0314—
                14.0317
1395 - -        District Map
1396 - -        District Map
1397 - -        District Map
1398 - -        District Map
1399 - -        District Map
1400 - -        District Map
1401 - -        District Map
1402 - -        District Map
1403 - -1968    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1404 - -        Repealed
1405 - -        Repealed
1406 - -        District Map
1407 - -        Repealed
1408 - -1968    Repealed by Ord. 4272
1409 - -        District Map
1410 - -        District Map
1411 - -        District Map
1412 - -        District Map
1413 - -        Deleted
1414 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1415 - -        Deleted
1416 - -        Repealed
1417 - -        District Map
1418 - -        District Map
1419 - -        District Map
1420 - -1968    52.0103
1421 - -        District Map
1422 - -        District Map
1423 - -        District Map
1424 - -        District Map
1425 - -1968    12.1401
1426 - -        District Map
                52.0204,
1427 - -1968    52.0205,
                52.0206
1428 - -        District Map
1429 - -1968    67.0101—
                67.0107
                14.0205,
1430 - -1968    14.0310—
                14.0313
1431 - -        Deleted
1432 - -        District Map
1433 - -        Repealed
1434 - -        District Map
1435 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1436 - -        District Map
1437 - -        Deleted
1438 - -        District Map
1439 - -        Deleted
1440 - -        District Map
1441 - -1968    28.0301—
                28.0305
1442 - -        Deleted
1443 - -1968    22.0101
1444 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1445 - -        District Map
1446 - -        Park Hours
1447 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1448 - -        District Map
1449 - -        District Map
1450 - -        District Map
1451 - -1968    22.0103
1452 - -        District Map
1453 - -        District Map
1454 - -        Park hours
                32.0101,
1455 - -1968    32.0102,
                32.0301—
                32.0305
1456 - -        District Map
1457 - -        District Map
1458 - -        District Map
1459 - -        Repealed
                12.0608,
1460 - -1968    12.0701,
                12.0702
1461 - -        District Map
1462 - -        District Map
1463 - -        District Map
1464 - -        District Map
1465 - -        District Map
1466 - -1968    32.0901—
                32.0916
1467 - -        District Map
1468 - -        District Map
1469 - -        District Map
1470 - -        Deleted
1471 - -        Deleted
1472 - -1968    27.0501—
                27.0507
1473 - -        District Map
1474 - -        District Map
1475 - -        District Map
1476 - -        Deleted
1477 - -        District Map
1478 - -        District Map
1479 - -        District Map
1480 - -        District Map
1481 - -        District Map
1482 - -1969    12.1401
1483 - -        District Map
1484 - -        District Map
1485 - -        District Map
1486 - -        District Map
1487 - -        Repealed
1488 - -1969    12.1700
1489 - -        District Map
1490 - -        District Map
1491 - -        District Map
1492 - -        District Map
1493 - -        District Map
1494 - -        Repealed
1495 - -        District Map
1496 - -        District Map
1497 - -1969    37.0101—
                37.0113
1498 - -        District Map
1499 - -1969    32.1001—
                32.1009
1500 - -        District Map
1501 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1502 - -        Treasurer-Tax and License Collector
1503 - -        No copy
1504 - -        District Map
1505 - -        District Map
1506 - -        District Map
1507 - -1969    67.0201—
                67.0216
1508 - -        District Map
1509 - -        District Map
1510 - -        District Map
1511 - -        Special Districts
                32.0110,
1512 - -1969    32.0204,
                32.0205
1513 - -        Repealed
1514 - -        District Map
1515 - -        District Map
1516 - -        Repealed
1517 - -        District Map
1518 - -        Airport dist. maps
1519 - -        Repealed
1520 - -        District Map
1521 - -        District Map
                41.0301—
                41.0316,
                41.0401—
1522 - -1969    41.0416,
                42.0101—
                42.0112,
                42.0301—
                42.0312
1523 - -        District Map
1524 - -        Repealed
1525 - -        District Map
1526 - -        District Map
1527 - -1969    33.0200—
                33.0210
1528 - -        District Map
1529 - -        District Map
1530 - -        District Map
1531 - -        Repealed
1532 - -        Deleted
1533 - -        District Map
1534 - -        District Map
1535 - -        District Map
1536 - -        District Map
1537 - -        District Map
1538 - -1970    12.1800
1539 - -        District Map
1540 - -        District Map
1541 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1542 - -        District Map
1543 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3654
1544 - -        Judicial district boundaries
1545 - -        District Map
1546 - -1970    12.1401
1547 - -        Interim grading
1548 - -        District Map
1549 - -1970    Repealed by Ord. 4459
1550 - -        District Map
1551 - -        District Map
1552 - -        District Map
1553 - -        District Map
1554 - -        District Map
1555 - -        Interim zoning
1556 - -1970    27.0601—
                27.0603
1557 - -        Repealed
1558 - -        District Map
1559 - -        Deleted
1560 - -        District Map
1561 - -        District Map
1562 - -        District Map
1563 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3654
1564 - -        District Map
1565 - -        Interim land use
1566 - -        Omitted
1567 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1568 - -        Deleted by Ord. 2540
1569 - -        District Map
1570 - -        District Map
1571 - -        Deleted
                12.0605,
1572 - -1970    12.0606,
                12.0607
1573 - -        District Map
1574 - -        Omitted
1575 - -        District Map
1576 - -        District Map
1577 - -        District Map
1578 - -        Repealed
1579 - -        District Map
1580 - -        District Map
1581 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1582 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1583 - -        Charter amendment
1584 - -        District Map
1585 - -        Repealed
1586 - -        Repealed
1587 - -        Interim zoning
1588 - -        District Map
1589 - -        Airport approach zoning maps
1590 - -1970    28.0407
1591 - -        District Map
1592 - -        District Map
1593 - -        District Map
1594 - -        Not passed
1595 - -        Interim zoning
1596 - -        District Map
1597 - -        Deleted
1598 - -        Repealed
1599 - -        Deleted
1600 - -1970    53.0601—
                53.0606
                12.1901—
1601 - -1970    12.1908,
                12.2001—
                12.2006
1602 - -        Repealed
                32.0101,
1603 - -1970    32.0102,
                32.0107
                45.0101,
                45.0201—
                45.0205,
1604 - -1970    45.0301—
                45.0309,
                45.0401,
                45.0402
1605 - -        District Map
1606 - -        District Map
1607 - -1970    27.0502,
                27.0507
1608 - -        District Map
1609 - -        District Map
1610 - -1970    28.0301—
                28.0305
1611 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1612 - -        District Map
1613 - -        District Map
1614 - -        District Map
                12.1700,
1615 - -1970    12.1800,
                12.1801
1616 - -        Deleted
1617 - -1971    12.2201—
                12.2205
1618 - -        Interim zoning
1619 - -        District Map
1620 - -        District Map
1621 - -        Repealed
1622 - -        Repealed
1623 - -        District Map
1624 - -        District Map
1625 - -        District Map
1626 - -        District Map
1627 - -        District Map
1628 - -        District Map
1629 - -        Deleted
1630 - -        District Map
1631 - -        District Map
1632 - -1971    12.1401
1633 - -1971    33.0200—
                33.0210
1634 - -        District Map
1635 - -        District Map
1636 - -        District Map
                12.2301,
1637 - -1971    12.2302,
                12.2303
1638 - -1971    Repealed by Ord. 4272
1639 - -        District Map
1640 - -        District Map
1641 - -        District Map
1642 - -        Franchise
1643 - -        Interim zoning
1644 - -1971    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1645 - -        Deleted
1646 - -        District Map
1647 - -1969    67.0201—
                67.0216
1647 - -1971    67.0101—
                67.0107
1648 - -        District Map
1649 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1650 - -        District Map
1651 - -        District Map
1652 - -        District Map
1653 - -        Interim zoning
1654 - -        District Map
                32.0904,
1655 - -1971    32.0905,
                32.0913
1656 - -        District Map
1657 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1658 - -        District Map
1659 - -1971    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1659 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1660 - -        District Map
1661 - -        District Map
1662 - -        District Map
1663 - -        District Map
1664 - -        Deleted
1665 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1666 - -        District Map
1667 - -        District Map
1668 - -        District Map
1669 - -        District Map
1670 - -        District Map
1671 - -        District Map
1672 - -        District Map
1673 - -        District Map
1674 - -        Repealed
1675 - -1971    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1676 - -1971    12.0102
1677 - -        District Map
1678 - -        Repealed
1679 - -        District Map
1680 - -        Deleted
1681 - -        District Map
1682 - -        District Map
1683 - -        District Map
                41.1601,
1684 - -1971    41.1602,
                41.1603
1685 - -        District Map
1686 - -1971    Repealed by Ord. 4212
1687 - -        Repealed
1688 - -        District Map
1689 - -        District Map
1690 - -        District Map
1691 - -        District Map
1692 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1693 - -        District Map
1694 - -1972    12.0507
1695 - -        Deleted
1696 - -        District Map
1697 - -        District Map
1698 - -        District Map
1699 - -        District Map
1700 - -        District Map
1701 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4212
1702 - -1972    63.0601—63.0622
1703 - -        District Map
1704 - -1972    12.0502
1705 - -        District Map
1706 - -        District Map
1707 - -        Deleted
1708 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1709 - -1972    12.2700—
                12.2730
1710 - -        Repealed
1711 - -1972    12.1401
1712 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1713 - -        District Map
1714 - -        Deleted
1715 - -        Deleted
1716 - -        District Map
1717 - -        District Map
1718 - -        Deleted
1719 - -        Repealed
1720 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
1721 - -        Deleted
1722 - -        District Map
1723 - -1972    12.0509
                52.0201—
                52.0209,
1724 - -1972    52.0301—
                52.0309,
                52.0401,
                52.0404
1725 - -        District Map
1726 - -        Map “T” Standards
1727 - -        District Map
1728 - -        District Map
1729 - -        District Map
1730 - -        Repealed
1731 - -        District Map
1732 - -        District Map
1733 - -        Deleted
1734 - -        District Map
1735 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1736 - -        District Map
1737 - -        Repealed
1738 - -        Repealed
1739 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1740 - -        Repealed
1741 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1742 - -        Repealed
1743 - -        Repealed
1744 - -1972    12.1700,
                12.1801
1745 - -        District Map
1746 - -        District Map
1747 - -        District Map
1748 - -        District Map
1749 - -        Repealed
1750 - -        District Map
1751 - -        Repealed
1752 - -        District Map
1753 - -1972    31.0102—
                32.0107
1754 - -        District Map
1755 - -        Deleted
1756 - -        District Map
1757 - -        District Map
1758 - -        District Map
1759 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1760 - -        District Map
1761 - -        District Map
1762 - -        District Map
1763 - -        Deleted
                32.0101—
                32.0111,
1764 - -1972    32.0113—
                32.0118,
                32.0201—
                32.0223
1765 - -        District Map
1766 - -        District Map
1767 - -1972    32.0106,
                32.0108
1768 - -        District Map
1769 - -        Repealed
1770 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1771 - -        District Map
1772 - -1972    53.0701—
                53.0704
1773 - -        Repealed
1774 - -        Repealed
1775 - -        District Map
1776 - -        District Map
1777 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1778 - -        District Map
1779 - -1972    32.0106,
                32.0108
1780 - -        District Map
1781 - -        Repealed
1782 - -        Deleted
1783 - -        District Map
1784 - -        District Map
1785 - -        District Map
1786 - -        Deleted
1787 - -        Deleted
1788 - -        District Map
1789 - -        District Map
1790 - -1973    33.0200—
                33.0210
1791 - -        District Map
1792 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1793 - -        District Map
1794 - -        District Map
1795 - -1973    32.0211
1796 - -        District Map
1797 - -        Deleted
1798 - -        District Map
1799 - -        District Map
1800 - -        District Map
1801 - -        District Map
1802 - -        District Map
1803 - -        District Map
1804 - -        Deleted by Ord. 2425
                12.0608,
1805 - -1973    12.0702,
                31.0101
1806 - -        District Map
1807 - -        District Map
1808 - -        District Map
1809 - -        District Map
1810 - -        District Map
1811 - -        District Map
1812 - -1973    12.2303
1813 - -1973    12.0102
1814 - -        District Map
1815 - -        District Map
1816 - -1973    12.1201—
                12.1205
1817 - -1973    12.1401
1818 - -        Repealed
1819 - -        District Map
1820 - -        District Map
1821 - -1973    32.0106,
                32.0108
1822 - -        Repealed
1823 - -1973    41.0501—
                41.0512
1824 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
1825 - -        District Map
1826 - -        Repealed
1827 - -1973    12.3301—
                12.3309
1828 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3654
1829 - -        District Map
1830 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1831 - -        District Map
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
1832 - -1973    33.0200—
                33.0210
1833 - -        District Map
1834 - -        District Map
1835 - -        Map
1836 - -        Deleted
1837 - -        Map
1838 - -        Repealed
1839 - -        Map
1840 - -        Map
1841 - -        Map
1842 - -        Repealed
1843 - -1973    31.0101,
                31.0102
1844 - -        Map
1845 - -        Map
1846 - -        Repealed
1847 - -        Repealed
1848 - -        Repealed
1849 - -        Repealed
1850 - -        Map
1851 - -        Map
1852 - -        Map
1853 - -        Map
1854 - -1973    14.0201
1855 - -        Map
1856 - -        Map
1857 - -        District Fees
1858 - -        Map
1859 - -        Map
1860 - -        Deleted
1861 - -        Map
1862 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
1863 - -        Map
1864 - -        Map
1865 - -        Map
1866 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1867 - -        Bonds
1868 - -1973    32.1201—
                32.1207
1869 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1870 - -        Repealed
1871 - -1973    12.3506
1872 - -        Map
1873 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1874 - -1973    12.1601—
                12.1607
1875 - -1973    14.0115
1876 - -        Map
1877 - -        Repealed
1878 - -        Deleted
1879 - -1973    Repealed by Ord. 4212
1880 - -        Map
1881 - -        Interim Land Use Zone
1882 - -1974    12.0508
1883 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1884 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1885 - -1974    Repealed by Ord. 4153
1886 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1887 - -        Deleted
1888 - -        Repealed
1889 - -        Map
1890 - -        Repealed
1891 - -        Map
1892 - -        Map
1893 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
                53.0701,
1894 - -1974    53.0702,
                53.0703
1895 - -        Map
1896 - -        Charter
1897 - -        Repealed
1898 - -1974    Repealed by Ord. 4272
1899 - -        Repealed
1900 - -        Map
1901 - -        Charter
1902 - -        Charter
1903 - -        Deleted
1904 - -        Charter
1905 - -        Map
1906 - -        Deleted
1907 - -        Map
1908 - -        Map
1909 - -        Charter
1910 - -        Map
                53.0701,
1911 - -1974    53.0702,
                53.0704
1912 - -1974    12.1401
1913 - -        Map
1914 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1915 - -        Map
1916 - -        Map
1917 - -        Map
1918 - -1974    13.0501
1919 - -1974    17.0101—
                17.0107
                18.0101—
1920 - -1974    18.0104,
                11.0601
1921 - -        Map
1922 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                14.0401—14.0405,
1923 - -1974    14.0407—
                14.0409
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
1924 - -1974    33.0200—
                33.0210
1925 - -        Map
1926 - -        Map
1927 - -        Interim Land Use Zone
1928 - -1974    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1929 - -        Map
1930 - -        Repealed
1931 - -        Map
1932 - -        Repealed
1933 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1934 - -        Repealed
1935 - -        Deleted
1936 - -        Deleted
                51.0112,
1937 - -1974    51.0301,
                51.0310
1938 - -        Map
1939 - -        Charter
                14.0501—
1940 - -1974    14.0503,
                14.0505,
                14.0506
1941 - -        Repealed
1942 - -        Map
1943 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1944 - -        Map
1945 - -        Map
1946 - -        Map
1947 - -        Deleted
1948 - -        Map
1949 - -1974    12.0608,
                12.0701
1950 - -1974    12.1101
1951 - -        Map
1952 - -        Repealed
1953 - -        Repealed
1954 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1955 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3596
1956 - -        Map
1957 - -        Map
1958 - -        Map
1959 - -        Map
1960 - -        Map
1961 - -        Charter
1962 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1963 - -        Deleted
1964 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1965 - -        Deleted
1966 - -        Map
1967 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1968 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1969 - -        Deleted
1970 - -        Repeals Ords. 1313 and 1318
1971 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1972 - -        Map
1973 - -        Map
1974 - -        Map
1975 - -        Map (Chino Hills)
1976 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1977 - -        Map
1978 - -1975    12.1402
1979 - -1975    37.0102
1980 - -        Special Census
1981 - -        Map
1982 - -        Map
1983 - -        Map
1984 - -        Deleted
1985 - -        Deleted
1986 - -        Map
1987 - -        Position in Unclassified Service
1988 - -        Deleted
1989 - -1975    Repealed by Ord. 4212
1990 - -        Vehicle Parking Dist.
1991 - -        Map
1992 - -        Map
1993 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1994 - -1975    14.0203
1995 - -        Repealed
1996 - -        Map
1997 - -        Map
1998 - -        Repealed
1999 - -        Map
2000 - -1975    32.0211
2001 - -1975    63.0606, 63.0607, 63.0608, 63.0617
2002 - -        Map
2003 - -        Map
2004 - -1975    12.1401
2005 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2006 - -        Map
2007 - -        Prohibit Construction Wrightwood
2008 - -        Map
2009 - -        Deleted
                23.0101—
2011 - -1975    23.0104,
                23.0108,
                23.0111
2013 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2018 - -1975    31.0204
2019 - -1975    12.1401
2024 - -1975    53.0301—
                53.0307
2029 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2030 - -1976    14.0201
2034 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2037 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2039 - -1975    41.0401—
                41.0416
2042 - -1975    13.0501,
                13.0502
                12.0402,
2043 - -1975    12.0403,
                12.0405,
                12.0406
2044 - -        Map
2045 - -        Map
2046 - -        Map
2047 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2048 - -        Map
2049 - -        Map
2050 - -1976    Repealed by Ord. 4291
2051 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
2052 - -        Map
2053 - -1976    42.0501—
                42.0556
2054 - -        Map
2055 - -        Map
2056 - -        Map
2057 - -        Map
2058 - -1976    27.0505—
                27.0507
2059 - -        Map
2060 - -        Map
2061 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2062 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2063 - -        Map
2064 - -        Map
2065 - -        Map
2066 - -1976    12.0509
2067 - -        Map
2068 - -1976    22.0103
2075 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2076 - -1976    28.0501—
                28.0504
2077 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2081 - -1976    12.1401
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
2084 - -1976    31.0801—
                31.0827
                31.1106,
2100 - -1976    32.0106,
                32.0109
2104 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2105 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2106 - -        Repealed
2107 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2108 - -1976    63.0701—
                63.0706
2109 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
                41.1703,
2110 - -1976    41.1705,
                41.1710,
                41.1713
2111 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2112 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2113 - -        Repealed
2114 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2115 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2116 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
                14.0409,
2117 - -1976    14.0501—
                14.0507
2118 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
2119 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2120 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2121 - -        Deleted
2122 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2123 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2124 - -        Repealed
2125 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2126 - -        Deleted
2127 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2128 - -        Deleted
2129 - -        Deleted
                71.0101—
                71.0105,
                71.0201—
                71.0210,
                71.0301—
2132 - -1977    71.0307,
                71.0401—
                71.0416,
                71.0501—
                71.0510,
                71.0601—
                71.0603
2139 - -1977    14.0318
2144 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2150 - -1977    12.0607,
                12.0608
2155 - 1977     14.0203
2159 - -1977    63.0801—
                63.0810
2167 - -1987    12.1607
2169 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2170 - -1977    14.0110
2171 - -1977    12.1401
2187 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                41.1703,
2193 - -1977    41.1705,
                41.1710,
                41.1713
2194 - -1973    12.2303
2196 - -1980    Repealed by Ord. 4459
2198 - -1977    22.0101,
                22.0111
2200 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2203 - -1977    52.0128,
                52.0129
2209 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2210 - -1977    12.0304
2211 - -1977    12.0101
2213 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2223 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2226 - -1978    53.0601—
                53.0606
                42.0601—
                42.0606,
2228 - -1978    71.0101—
                71.0105,
                71.0603
2232 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2236 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2237 - -1978    12.1403
2240 - -1978    12.0608
2246 - -1978    33.0200—
                33.0210
2274 - -1978    14.0115
2287 - -1978    14.0402,
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2291 - -1978    12.2201—
                12.2205
2314 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2323 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2325 - -1979    53.0308
2329 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2330 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2332 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2339 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                67.0101—
2346 - -1979    67.0107,
                67.0201—
                67.0216
2348 - -1979    32.0906,
                32.0913
2352 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2353 - -1979    12.1401
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
2354 - -1979    32.0204,
                32.0209
2355 - -1979    42.0503,
                42.0513
2357 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2358 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2363 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2365 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2366 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2369 - -1979    14.0204
                51.0107,
2377 - -1979    51.0117,
                51.0210
2379 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2384 - -1979    15.0103
2389 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2390 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2398 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2400 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2402 - -1979    14.0115
2405 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2413 - -1980    12.2302,
                12.2303
2415 - -1980    41.0501—
                41.0512
2420 - -1980    12.1601—
                12.1607
2421 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                12.0601—
                12.0606,
                12.1001,
                12.1301,
2425 - -1980    12.1303,
                14.0104,
                14.0705,
                15.0101,
                15.0102,
                51.0101
2433 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2434 - -1980    12.1401
2440 - -1980    12.1604
2441 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2445 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2454 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2473 - -1980    63.0801—
                63.0810
2475 - -1980    Repealed by Ord. 4130
2492 - -1980    27.0801—
                27.0805
                13.0101—
2498 - -1980    13.0109,
                13.0404
                22.0101,
2499 - -1980    22.0103,
                22.0104,
                22.0105
2508 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2511 - -1981    31.0807,
                31.0820
2512 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                33.0601—
2518 - -1981    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
2519 - -1981    12.2303
2525 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2527 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2528 - -1981    Repealed by Ord. 4130
2533 - -1981    12.0301—
                12.0304
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.0601—
2537 - -1981    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
2543 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2544 - -1981    11.0401
2547 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2548 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2556 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2557 - -1981    12.0101
2562 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2568 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                52.0201—
                52.0209,
2572 - -1981    52.0301—
                52.0309,
                54.0402
2573 - -1980    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2581 - -1981    12.0102
2580 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2586 - -1981    31.0204
2587 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2591 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2606 - -1981    31.0101
2607 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2613 - -1982    12.0101
2623 - -1982    53.0801
2626 - -1982    12.1604
2630 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2639 - -1982    31.0901
2640 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2641 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2644 - -1982    12.0502
2646 - -1982    31.0601—
                31.0605
2654 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2655 - -1982    22.0112
2656 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                14.0409,
                14.0501—
2658 - -1982    14.0503,
                14.0505—
                14.0507
2659 - -1982    12.1401
2661 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
2663 - -1982    33.0200—
                33.0210
2667 - -1982    42.0501—
                42.0556
2668 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.0601—
2670 - -1982    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
2674 - -1982    Repealed by Ord. 4130
2676 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2678 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2680 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2691 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2696 - -1982    13.0501,
                13.0502
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.0601—
2701 - -1982    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
2702 - -1982    12.3701
2703 - -1982    14.0203
2715 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2706 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2707 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2709 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2714 - -1982    12.0101
2715 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2717 - -1982    42.0556
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                41.1801—
2718 - -1982    41.1804,
                41.1806—
                41.1815
2727 - -1983    12.0607
2732 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                11.0301—
2734 - -1983    11.0306,
                12.3401—
                12.3405
2736 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2741 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2745 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2750 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2751 - -1983    12.1404
                42.0505,
                42.0518,
                42.0520,
2754 - -1983    42.0533,
                42.0534,
                42.0535,
                42.0543
2755 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2761 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2763 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2764 - -1983    12.1405
2767 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2769 - -1983    12.0510
2771 - -1983    31.0201, 63.0621
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
2775 - -1983    42.0516,
                42.0519
2777 - -1983    14.0203
2778 - -1983    52.0101—
                52.0130
2779 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2783 - -1983    12.3301—
                12.3309
2789 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2790 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2792 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2799 - -1983    17.0101—
                17.0106
2803 - -1983    13.0101
2805 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                12.1908,
                12.2002,
                12.2003,
2809 - -1983    12.2201,
                12.2401,
                12.2402,
                12.3506
2815 - -1983    63.0801—
                63.0810
2816 - -1983    Repealed by Ord. 4459
2818 - -1983    14.0201
                14.0601—
2821 - -1983    14.0607,
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2825 - -1984    12.3801,
                12.3802
2827 - -1984    12.2400
2830 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2836 - -1984    24.0101—
                24.0104
2838 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2841 - -1984    31.0819
2844 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                53.0602,
2847 - -1984    53.0603,
                53.0605
2849 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2854 - -1984    33.0801—
                33.0804
2856 - -1984    23.0108
                13.0502,
                13.0612,
                13.0630,
2860 - -        13.0639,
                13.0643,
                13.0651,
                13.0654
2862 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2868 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2880 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2881 - -1980    27.0901
2890 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2892 - -1984    31.0601
                42.0502,
                42.0504,
                42.0505,
2908 - -1984    42.0506,
                42.0516,
                42.0517,
                42.0544
2911 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2923 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2924 - -1985    Repealed by Ord. 4284
2926 - -1985    52.0501—
                52.0507
2933 - -1985    32.0701
2951 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2952 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2967 - -1985    12.3405
2971 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2977 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2982 - -1985    52.0501—
                52.0504
2986 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2994 - -1986    23.0308,
                27.0504
2995 - -1986    32.0110
                33.1201,
                33.1205,
                33.1210,
                33.1215,
                33.1220,
                33.1225,
                33.1230,
                33.1235,
                33.1240,
                33.1245,
2996 - -1986    33.1250,
                33.1255,
                33.1260,
                33.1265,
                33.1270,
                33.1275,
                33.1280,
                33.1281,
                33.1285,
                33.1290,
                33.1295,
                33.1298, 33.1299
2998 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                53.0603,
3010 - -1986    53.0604,
                53.0606
3011 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3015 - -1986    Repealed by Ord. 4272
                52.0505,
3019 - -1986    52.0506,
                52.0507
3023 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3026 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3033 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3034 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3041 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3055 - -1986    Repealed by Ord. 4459
3058 - -1986    12.2702
3059 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3062 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3066 - -1986    Repealed by Ord. 4191
3070 - -1986    Repealed by Ord. 4130
3075 - -1986    12.3701
3076 - -1986    12.0305
                14.0318,
3077 - -1986    14.0406,
                14.0407
3079 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3089 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3093 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3096 - -1986    28.0101,
                28.0407
3096 - -1987    28.0501—
                28.0504
3097 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                31.0203,
                31.0205—
                31.0214,
                32.0501—
                32.0511,
                33.0101—
                33.0115,
                33.0200—
                33.0210,
                33.0301—
                33.0305,
                33.0307,
                33.0311,
                33.0401—
                33.0410,
                33.0501—
                33.0508,
                33.0601—
                33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624,
                33.0630—
                33.0641,
                33.0643—
                33.0645,
                33.0801—
                33.0811,
                33.08100—
                33.08108,
                33.08120—
                33.08128,
                33.08130,
                33.08131,
                33.08141—
3105 - -1986    33.08147,
                33.0850—
                33.0865,
                33.0890—
                33.0897,
                33.0901—
                33.0903,
                33.0911,
                33.0912,
                33.0914—
                33.0920,
                33.0931—
                33.0936,
                33.0941—
                33.0945,
                33.0951,
                33.0952,
                33.1002—
                33.1012,
                33.1035—
                33.1038,
                33.1101—
                33.1112,
                33.1114—
                33.1127,
                33.1129,
                33.1131,
                33.1132,
                34.0301—
                34.0311,
                34.0501,
                34.0502,
                35.0101—
                35.0132, 41.1012—41.1015 (Repealed by Ord. 4272) ,
                51.0101
3111 - -1987    Repealed by Ord. 4130
                17.0101—
                17.0107,
3121 - -1987    17.0201—
                17.0214,
                17.0301,
                17.0401
3128 - -1987    Repealed by Ord. 4212
3130 - -1987    63.0801—
                63.0810
3132 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                12.3301—
3139 - -1987    12.3304,
                12.3306,
                12.3309
3140 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3144 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                33.08150,
3145 - -1987    33.08152,
                33.08153
3146 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3148 - -1987    33.08151
3150 - -1987    13.0205
                14.0601—
3154 - -1987    14.0607,
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3165 - -1987    Repealed by Ord. 4272
3168 - -1987    12.0504
3170 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3175 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3177 - -        15.0301,
                15.0402
3187 - -1987    22.0101,
                22.0103
3199 - -1987    27.1002—
                27.1007
3208 - -1988    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                32.0211
3209 - -1988    12.0511
3214 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3215 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3225 - -1988    14.0204
3229 - -1988    27.1101,
                27.1102
3230 - -1988    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.08151
3233 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3236 - -1988    18.0101—
                18.0104
3244 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3250 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                31.0801—
3251 - -1998    31.0819,
                31.0821—
                31.0827
3253 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3254 - -1988    28.0301—
                28.0308
3257 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3260 - -1988    33.08170—
                33.08177
3264 - -1988    14.0204
3267 - -1988    28.0601
3268 - -1988    28.0601
3279 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3280 - -1988    32.0119,
                32.0120
                33.1201,
                33.1205,
                33.1210,
                33.1215,
                33.1220,
                33.1225,
                33.1230,
                33.1235,
                33.1240,
                33.1245,
                33.1250,
3283 - -1988    33.1255,
                33.1260,
                33.1265,
                33.1270,
                33.1275,
                33.1280,
                33.1281,
                33.1285,
                33.1290,
                33.1295,
                33.1298—
                13.0708
3292 - -1979    14.0408
3294 - -1988    33.0856,
                33.0857
3296 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3304 - -1989    13.0207
3308 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3314 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3322 - -1989    32.1301—
                32.1306
                Repealing,
3325 - -1989    12.0706—
                12.0710
3326 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3331 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3333 - -1989    Repealed by Ord. 4209
3334 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3335 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3338 - -1989    Repealed by Ord. 4306
3341 - -1989    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3343 - -1989    Repealed by Ord. 4306
3348 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                33.1201,
                33.1205,
                33.1210,
                33.1215,
                33.1220,
                33.1225,
                33.1230,
                33.1235,
                33.1240,
                33.1245,
3349 - -1989    33.1250,
                33.1255,
                33.1260,
                33.1265,
                33.1270,
                33.1275,
                33.1280,
                33.1281,
                33.1285,
                33.1290,
                33.1295,
                33.1298, 33.1299
3355 - -1989    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3356 - -1989    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
3357 - -1989    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
3358 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3361 - -1989    53.0901—
                53.0903
3363 - -1989    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3364 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3366 - -1989    12.3802
3367 - -1989    12.0305
3369 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3373 - -1990    Repealed by Ord. 4209
3374 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3376 - -1990    33.08151
3377 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3379 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3380 - -1990    52.0128
3381 - -1990    Repealed by Ord. 4459
3383 - -1990    18.0103
3384 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3385 - -1990    41.0501—
                41.0512
3386 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3387 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3388 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                12.3401,
3390 - -1990    12.3403,
                12.3506
3391 - -1990    24.0501
3392 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3393 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3394 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4240
3395 - -1990    52.0129,
                52.0130
3396 - -1990    33.08151—
                33.08153
3397 - -1990    12.3401—
                12.3405
3399 - -1990    32.0304
                32.0305,
3399 - -1999    32.0306,
                32.0307
                32.0207,
                32.0211,
3402 - -1990    32.0214,
                32.0219,
                32.0221,
                32.0222
3403 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3411 - -1990    33.0826
3412 - -1990    24.0301—
                24.0304
3415 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3420 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3421 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3423 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3425 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3427 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3428 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3429 - -1991    33.1035
3430 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3431 - -1991    53.1001—
                53.1005
3432 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3433 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3435 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3436 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3440 - -1991    42.0501—
                42.0556
3442 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3443 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                14.0402,
3445 - -1991    14.0403,
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3446 - -1991    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3449 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3455 - -1991    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
3458 - -1991    14.0403,
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
3459 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3460 - -1991    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3461 - -1991    14.0102
3462 - -1991    63.0601—63.0622
3463 - -1992    12.0102
3464 - -1991    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3465 - -1991    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3466 - -1991    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3467 - -1991    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), 41.1401—41.1413 (Repealed by
                Ord. 4272)
3468 - -1991    25.0101,
                51.0101
3470 - -1991    18.0104,
                18.0105
3471 - -1991    33.08150—
                33.08153
3472 - -1991    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                12.0807,
3473 - -1991    12.0901,
                12.0903
3480 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-             Collection of road maintenance service charges on tax roll, CSA 70-R-23 (Mile
91-  - -1991    High Park), Crestline
10
SD-
91-  - -1991    Collection of street and highway sweeping charges on tax roll, CSA 70-CH
11
SD-             Collection of service charge on tax roll for road maintenance, CSA 70-R-31
91-  - -1991    (Lytle Creek)
12
SD-             Collection of road maintenance service charge on tax roll, CSA 70-R-29 (Yucca
91-  - -1991    Mesa)
13
SD-
91-  - -1991    Collection of water service charges on tax roll, CSA 53-C (Fawnskin)
14
SD-
91-  - -1991    Establishing Facilities Benefit Assessment, Chino Hills Specific Plan
15
SD-
91-  - -1991    Increasing Facilities Development Fee, Chino Hills Specific Plan
16
SD-
91-  - -1991    Levy of Special Tax, CFD #9 (Rincon Village)
18
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #1
19
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #2
20
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #4
21
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #5
22
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #6
23
3483 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                41.1901 —
                41.1910 ,
3484 - -1992    41.1912 —
                41.1920 ,
                41.2001 —
                41.2018
3485 - -1992    Fee for septic waste
3486 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3487 - -1992    Amending Official Land Use Plan
3488 - -1992    Location of Municipal Court sessions
3489 - -1992    Organization of Social Services Group
3490 - -1992    Fees for massage clinics and massage technicians
3491 - -1992    Revised fees
SD-  - -1992    Recreation and park fees for CSA’s, Improvement Zones and Park Districts
92-2
SD-  - -1992    Sewer user fees and standby charges for Crestline Sanitation District
92-3
SD-  - -1992    Ambulance fees for CSA’s, Improvement Zones and Fire Protection Districts
92-4
SD-  - -1992    Cemetery charges for CSA 29
92-5
3492 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3493 - -1992    Compensation of Radiology Trainee I’s
3494 - -1992    Compensation of exempt and other non-represented officers and employees
3495 - -1992    31.1101—
                31.1106
3496 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                42.0512,
3497 - -1992    42.0534,
                42.0541
3498 - -1992    12.2201,
                12.2202
3499 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3500 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                63.1101,
                63.1105,
                63.1110,
                63.1115,
3501 - -1992    63.1120,
                63.1125,
                63.1130,
                63.1135,
                63.1140, 63.1202—63.1208
3502 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3503 - -1992    Land Use District Maps
SD-  - -1992    Increasing sewer connection charge for CSA 70-B and increasing water connection
92-6            fee for CSA 70-C and repealing Ord. SD-91-8
3504 - -1992    Extending and fixing benefit assessment rates for Vector Control Program for
                various cities
3505 - -1992    Extending and fixing benefit assessment rates for Vector Control Program for
                City of Needles
3506 - -1992    Extending and fixing benefit assessment rates for Vector Control Program for
                City of San Bernardino
3507 - -1992    Extending and fixing benefit assessment rates for Vector Control Program for San
                Bernardino Valley area
3508 - -1992    Extending and fixing benefit assessment rates for Vector Control Program for
                Colorado River Region
3509 - -1992    Including portion of City of Ontario in Vector Control Program and establishing
                rates
3510 - -1992    Establishing Mountain Region in Vector Control Program and establishing rates
3511 - -1992    Establishing Desert Region in Vector Control Program and establishing rates
SD-  - -1992    Collection of service charge and interest on tax rolls, CSA 70-R-32, Phelan
92-7
                33.0601—
                33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624,
                33.0650,
3512 - -1992    33.0655,
                33.06510,
                33.06515,
                33.06520,
                33.06525,
                33.06530,
                33.06535
3513 - -1992    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3514 - -1992    Toilet and lavatory requirements in establishments serving food and beverages
3515 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                33.0601—
                33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624,
3516 - -1992    63.0101—
                63.0104,
                63.0301—
                63.0305,
                63.0401—63.0403
3517 - -1992    Repealed by Ord. 4130
                41.1901 ,
                41.1906 —
                41.1908 ,
                41.1915 ,
                41.2001 ,
3518 - -1992    41.2002 ,
                41.2004 ,
                41.2007 ,
                41.2012 ,
                41.2014 ,
                41.2015
3519           Land Use District Maps
3520 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3521 - -1992    12.0102
3522 - -1992    14.0203
3523 - -1992    Appointment of Fish and Game Commission members
3524 - -1992    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3525 - -1992    Internships, residents and externships
                41.0501,
3526 - -1992    41.0503,
                41.0504
3527 - -1992    12.3803
3528 - -1993    Salaries of elected officials
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election to Inland
93-1            Empire West Resource Conservation District
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election to Mojave
93-2            Desert Resource Conservation District
3529 - -1993    Urgency ordinance amending Development Code re businesses providing massage
                services
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election, East Valley
93-3            Resource Conservation District
3530 - -1993    One year extension for certain Conditional Use Permits expiring in 1993
3531 - -1993    Urgency ordinance extending Ord. 3529 re businesses providing massage services
3532 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3533 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-  - -1993    Repealing Ord. SD-92-4 and establishing various ambulance fees for CSA’s 29, 56
93-4            and 82-SV-1 and Lake Arrowhead and Yucca Vly. FPD’s
3534 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                43.0201,
3535 - -1993    43.0202,
                43.0203
3536 - -1993    12.0101
3537 - -1993    28.0701—
                28.0705
3538 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3539 - -1993    Amending Official Land Use Plan
3540 - -1993    County fees
3541 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3542 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3543 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-  - -1993    Repealing Ord. SD-92-1 and amending Ord. SD-85-4 increasing sewer connection
93-5            charge for Crestline Sanitation District
3544 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
SD-  - -1993    Sewer and water connection fees, CSA 70 B & C
93-6
SD-  - -1993    Various recreation and park activity fees for named CSA’s and recreation and
93-7            park districts
SD-  - -1993    Sewer standby and user charges for Crestline Sanitation District
93-8
SD-  - -1993    Cemetery fees and charges CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley)
93-9
3545 - -1993    Compensation of student nurses
3546 - -1993    14.0102,
                14.0113
3547 - -1993    Compensation of Exempt and other non-represented officers and employees
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge for park maintenance CSA 20 (Joshua Tree)
10
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge for park maintenance CSA 70-M (Wonder Valley)
11
3548 - -1993    41.2101—
                41.2120
3549 - -1993    33.0941—
                33.0945
3550 - -1993    33.08181,
                33.08180
3551 - -1993    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.0822
3552 - -1993    Amending Official Land Use Plan
                33.08150,
3553 - -1993    33.08152,
                33.08153
3554 - -1993    12.3301—
                12.3304
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of CSA 79-R-1 service charge on tax rolls
12
3555 - -1993    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
                41.1901 ,
                41.1902 ,
                41.1909 ,
3556 - -1993    41.1915 ,
                41.2001 ,
                41.2003 ,
                41.2009 ,
                41.2012
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge and interest for CSA 70-R-33
13
3557 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3558 - -1993    13.0619
3559 - -1993    Compensation of Boards, Committees and Commissions (Assessment Appeals Board)
3560 - -1993    63.1201
3561 - -1993    Amending definition of a motel business
3562 - -1993    Amending justice court judges benefits
3563 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3564 - -1993    33.0870—
                33.0880
3565 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3566 - -1993    33.08181
3567 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3568 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3569 - -1993    Regional parks fees
3570 - -1993    Professional unit working conditions
3571 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3572 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3573 - -1993    Massage clinics (Urgency ordinance)
3574 - -1993    Official Land Use Plan
3575 - -1994    Salaries of elected officials
SD-  - -1994    CSA 70-R-34 (Big Bear) collection of service charge on tax roll
94-1
SD-  - -1994    Crestline Sanitation District increasing sewer connection charge
94-2
3576 - -1994    12.0101
3577 - -1994    33.0943
3578 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 22 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-  - -1994    CSA 70-B AND C (Helendale) sewer and water connection fees
94-3
SD-  - -1994    Recreation and Park Districts activity fees
94-4
SD-  - -1994    CSA 20 (Joshua Tree) and CSA 70-M (Wonder Valley) recreation and park service
94-5            charges
SD-  - -1994    CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley) cemetery fees
94-6
                41.1909 ,
3579 - -1994    41.1918 ,
                41.1920
3580 - -1994    12.0101
3581 - -1994    Salary ordinance
SD-  - -1994    Collection of park service charges on tax roll
94-7
SD-  - -1994    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll, CSA 70-R-36
94-8
SD-  - -1994    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll, CSA 70-R-35
94-9
3582 - -1994    Land Use District Map
3583 - -1994    Land Use District Map
3584 - -1994    63.0802
                33.0112,
3585 - -1994    33.0113,
                33.0114
3586 - -1994    23.0301—
                23.0313
3587 - -1994    35.0101—
                35.0132
3588 - -        Pollutant Discharge
3589 - -1994    Repealed by Ord. 4191
3590 - -1994    Remove positions 09865 and 09869 (Senior Service Counselors I) from Unclassified
                Service
3591 - -1994    County organizational structure
3592 - -1994    Salaries of elected officials
3593 - -1994    Amending Official Land Use Plan (3rd Cycle 1994 GPA’s)
3594 - -1994    Imposing criminal justice administrative fee (booking fees)
3595 - -1995    12.3901—
                12.3905
SD-  - -1995    Appointing members to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District Board of
95-1            Directors
SD-  - -1995    Appointing members to East Valley Resource Conservation District Board of
95-2            Directors
3596 - -1995    Repealing language relating to sign regulations (political signs)
3597 - -1995    Medical waste generators, haulers and treatment facilities
3598 - -1995    32.0901—
                32.0916
3599 - -1995    13.0502,
                13.0617b
3600 - -1995    Justice and Municipal Courts
3602 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3601 - -1995    Placing positions in the Unclassified Service
SD-  - -1995    Increasing sewer connection charge- Crestline Sanitation District
95-3
3602 - -1995    Revised fees
SD-  - -1995    Sewer and water connection charges/fees for CSA 70-B & C and repeal Ord. SD-94-3
95-4
SD-  - -1995    Fixing various recreation and park activity fees for various CSA’s and repealing
95-5            Ord. SD-94-4
SD-  - -1995    Repealing Ord. 94-10 and establishing ambulance fees for various CSA’s and FPD’s
95-6
SD-  - -1995    Repealing Ord. 93-8 and establishing and modifying sewer user fees and standby
95-7            charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1995    Establishing fire emergency response service fees for CSA 70
95-8
3603 - -1995    41.1912 ,
                41.2013
3604 - -1995    Superseded by Ord. 4240
3605 - -1995    Amending Official Land Use Plan
3606 - -1995    12.0101
3607 - -1995    Changing Municipal Court boundaries
3608 - -1995    33.0409
3609 - -1995    Compensation of exempt and other non-represented officers and employees
3610 - -1995    Uniform Fire Code amendment
SD-  - -1995    Establishment of rules relating to issuance of road permits for various CSA’s
95-9
SD-
95-  - -1995    CSA 70-R-22 (Twin Peaks) collection of service charge on tax roll
10
                33.0115,
3611 - -1995    33.0200,
                33.0301,
                33.0302
3612 - -        Readopted by Ord. 3587, Superseded by Ord. 4011
3613 - -        Land Use Plan
3614 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3654
3615 - -        Repealed
3616 - -        Superseded by Ord. 4011
3617 - -1995    Placing positions into Unclassified Service
SD-
95-  - -1995    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll (CSA 70-R-33)
11
3618 - -1995    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3619 - -1995    Placing position into Unclassified Service
3620 - -1995    Realign Flood Control Zone Boundaries 4, 5, and 6 in Victor Valley and Barstow
                areas
3621 - -1995    Placing various positions into Unclassified Service
3622 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3623 - -1995    Registered Nurses-Per Diem
3624 - -1995    33.0870—
                33.0880
3625 - -1995    Option to Purchase Agreement with Cousins/New Market Development Group, Inc./
                Hopkins Real Estate Group for sale of County land in Ontario
3626 - -1995    Business license tax on operators of solid waste disposal sites and calling
                election for 3/26/96
                63.0802,
3627 - -1995    63.0804,
                63.0805
                52.0505,
3628 - -        52.0506,
                52.0507
3629 - -1995    Amending Official Maps of Official Land Use Plan (Third Cycle 1995 General Plan
                Amendments/Rail-Cycle)
3630 - -1995    Ballot initiative Buffer Space Between Large Solid Waste Landfills and
                significant water resources
3631 - -1995    Approving and adopting Redevelopment Plan for San Sevaine Redevelopment Project
                Urgency ordinance extending urgency Ord. 3628 re protection of water resources
3632 - -1995    from contamination from improper storage of radioactive wastes; Repealed by Ord.
                3640
3633 - -1995    Amending Official Maps of Official Land Use Plan (Fourth Cycle 1995 General Plan
                Amendments)
3634 - -1996    Placing position 10389 into Unclassified Service
3635 - -1996    Businesses providing massage services
3636 - -1996    Amending East Valley Corridor Specific Plan
3637 - -        Land Use District Map
3638 - -1996    Placing position 00460, Library Associate, in Unclassified Service
3639 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3640 - -        Repeals Ord. 3632
3641 - -1996    12.2400
SD-  - -1996    Authorizing collection of park service charges on tax roll for CSA’s 70-P-10 and
96-1            11
SD-  - -1996    Increasing sewer connection charges for CSA 70-B; increasing water connection
96-2            fee for CSA 70-C and repealing Ord. SD-95-4
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-5 and fixing recreation and park fees for CSA’s and
96-3            improvement zones and recreation and park districts
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-6 and establishing ambulance fees for CSA 29, 56, 82-SV-1,
96-4            Lake Arrowhead and Yucca Valley FPD’s & CSA 70- HL
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-7 and establishing and modifying sewer user fees & standby
96-5            charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-3 and increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline
96-6            Sanitation District
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-94-6 and fixing cemetery charges for CSA 29
96-7
3642 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3643 - -1996    Public lease back of solid waste facilities (expansion)
3644 - -        Public Lease Back of Regulations
3645 - -1996    Suits upon Claims
3646 - -1996    12.3406
3647 - -        Public leaseback
3648 - -        Water vehicle speed and wake restrictions on Lake Havasu
3649 - -        Compensation of exempt & non-represented employees
3650 - -        Compensation of exempt & non-represented employees - furloughs
3651 - -1996    33.0823
                33.0827,
3652 - -1996    33.0828,
                33.0829
SD-             Authorizing collection of service charge on tax roll for CSA 70-R-38 (Pinon
96-  - -1996    Hills road maintenance district)
10
                25.0201—25.0208,
3653 - -1996    26.0101,
                26.0102
3654 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3654, Superseded by Ord. 4011
3655 - -1996    12.2101
3656 - -1996    12.3301—
                12.3304
3657 - -1996    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3658 - -1996    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                33.0601—
3659 - -1996    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
3660 - -1996    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3661 - -        Land Use District Map
                12.2400,
                12.3201—
3662 - -1996    12.3203,
                12.4001—
                12.4005, Amending Ord. 1904
3663 - -        Placing positions in Unclassified Service
SD-
96-  - -1996    Collection of service charge on tax roll for CSA 70-R-37, Hillview, Drive South
11
3664 - -1996    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
3665 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3666 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3667 - -1995    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
                12.2025,
                12.2026,
                12.2101,
3668 - -1996    12.2202,
                12.2203,
                12.2204,
                12.2205
                41.2201,
3669 - -1996    41.2202,
                41.2204—
                41.2211
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                46.0101,
                46.0201, 46.0202,
                46.0301—
                46.0304,
                46.0401—46.0405,
                46.0501—
3670 - -1996    46.0509, 46.0601, 46.0602,
                46.0701, 46.0702,
                46.0801—46.0807,
                46.0901—46.0908,
                46.1001—
                46.1004,
                46.1101,
                46.1201, 46.1202
                33.0801—
                33.0811,
                33.0821—
                33.0835,
                33.0840—
                33.0848,
                33.0849,
3671 - -1996    33.0849A,
                33.0849B,
                33.0849C,
                33.0849D,
                33.0849E,
                33.0849F,
                33.0942—
                33.0945, 46.0804, 46.0805, 46.0806
3672 - -        33.0941—
                33.0945
3673 - -1996    Repealed
3674 - -1996    Superseded by Ord. 4011
SD-
96-  - -1996    Reduction or waiver of various recreation and park activities fees
12
3675 - -1996    Superseded by Ord. 4240
3676 - -        Land Use District Map
3677 - -1996    86.070401, 86.070440
3678 - -1996    63.1201
                12.3506,
3679 - -1996    13.0502,
                13.0634,
                13.0635
3680 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to East Valley Resource Conservation District in lieu of
97-1            election
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District in lieu
97-2            of election
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to Mojave Desert Resource Conservation District in lieu of
97-3            election
3681 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3682 - -1997    12.2803
                33.08155,
                33.08156,
                33.08157,
                33.08158,
3683 - -1997    33.08160,
                33.08161,
                33.08162,
                33.08163,
                33.08164
3684 - -1997    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3685 - -        Land Use District Map
3686 - -1997    52.0701—
                52.0706
3687 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3688 - -1997    Superseded by Ord. 4011
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ord. SD-96-3 and fixing recreation and park fees for CSA’s,
97-4            improvement zones and recreation and park districts
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ord. SD-96-4 and confirming and/or modifying ambulance fees for CSA’s
97-5            29, 56 and 82-SV-1, Lk. Arrowhead and Yucca Valley FPD’s and CSA 70-HL
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ord. SD-96-5 and confirming sewer user charges and standby charges for
97-6            Crestline Sanitation Dist.
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ord. SD-96-6 and increasing sewer connection charges for Crestline
97-7            Sanitation Dist.
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ord. SD-96-7 and confirming cemetery charges for CSA 29
97-8
SD-  - -1997    Confirming fire protection service fees and repealing Ord. SD-96-8 and SD-95-8
97-9
SD-             Increasing sewer connection charges for CSA 70-B (Helendale) and water
97-  - -1997    connection fee for CSA 70-C (Helendale) and repealing Ord. SD-96-2
10
3689 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3690 - -        Land Use District Map
3691 - -1997    12.3202
3692 - -1997    Repealed by Ord. 4184
3693 - -        Repealed
3694 - -1997    12.3202
3695 - -1997    12.1602
3696 - -1997    Repealed by Ord. 4191
3697 - -1997    46.1202
                12.4101,
                12.4105,
3698 - -1997    12.4110,
                12.4115,
                12.4120,
                12.4125
3699 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3700 - -1997    27.1201—
                27.1205
3701 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3702 - -1997    14.0701—
                14.0705
3703 - -        Urgency ordinance
3704 - -1997    41.2401—
                41.2413
3705 - -        Land Use District Map
3706 - -        Urgency ordinance
                13.0201—
3707 - -1998    13.0211,
                13.0213,
                13.0214
3708 - -        Compensation of exempt officers and employees
3709 - -1998    12.2801,
                12.2802
3710 - -1998    12.2400,
                12.3506
                33.08150,
3711 - -1998    33.08151,
                33.08152,
                33.08153
3712 - -1998    41.2301—
                41.2313
3713 - -        Urgency ordinance
3714 - -1998    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3715 - -        Repealed
3716 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3717 - -        Repealed
3718 - -1998    31.0820
3719 - -1998    25.0202
SD-  - -1998    Fixing various recreation and park activity fees
98-1
SD-  - -1998    Ambulance fees
98-2
SD-  - -1998    Sewer standby & user charges, Crestline Sanitation District
98-3
SD-  - -1998    Increasing sewer connection charges, Crestline Sanitation District
98-4
SD-  - -1998    Cemetery fees and charges
98-5
SD-  - -1998    Fire protection service fees
98-6
SD-  - -1998    Sewer and water connection fees, CSA 70-B and C, Helendale
98-7
3720 - -        Land Use District Map
3721 - -1998    Superceded by Ord. 4011
3722 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3723 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3724 - -        Amending compensation due election workers and poll owners
3725 - -        First Cycle General Plan Safety Element
3726 - -        Repealing Chapter 9 and Chapter 12 of Division 1 of Title 4,
                51.0101
3727 - -        Compensation of CMC Registered Nurse-Per Diem
3728 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3729 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3730 - -1998    41.0501—
                41.0512
3731 - -        Exempt group retirement benefits
3732 - -1998    12.3801
3733 - -        Child Support Compliance Program
3734 - -1998    14.0704
3735 - -        Land Use District Map
                Establishing salaries, benefits, promotions, salary increases and step advances
3736 - -        for Judicial Counsel I, II and III, Supervising Judicial Staff Counsel and Chief
                of Staff of Counsel Services
3737 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
                12.0608,
3738 - -1998    12.0701,
                12.0702
3739 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3740 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3741 - -        Urgency ordinance
3742 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3743 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3744 - -        Land Use District Map
3745 - -1999    12.2901—
                12.2907
3746 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3747 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3748 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                13.0106,
                13.0502,
                13.0604,
3749 - -1999    13.0613,
                13.0616,
                13.0617d,
                13.0617e,
                13.0617g
3750 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3751 - -        Child Support Compliance Program
                14.0501,
                14.0502,
3752 - -1999    14.0503,
                14.0505,
                14.0506
3753 - -        Adopting the Kaiser Commerce Center Specific Plan
3754 - -        Land Use District Map
3755 - -        Duties of CAO
3756 - -        Compensation of Exempt Employees
3757 - -        Development Agreement
3758 - -1999    41.1906 —
                41.1908
3759 - -1999    Superceded by Ord. 4011
3760 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
SD-  - -1999    Fixing recreation and park activity fees
99-1
SD-  - -1999    Confirming and/or modifying ambulance fees
99-2
SD-  - -1999    Increasing sewer user fees and confirming standby charges
99-3
SD-  - -1999    Increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline Sanitation District
99-4
SD-  - -1999    Confirming cemetery charges for CSA 29
99-5
SD-  - -1999    Confirming and/or modifying fire protection service fees
99-6
3761 - -        Military leave benefits
                13.0502,
                13.0606,
                13.0607,
3762 - -        13.0608,
                13.0609,
                13.0610,
                13.0615
3763 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3764 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3765 - -        Juvenile Court Dependency Judge Pro Tem salary, etc.
3766 - -1999    52.0131,
                52.0132
3767 - -        Land Use District Map
3768 - -        Reinstated and repealed by Ord. 3768
3769 - -1999    14.0102,
                14.0113
SD-  - -1999    Confirming report of connection fees
99-7
3770 - -        Salary, benefits, salary increases and step advances for Juvenile Court Officer
                12.0205,
                12.0206, 12.2506 (Repealed by Ord. 4368),
3771 - -1999    12.3201,
                12.3202,
                12.3203,
                12.3506
3772 - -1999    14.0102
SD-  - -1999    Confirming report of connection fees for CSA’s & Improvement Zones
99-8
3773 - -1999    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                13.0205
3774 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3775 - -        Reimbursement of moving expenses
3776 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3777 - -        Cable Franchises
3778 - -        Land Use District Map
3779 - -1999    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3780 - -1999    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3781 - -        Sick leave usage - exempt group
3782 - -        Defined (401(a)) contribution plan for elected officials
3783 - -        Increase stipend for Regional Parks Commission
3784 - -        Retirement benefits for exempt employees
3785 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
                12.2400, 12.2506 (Repealed by Ord. 4368),
                12.3202,
3786 - -2000    12.3203,
                12.3506,
                13.0613
3787 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3788 - -        Cable Franchises
3789 - -        Child Support Compliance Program
3790 - -        Purchasing Department
3791 - -        Land Use District Map
SD-  - -2000    Recreation and Park Activities Fees
00-1
SD-  - -2000    Ambulance Fees
00-2
SD-  - -2000    Cemetery Fees
00-3
SD-  - -2000    Fire Protection Service Fees
00-4
SD-  - -2000    Sewer User and Standby Fees
00-5
SD-  - -2000    Sewer Connection Charges
00-6
3792 - -2000    Placing Child Support Chief Attorney in Unclassified Services
3793 - -2000    Placing position 00761 Administrative Aide, in Unclassified Services
SD-  - -2000    Confirming report regarding connection fees with proposed increases and sewer
00-7            and water connection fees
3794 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3795 - -2000    Urgency ordinance temporarily prohibiting construction of wireless
                communications facilities countywide
3796 - -2000    General Plan Land Use District Amendments
3797 - -2000    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3798 - -2000    Removing positions from Unclassified Service
3799 - -2000    TV franchise
3800 - -2000    Urgency ordinance regarding wireless communications
3801 - -2000    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3802 - -2000    13.0702,
                13.0706
3803 - -2000    Duties of Purchasing agent and property surplus
                32.0101—
                32.0111,
3804 - -2000    32.0113—
                32.0121,
                32.1401—
                32.1408
3805 - -2000    13.0613
3806 - -2000    Countywide photocopy fee
3807 - -2000    Amend Kaiser Commerce Center Specific Plan
3808 - -2000    Land Use District Map
3809 - -2000    Benefits of exempt employees
3810 - -2000    Transferring Comcast Cablevision to Clear Cablevision
3811 - -2000    Fourth Cycle 2000 General Plan Amendments
3812 - -2001    Placing position of Public Health Programs Administrator in the Unclassified
                Service
3813 - -2001    Compensation of ARMC Registered Nurse Per diem
SD-  - -2001    Appointments in lieu of election for East Valley Resource Conservation District
01-1
SD-  - -2001    Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
01-2
SD-  - -2001    Mojave Resource Conservation District
01-3
3814 - -2001    Repealing Ord. 3629 (Rail Cycle)
3815 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3816 - -2001    13.0617a
3817 - -2001    Amending Ord. 1904 placing position 02271, Treasurer/Tax Collector Finance
                Officer into Unclassified Service
3818 - -2001    24.0606
3819 - -2001    13.0618
3820 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3821 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3822 - -2001    First Cycle 2001 General Plan Amendments
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-1 fixing various rec. and park activity fees for various
01-4            CSA’s
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-2 confirming various ambulance fees for various CSA’s
01-5
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-3 confirming existing cemetery charges for CSA 29
01-6
SD-  - -2001    Amending Ord. SD-96-9 confirming cost recovery for fire suppression and
01-7            emergency response cost
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-4 confirming existing fire protection service fees
01-8
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-5 increasing sewer user fees and confirming standby charges
01-9            for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD-00-6 increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline
01-  - -2001    Sanitation District
10
3823 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD-00-7 confirming report of connection fees with proposed
01-  - -2001    increases for various CSA’s
11
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD-83-1 authorizing collection of water/sewer service charges and
01-  - -2001    standby charges on tax bill
12
3824 - -2001    Franchise
3825 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3826 - -2001    12.0102
3827 - -2001    13.0205
SD-             Appointments in Lieu of Election to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation
01-  - -2001    District
13
3828 - -2001    Preschool Services Department position from Classified to Unclassified
3829 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3830 - -2001    Amending Ord. 1904 removing Position 73080, Child Support Chief Attorney, from
                the Unclassified Service
3831 - -2001    Repealed by Ord. 4270
3832 - -2001    Official Land Use District Map (2nd Cycle 2001 GPA’s) - Majestic Realty
3833 - -2001    18.0101—
                18.0104
3834 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3835 - -2001    23.0510
3836 - -2001    Amending Official Land Use Plan - 3rd Cycle 2001 GPAs
3837 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3838 - -2001    12.2400,
                12.3202
3839 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3840 - -2001    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
3841 - -2001    Amending Official Land Use Plan - 4th Cycle 2001 GPAs
3842 - -2002    12.4201—
                12.4214
3843 - -2002    Amending Ord. 1904, removing Position 17796, Redevelopment Project Manager, from
                the Unclassified Service
3844 - -2002    12.1604,
                12.1607
                13.0604,
3845 - -2002    13.0613,
                13.0614,
                13.0617f
                23.0401—
                23.0413,
                23.0501—
                23.0509,
                23.0601—
                23.0610,
                23.0710—
                23.0715,
                23.0720—
                23.0732,
3846 - -2002    23.0740,
                23.0750,
                23.0751,
                23.0760,
                23.0761,
                23.07210,
                23.07211,
                23.07212,
                23.07213,
                23.07214,
                33.1301—
                33.1306
3847 - -2002    Amending Kaiser Commerce Center Specific Plan
3848 - -2002    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.0408
3849 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3850 - -2002    Amending Ord. 1904 by Placing Position #76498 in the Unclassified service
3851 - -2002    Amending County General Plan - 1st Cycle 2002 GPAs
3852 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3853 - -2002    13.0604
3854 - -2002    Amending Ord. 1904 removing Position 14998, Staff Analyst I, from Unclassified
                service
3855 - -2002    Amending Ord. 1904 placing Position 76624, Assistant Public Defender, in the
                Unclassified Service
3856 - -2002    14.0102,
                14.0109
3857 - -2002    Repealing Chapter 1 of Division 4 of Title 1, regarding the Child Support
                Compliance Program
3858 - -2002    53.1103
3859 - -2002    Amending Ord. 1904, placing various Museum staff positions into the Unclassified
                Service
3860 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3861 - -2002    14.0203
3862 - -2002    Amending Ord. 691, extending expiration date of Southern California Edison
                Natural Gas Pipeline Franchise for one year
SD              Repeals Ord. SD 01-04 and fixing various recreation and park activity fees for
02-  - -2002    FY 2002-2003 for county service areas and improvement zones, and recreation and
01              park districts
SD              Repeals Ord. SD 01-05 and increases various ambulance fees for CSA 29 (Lucerne
02-  - -2002    Valley), CSA 56 (Wrightwood), CSA 82 SV-1 (Searles Valley), Lake Arrowhead Fire
02              Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire Protection District and CSA 70 HL (Havasu
                Lake)
SD
02-  - -2002    Repeals Ord. SD 01-06, confirms existing cemetery charges for CSA 29
03
SD              Repeals Ord. SD 01-09, increases sewer user fee and confirms standby charges
02-  - -2002    with no proposed increases for Crestline Sanitation District
04
SD              Repeals Ord. SD 01-10, increases sewer connection charge for Crestline
02-  - -2002    Sanitation District
05
SD              Repeals Ord. SD 01-11, increases water and sewer connection charges for named
02-  - -2002    County Service Areas and Improvement Zones
06
3863 - -2002    13.0404
SD              Appointing, in lieu of election, Sybrand Vander Dussen to the office of Director
02-  - -2002    of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
07
3864 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3865 - -2002    14.0116
SD              Levying a Special Tax for the Fiscal Year 2002-2003 and Following Fiscal Years
02-  - -2002    Solely Within and Relating to Community Facilities District No 2002-1 (Kaiser
08              Commerce Center)
SD              Levying a Special Tax for the Fiscal Year 2002-2003 and Following Fiscal Years
02-  - -2002    Solely Within and Relating to Community Facilities District No. 2002-2 (Central
09              Valley FPD - Fire Protection Services)
3866 - -2002    Amending San Bernardino County Code by the Amendment of the Official Maps of the
                Official Land Use Plan - 2nd Cycle 2002 General Plan Amendments
                Amending Subsection 16.0203A(yy) of
3867 - -2002    Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code, Relating
                to Auditor/Controller-Recorder Fees
3868 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3869 - -2002    13.0604,
                13.0613
3870 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3871 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3872 - -2002    33.06557
3873 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3874 - -2002    Amending County General Plan - 3rd Cycle 2002 GPAs
                13.0401,
3875 - -2002    13.0403,
                13.0404
3876 - -2002    Amending County General Plan - 4th Cycle 2002 GPAs
3877 - -2003    13.0205
3878 - -2003    Repealed by Ord. 4270
3879 - -2003    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position No. 77906 in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
3880 - -2003    Amending County General Plan - First Cycle 2003 GPAs
3881 - -2003    14.0501—
                14.0504
3882 - -2003    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3883 - -2003    13.0613
3884 - -2003    Repealed by Ord. 4270
3885 - -2003    12.0101
3886 - -2003    12.2400
3887 - -2003    13.0616
3888 - -2003    Repealed by Ord. 4291
3889 - -2003    Repealed by Ord. 4347
3890 - -2003    Amending the Official Maps of the Official Land Use Plan
3891 - -2003    Amending the Kaiser Commerce Center Specific Plan
3892 - -2003    12.3801
SD-             Fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing with fiscal year
03-  - -2003    2003-2004 and repealing Ord. SD 02-01
05
SD
03-  - -2003    Fixing ambulance fees and charges and repealing Ord. SD 02-02
06
SD
03-  - -2003    Fixing cemetery fees and charges and repealing Ord. SD 02-03
07
SD
03-  - -2003    Fixing sewer standby and user charges and repealing Ord. SD 02-04
08
SD              Amending Ord. SD 85-4 to increase sewer connection charges and repealing Ord. SD
03-  - -2003    02-05
09
SD              Establishing and continuing sewer and water connection fees and repealing Ord.
03-  - -2003    02-06
10
3893 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3894 - -2003    13.0617c
3895 - -2003    Adopting the Mission Boulevard Joint Redevelopment Project
                12.2803,
                41.2301—
3896 - -2003    41.2313,
                41.2401—
                41.2413
3897 - -2003    12.3301—
                12.3309
3898 - -2003    13.0611
3899 - -2003    Adoption of three percent at age 50 enhanced retirement formula for safety and
                safety exempt employees; approval of replacement benefits plan
3900 - -2003    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3901 - -2003    Amendment of the official maps of the official land use plan, Third Cycle Plan,
                GPA Amendments
3902 - -2003    Adopt ordinance to approve a boundary change between the counties of San
                Bernardino and Riverside
3903 - -2003    Adopt ordinance regarding catastrophic leave for exempt employees
                Amending Ord. 1904 by placing the classification of Eligibility Worker I
3904 - -2003    (Unclassified), Eligibility Worker II (Unclassified), and Eligibility Worker
                Trainee (Unclassified) in the Unclassified Service
3905 - -2003    Amending the San Bernardino County Code by the amendment of the official maps of
                the official land use plan
3906 - -2004    Related to building standards within the Del Rosa Area
3907 - -2004    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position no. 79193 in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
                12.2903,
                12.2904,
                12.3506,
                32.0101,
3908 - -2004    32.0301,
                32.0302,
                32.0303,
                32.1201,
                41.2001
3909 - -2004    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position no. 78761 in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
SD              Acting in it’s capacity as the governing body of CSA 70 S-7 (Lenwood) requiring
04-  - -2004    that all buildings or other structures containing plumbing or drainage fixtures
01              be connected to the sewer system, and providing for the payment of connection
                fees
3910 - -2004    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3911 - -2004    Related to building standards within the Del Rosa area extending urgency interim
                Ord. 3906
                Amending §
                14.0114 of
3912 - -2004    Chapter 1 of Division 4 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code, pertaining
                to informal bidding procedures under the Uniform Public Construction Cost
                Accounting Act (§§ 22000 et seq. of the public contract code)
3913 - -2004    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position no. 79463 in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
3914 - -2004    31.0820
3915 - -2004    Amending certain time limitations with respect to the redevelopment plan for the
                San Sevaine Redevelopment Project
3916 - -2004    13.0205
3917 - -2004    Adopt ordinance relating to County Organizational Structure
3918 - -2004    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3919 - -2004    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan official fire hazard overlay
                maps
3920 - -2004    Amending the County General Plan official maps of the Official Land Use Plan
3921 - -2004    27.1304
3922 - -2004    Repealed by Ord. 4191
3923 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-05
02
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-06
03
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-07
04
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-08
05
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-09
06
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-10
07
3930 - -2004    33.1401—
                33.1407
3931 - -2004    33.08150,
                33.08151
3932 - -2004    Repealed by Ord. 4212
SD              Appointing a member of the Board of Directors of the East Valley Resource
04-  - -2004    Conservation District
08
3933 - -2004    13.0613
3934 - -2004    Amending Ord. 1904
                Amending Section
3935 - -2004    41.0510 of
                Chapter 5 of Division 1 of Title 4 of the San Bernardino County Code, relating
                to hawking and vending
                12.0512,
                12.1202,
3936 - -2004    12.1203,
                12.1204,
                12.3506
3936 - -2000    12.2400
3937 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3938 - -2004    Amending the Redevelopment Plan for the San Sevaine Redevelopment Project.
3939 - -2004    Amending the official maps of the official land use plan
3940 - -2004    Approving and adopting the Cedar Glen disaster recovery plan for the Cedar Glen
                disaster recovery area
3941 - -2004    Amending the official maps of the official land use plan
3942 - -2004    12.3405
3943 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD   - -2005    Appointing a member of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
05-1            (Cheryl Karns-Avent)
SD   - -2005    Appointing a member of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
05-2            (Terrie Andrews)
SD   - -2005    Appointing members of the Board of Directors of the Mojave Desert Resource
05-3            Conservation District
3944 - -2005    12.0101
3945 - -2005    13.0205
3946 - -2005    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing additional positions (Positions Nos. 71101, 08260,
                80380) in the Unclassified Service pursuant to Charter provisions
                12.0205,
                12.0210,
                12.0213,
3947 - -2005    12.2400, 12.2506 (Repealed by Ord. 4368),
                12.3202,
                12.3203,
                12.3506
3948 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3949 - -2005    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3950 - -2005    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Official Maps of the official
                Land Use Plan
3951 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3952 - -2005    Superseded by Ord. 4011
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-02
05-4
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-03
05-5
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-04
05-6
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-05
05-7
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-06
05-8
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-07
05-9
                12.0205,
                12.2400,
3953 - -2005    13.0604,
                13.0613,
                13.0614
3954 - -2005    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing additional positions in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
3955 - -2005    12.0402
3956 - -2005    Amending Ord. 1904
3957 - -2005    13.0619
3958 - -2005    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3959 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3960 - -2005    Amending the County General Plan (2nd Cycle 2005 General Plan Amendments)
3961 - -2005    Approving and adopting the amended and restated redevelopment plan (amendment 2
                to the San Sevaine Redevelopment Plan) for the San Sevaine Redevelopment Project
3962 - -2005    Glen Helen Specific Plan
3963 - -2005    3rd Cycle 2005 General Plan Amendments - amends Official Land Use Maps
3964 - -2005    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3965 - -2005    31.0820
3966 - -2005    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3967 - -2005    Fourth Cycle General Plan Amendments
3968 - -2006    13.0613
3969 - -2006    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing additional positions in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
3970 - -2006    13.0613
SD   - -2006    Increasing ambulance fees and charges for various county services areas and fire
06-1            protection districts. (Repealed by SD-06-08)
                13.0613,
                13.0618,
3971 - -2006    13.0700,
                13.0709,
                13.0710
3972 - -2006    46.0506
3973 - -2006    28.0407
3974 - -2006    First Cycle 2006 General Plan Amendments
                71.0101—
                71.0105,
                71.0201—
                71.0210,
                71.0301—
3975 - -2006    71.0307,
                71.0401—
                71.0416,
                71.0501—
                71.0510,
                71.0601—
                71.0603
3976 - -        33.1403
3977 - -2006    52.0302
3978 - -2006    Repealed by Ord. 4459
3979 - -2006    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3980 - -2006    13.0205
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD 05-04 and fixing various recreation and park activity fees for
06-  - -2006    FY 2006-07 for County Service Areas and Improvement Zones, and recreation and
02              park districts as shown on Exhibits I through XII
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD 05-06 and confirming cemetery charges for County Service Area
06-  - -2006    29, as shown on Attachment B
03
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD 05-09 and setting the water and sewer connection charges for
06-  - -2006    named County Service Areas and Improvement Zones, as shown on Exhibits IC and
04              IIC
                14.0102,
3982 - -2006    14.0103,
                14.0109,
                14.0115
SD
06-  - -2006    Public hearing to establish Fire Service Fees and Charges
05
SD              Repealing Ord. SD 05-07 setting sewer user fees and standby charges for
06-  - -2006    Crestline Sanitation District
06
SD              Repealing Ord. SD 06-08 and setting the sewer connection charge for Crestline
06-  - -2006    Sanitation District
07
3983 - -2006    13.0617a
                41.2201—
3984 - -2006    41.2207,
                41.2211
3985 - -2006    Proposing a Charter Amendment Number 37 to limit eminent domain and protect
                property rights
                Proposing County Charter Amendment Number 38: Calling an election thereon;
3986 - -2006    Consolidating said election with the consolidated election; proclaiming such
                election; giving notice of final dates for submission of arguments
3987 - -2006    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3988 - -2006    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing various positions into the Unclassified Services
3989 - -2006    13.0613,
                13.0618
3990 - -2006    Second Cycle 2006 General Plan Amendments
3991 - -2006    13.0201—
                13.0214
3992 - -2006    Repealed by Ord. 4291
                Repealing Ord. SD 06-01 and establishing increased ambulance service rates for
SD-             County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley), County Service Area 56 (Wrightwood),
06-  - -2006    County Service Area 82, Improvement Zone SV-1 (Searles Valley), Lake Arrowhead
08              Fire Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire Protection District and County
                Service Area 70, Improvement Zone HL (Havasu Lake)
3993 - -2006    Repealed by Ord. 4374
3994 - -2006    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing various positions into the Unclassified Services
3995 - -2006    12.1907,
                12.1908
SD-             Authorizing CSA 70 and its’ Improvement Zones to regulate the use and
06-  - -2006    construction of public storm drain systems owned and maintained by the Special
09              Districts Department for unincorporated areas within the County
3996 - -2006    Amend Kaiser Commerce Center specific plan and revise a site development review;
                Applicant: Young Electric Sign Company; Community: Fontana
3997 - -2006    Regional Transportation Development Mitigation Plan
3998 - -2006    12.4203
3999 - -2006    14.0102,
                14.0110
4000 - -2006    Third Cycle 2006 General Plan Amendments/Amending County General Plan
4001 - -2007    28.0309
4002 - -2007    Repealed by Ord. 4459
4003 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position of Auditor/Controller Division Chief in
                Unclassified Service
4004 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position No’s 82755, 82756, 82757, Laboratory
                Technologist Intern, in the Unclassified Service
4005 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing the list of positions into the Unclassified
                Service
4006 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position No. 04315, Assistant Chief Probation
                Officer in the Unclassified Service
4007 - -2007    Relating to recovering the cost of the Comprehensive Disposal Site Diversion
                Program
SD-             Appointing individuals, in lieu of election, to the position of director for the
07-  - -2007    Inland Empire Resource Conservation District
01
SD-             Appointing individuals, in lieu of election, to the position of director for the
07-  - -2007    Mojave Desert Resource Conservation District
02
4008 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position No. 83213, Assistant Director of Public
                Health, in the Unclassified Service
4009 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing the following positions #02210, #05561, #05666,
                #15846, Executive Secretary III - Classified into the Unclassified Service
SD-             Regulating the use and operation of skateboard/skating facilities within County
07-  - -2007    Service Areas, Improvement Zones, and Recreation and Park Districts in order to
03              ensure the orderly and safe use of facilities
4010 - -2007    Amending all of the San Bernardino County General Plan Maps
                Amending Section
4011 - -2007    11.0110 and Title 8 (Development Code), all of the County Code as part of the
                General Plan Update Program; Ch. 84.08 repealed by Ord. 4341 ;  Ch. 83.07
                repealed by Ord. 4419
4012 - -2007    Establishing the East Valley Area Plan as part of the General Plan Update
                Program
4013 - -2007    16.0204
4014 - -        Repealed by Ord. 4367
4015 - -2007    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
4016 - -2007    Regarding the levy of special taxes to finance services and facilities within
                the Community Facilities District and it’s Improvement Areas
4017 - -2007    13.0617m
4018 - -2007    13.0613
4019 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position No. 08070, Principal Appraiser, Exempt
                Group C in the Unclassified Service
4020 - -2007    82.22.020,
                82.22.030
4021 - -2007    Amending land use zoning district maps
4022 - -2007    23.0206
4023 - -2007    12.2903
4024 - -2007    13.0604,
                13.0613
                Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-01 and confirming ambulance service and
SD-             subscription fees for County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley), County Service
07-  - -2007    Area 56 (Wrightwood), County Service Area 82, Improvement Zone SV-1 (Searles
04              Valley), Lake Arrowhead Fire Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire Protection
                District and County Service Area 70 HL (Havasu Lake), as shown on Exhibits I and
                II
SD-             Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-05 and confirming existing fees and fee
07-  - -2007    increases for the Office of the Fire Marshal as shown on Attachment A
05
4025 - -2007    Changed to SD-07-04
4026 - -2007    Changed to SD-07-05
4027 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904, Adding position
4028 - -2007    Eminent domain
4029 - -2007    Eminent domain
4030 - -2007    Eminent domain
SD              Adopt ordinance for CSAs and recreation and park districts in the County of San
07-  - -2007    Bernardino fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing with
06              fiscal year 2007-08 and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley) fixing cemetery fees and charges and
07-  - -2007    repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-03.
07
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Crestline Sanitation District of the county of San
07-  - -2007    Bernardino fixing sewer standby and user charges and repealing Ordinance No. SD
08              06-06
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, acting in its capacity as the
07-  - -2007    governing body of Crestline Sanitation District, fixing sewer connection charges
09              and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-07
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, acting in its capacity as the
07-  - -2007    governing body of the named CSAs and improvement zones, thereof, establishing
10              and continuing sewer and water connection fees, and repealing Ordinance No. SD
                06-04
4031 - -2007    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
4032 - -2007    16.0225
4033 - -2007    Repealing Local Area Transportation Plan
4034 - -2007    53.0602—
                53.0606
4035 - -2007    52.0302
4036 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904, Adding position
4038 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904, Adding position
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to the 2007 California Fire Code for the Board-governed
07-  - -2007    County Service Areas and Improvement Zones amending Chapter 1 of Division 3 of
11              Title 2 of the San Bernardino Code and repealing Ordinance No. 4002
4039 - -2007    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-             Amending thee rate and method of apportionment and to increase the amount of
07-  - -2007    bonded indebtedness and rescinding Ord. SD-03-04
12
4040 - -2007    Amending the General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
4041 - -2008    33.1014—
                33.1017
4042 - -2008    16.0203A
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.04.060,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.030,
                82.06.040,
                82.06.050,
                82.13.060,
                82.13.070,
                82.13.080,
                83.02.070,
                83.02.080,
                83.06.040,
                83.06.070,
                83.08.020,
                83.08.040,
                83.10.060,
                83.10.070,
                83.10.080,
                83.11.040,
                83.11.070,
                83.11.080,
                83.13.050,
                83.13.090,
                83.15.010,
                83.15.020,
                83.15.030,
                83.15.040,
                83.15.050,
                83.15.060,
                83.15.070,
                84.01.050,
                84.04.050,
                84.04.060,
                84.04.070,
                84.04.090,
                84.05.030, 84.08.040,
                84.16.010,
                84.16.020,
                84.16.030,
                84.16.040,
                84.16.050,
                84.16.060,
                84.16.070,
                84.16.080,
4043 - -2008    84.17.080,
                84.18.030,
                84.19.080,
                84.21.030,
                84.24.030,
                84.25.010,
                84.25.070,
                84.27.060,
                85.06.080,
                85.09.010,
                85.09.020,
                85.09.030,
                85.10.070,
                85.17.040,
                86.06.060,
                86.09.010,
                86.09.020,
                86.09.030,
                86.09.040,
                86.09.050,
                86.09.060,
                86.09.070,
                86.09.080,
                86.09.090,
                86.09.100,
                86.09.110,
                86.09.120,
                86.09.130,
                86.09.140,
                86.09.150,
                86.09.160,
                86.09.170,
                86.09.180,
                86.09.190,
                86.09.200,
                86.09.210,
                86.15.050,
                88.01.050,
                88.02.040,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.050,
                810.01.070,
                810.01.150,
                810.01.200,
                810.01.210,
                810.01.240
                16.0206,
                41.2501—
4044 - -2008    41.2514,
                41.2601—
                41.2604 
4045 - -2008    16.0201—
                16.0231
4046 - -2008    Repealing and reenacting title 1 through 7 of the San Bernardino County Code
4047 - -2008    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
                41.0501 -
                41.0505,
4048 - -2008    41.0509,
                41.0511,
                41.0513,
                41.0514
4049 - -2008    16.0207A
4050 - -2008    Amending Ordinance 1904 by placing the following positions, #82656, 82657,
                82660, 82661 and 82730, Mental Health Specialist - into the Unclassified Service
4051 - -2008    Repeals 33.1020—33.1029
                Amending Section EV.0240 Relative to the Special Development Land Use Zoning
4052 - -2008    District, Subsections EV.0320(M)(1), (3) and (4) and Figure EV-12 Relative to
                Trails Systems and Subsection EV.0330(B)(7) Relative to Loading Dock Standards,
                All of the East Valley Area Plan
                Approving an Amendment to the Development Agreement for the Revised Citrus Plaza
4053 - -2008    Project and Mountain Grove at Citrus Plaza Project between the County and
                Redlands Joint Venture, LLC and Mountain Grove Partners, LLC
4054 - -2008    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
                Proposing Charter Amendment Number 39; Calling an election thereon;
4055 - -2008    Consolidating said election with the presidential general election; proclaiming
                such election; giving notice of final dates for submission of arguments
                13.0602,
4056 - -2008    13.0604,
                13.0613
                82.01.030,
                82.03.040,
                82.03.060,
                82.04.040,
                82.04.060,
                82.05.060,
                82.06.040,
                82.06.060,
                82.10.030,
                82.13.050,
                82.13.090, 82.24.010 - 82.24.030,
                83.02.070,
                83.02.080,
                83.10.070,
4057 - -2008    83.11.080,
                83.13.090, 83,13,100,
                84.01.030 -
                84.01.050, 84.08.030, 84.08.040,
                84.14.030,
                84.21.030,
                85.12.020,
                86.09.030,
                86.09.090,
                86.09.110,
                86.15.050,
                88.01.080,
                810.01.060,
                810.01.140,
                810.01.200
                23.0301,
4058 - -2008    23.0304,
                23.0307,
                23.0308
4059 - -2008    23.0801
4060 - -2008    16.0215B,
                16.0228B
4061 - -2008    Placing additional positions in the classified service
4062 - -2008    16.0226
4063 - -2008    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
                23.0301,
                23.0304,
4064 - -2008    23.0307,
                23.0308,
                23.0310
4065 - -2008    83.01.040,
                810.01.060
4066 - -2009    Repealed by Ord. 4347
4068 - -2009    12.0306
                13.0604,
4069 - -2009    13.0613,
                13.0614
4070 - -2009    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
                12.1604,
4071 - -2009    12.4105,
                12.4110
4072 - -2009    16.0203B
                12.2400,
4073 - -2009    12.3502,
                16.0220B
4074 - -2009    13.0613
4075 - -2009    Repeals 16.0226(x)(11)
4076 - -2009    16.0201 -
                16.0231
4077 - -2009    13.0604
4078 - -2009    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
4079 - -2009    29.0201 -
                29.0207
4080 - -2009  13.0614
4081 - -2009  46.0101 -
                46.1201
4082 - -2009    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4083 - -2009    Establishing a temporary moratorium on the issuance of permits for medical
                marijuana dispensaries
4084 - -2009    16.0213A
                82.01.020,
                82.02.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.05.060,
                82.06.030,
                82.07.040,
                82.13.060,
                82.13.080,
                83.02.060,
                83.02.080,
                83.11.100,
                83.15.070,
                84.01.020, 84.08.040,
4085 7-21-2009  84.14.030,
                84.14.050,
                84.21.030,
                84.25.040,
                84.25.070,
                85.03.020,
                85.11.010 -
                85.11.030,
                85.17.040,
                86.06.020,
                86.06.040,
                86.09.050,
                86.09.090,
                86.09.100,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.180
                An interim Ordinance adopted pursuant to Government Code § 65858, establishing a
4086 - -2009    temporary moratorium on the issuance of permits for medical marijuana
                dispensaries
4087 - -2009    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
4088 - -2009    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4089 - -2009    Third Cycle 2009 General Plan Amendments/Amending County General Plan Land Use
                Zoning District Maps
4090 - -2009    11.0201 -
                11.0212
4091 - -2009    23.0313-
                23.0319
4092 - -2009    32.0119 -
                32.0126, repeals 32.0224, 32.0703-32.0705, 32.0917 and 32.1409
                33.0103,
                33.0104,
4093 - -2009    33.0106,
                33.0109 -
                33.0113
4094 - -2009    16.0203A
4095 - -2009    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
4096 - -2009    13.0402
                12.0301,
4097 - -2010    12.0512,
                12.2400,
                12.4401, repeals 12.2804
                82.01.030,
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                82.06.050,
                82.13.040,
                82.14.020,
                83.02.040,
                84.01.030,
                84.01.040,
                84.12.040,
                84.16.050,
                84.19.040,
4098 - -2010    84.23.030,
                84.25.040,
                84.25.070,
                Ch. 84.26 (title),
                84.26.030,
                84.27.060,
                86.09.050,
                84.29.010 -
                84.29.050,
                84.29.070,
                Ch. 85.18 (title),
                85.18.020,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.090,
                810.01.170, repeals 83.05.070
4099 - -2010    First Cycle 2010 General Plan Amendments/Amending County General Plan Land Use
                Zoning District Maps
4100 - -2010    13.0604,
                13.0613
4101 - -2010    16.0201 -
                16.0231
                11.0202,
                11.0208,
4102 - -2010    32.0119,
                33.0110,
                33.0113, 37.0205, 37.0207 - 37.0209
                28.0404,
4103 - -2010    28.0407 -
                28.0409
4104 - -2010    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4105 - -2010    13.0604
4106 - -2010    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4107 - -2010    16.0207A
4108 - -2010    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4109 - -2010    13.0604
                An interim Ordinance adopted pursuant to Government Code § 65858, extending a
4110 - -2010    temporary moratorium on the issuance of permits for medical marijuana
                dispensaries
4111 - -2010    25.0301 -
                25.0312
                16.0204,
                16.0206,
                16.0215A,
4112 - -2010    16.0215B,
                16.0215C,
                16.0222,
                16.0222A, 16.0222B, 16.0228, 16.0228B
4113 - -2010    14.0102,
                14.0114
                32.0124,
4114 - -2010    32.0220,
                32.1501
4115 - -2010    41.1920 ,
                41.2018
                16.0215B,
4116 - -2010    87.07.020,
                87.07.040
4117 - -2010    22.0101 -
                22.0116
4118 - -2010    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4119 - -2010    16.0203A
4120 - -2010    12.0513
4121 - -2010    82.040.060
4122 - -2010    Second Cycle 2010 General Plan Amendments/Amending County General Plan Land Use
                Zoning District Maps
                14.0102,
4123 - -2010  14.0106,
                14.0109,
                14.0115
4124 - -2010  11.0601
4125 - -2010  19.0101 -
                19.0109
4126 - -2010  16.0226
4127 - -2010  Authorizing the levy of special taxes within the Communities Facilities District
                No. 2010-1 (East Valley)
                12.0103,
                12.0201,
                12.0206,
4128 - -2010  12.0207,
                12.0209,
                12.0211,
                12.0212
4129 - -2010  Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4130 - -2010  63.0622, 63.0623
4131 - -2010  13.0613
4133 - -2011    16.0222
                52.0201,
                52.0202,
4135 - -2011    52.0204,
                52.0205,
                52.0210
                83.10.010 -
                83.10.120,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.040,
                810.01.050,
                810.01.070,
                810.01.080,
                810.01.100,
4136 - -2011    810.01.110,
                810.01.140,
                810.01.150,
                810.01.170,
                810.01.180,
                810.01.200,
                810.01.210,
                810.01.220,
                810.01.250,
                810.01.260
4137 - -2011    33.1401 -
                33.1407
4138 - -2011    Authorizing the levy of special taxes within the Improvement Area No. 2 of
                Communities Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4139 - -2011    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4140 --2011     16.0215C,
                810.01.150
4141 - -2011    16.0201-
                16.0231
4142 - -2011    13.0613
4143 - -2011    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by removing positions in the unclassified service
                pursuant to charter provisions
4144 - -2011    Repealed by Ord. 4374
4145 - -2011    13.0613
4146 - -2011    16.0222
4147 - -2011    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by removing positions from and adding a position to
                the unclassified service pursuant to charter provisions
4148 - -2011    12.3801
4149 - -2011    12.4501 -
                12.4509
4150 - -2011    32.1502 -
                32.1504
                An ordinance determining compliance with Voluntary Alternative Redevelopment
4151 - -2011    Program in order to permit the continued existence and operation of the County
                Redevelopment Agency
4152 - -2011    12.0102
4153 - -2011  Repeals 12.3601—12.3606
4154 - -2011    23.0732
4155 - -2011    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by removing positions from and adding positions for
                the unclassified service pursuant to charter provisions
                84.29.030,
                84.29.040,
                84.29.060,
4156 - -2011    84.29.070,
                84.30.010 -
                84.30.030,
                85.03.040
4157 - -2012    13.0614
                33.0401—
4158 - -2012    33.0404,
                33.0408,
                33.0409
4159 - -2012    Amending Ordinance 1904 by removing certain positions from the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4160 - -2012    41.2407
4161 - -2012    83.11.040,
                84.17.090
                82.04.040,
4162 - -2012    84.03.030,
                810.01.050
                82.14.010 -
                82.14.070,
                85.07.010 -
                85.07.030,
                85.11.020,
4163 - -2012    86.04.010,
                86.09.030,
                88.03.060,
                810.01.060,
                810.01.080,
                810.01.250
4166 - -2012  33.08102; repealing 33.08109 and 33.08110
                An urgency ordinance, extending urgency interim Ordinance No. 4164 for 10 months
4168 - -2012    and 15 days prohibiting establishment of certain alcohol and drug treatment
                centers
                84.31.010—
                84.31.060,
4169 - -2012    86.08.010,
                810.01.060,
                810.01.080,
                810.01.200
4170 - -2012  85.19.010—85.19.150,
                810.01.080
4171 - -2012    Granting franchise to Southern California Edison Company for construction, use
                of property, and transmitting electricity
                33.0402,
4172 - -2012    33.0408,
                33.1401—
                33.1407
4173 - -2012    16.0201—
                16.0231
4174 - -2012  16.0207A
                11.0208,
4175 - -2012  86.09.100,
                86.09.110
                16.0225,
                35.0102,
                35.0103,
                35.0109,
4176 - -2012  35.0110—
                35.0113,
                35.0118—
                35.0121,
                35.0125,
                35.0127
4177 - -2012  16.0225
4178 - -2012    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding certain positions to the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4179 - -2012  Repealed by Ord. 4374
4180 - -2012    83.05.060,
                83.12.030
                83.05.020,
4181 - -2012    83.09.020,
                84.16.020,
                84.21.020
4182 - -2012    12.4601—
                12.4610
                Proposing Charter Amendment Number 40; Calling an election thereon;
4183 - -2012    Consolidating said election with the general election; proclaiming such
                election; giving notice of final dates for submission of arguments
                12.4301—
                12.4313,
4184 - -2012    12.4316,
                12.4317,
                12.4319
4185 - -2012    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding certain positions to the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4186 - -2012    16.0213B
4187 - -2012    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by removing positions from and adding positions to
                the unclassified service pursuant to charter provisions
                82.06.040,
                84.26.010—
4188 - -2012    84.26.030,
                85.18.020,
                85.18.030,
                810.01.250
                82.22.010—
                82.22.220,
                810.01.050,
                810.01.060,
4189 - -2012    810.01.100,
                810.01.150,
                810.01.160,
                810.01.200,
                810.01.280
4190 - -2012  Amending the Land Use Element of the General Plan as the first Cycle 2012 Land
                Use Element General Plan Amendments
4191 - -2012    21.0101—
                21.0110
4192 - -2013    Authorizing the levy of special taxes within the Improvement Area No. 3 of
                Communities Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4193 - -2013    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding and/or removing positions from the
                unclassified service pursuant to charter provisions
                An interim ordinance, extending urgency interim Ordinances No. 4164 and 4168 for
4194 - -2013    an addition 12 months prohibiting the establishment of certain alcohol and drug
                treatment centers
                Repealing
4195 - -2013    33.08160—
                33.08.164
4196 - -2013    33.0401—
                33.0410
4197 - -2013    16.0201—
                16.0231
                An interim urgency ordinance establishing a temporary moratorium on the approval
4198 - -2013    of solar energy generation projects for which applications have not been
                accepted as complete
4199 - -2013    16.0207A
4200 - -2013    33.0501—33.0509
4201 - -2013    First Cycle 2013 General Plan Amendments/Amending County General Plan Land Use
                Zoning District Maps
4202 - -2013    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by moving positions from the unclassified to the
                classified service pursuant to the County Charter
4203 - -2013    46.0301
4204 - -2013    82.36.010—
                82.36.050
                84.18.020—
4205 - -2013    84.18.040,
                85.10.030
4206 - -2013    12.0509
                An interim urgency ordinance extending interim urgency Ordinance No. 4198
4207 - -2013    establishing a temporary moratorium on the approval of solar energy generation
                projects for which applications have not been accepted as complete
4208 - -2013    Granting franchise to Calnev Pipe Line LLC to construct and operate pipelines
                along and under the public streets within the County
4209 - -2013  Repealing 31.0701—31.0723
4210 - -2013  13.0201—
                13.0214
4211 - -2013  Second Cycle 2013 General Plan Land Use Element Amendments/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4212 - -2013  Repealing 31.0215; 31.0301—31.0310
                84.29.020,
4213 - -2013  84.29.035,
                84.29.040,
                810.01.050
                Granting to Terrace Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use and
4214 - -2013  repair water pipelines along, across, upon and under the public streets within
                the County
                Granting to Sky Forest Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use, and
4215 - -2013  repair water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets
                within the County
                Granting to Jubilee Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use, and
4216 - -2013  repair water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets
                within the County
                Granting to Crystal Lakes Property Owners Association a franchise to construct,
4217 - -2013    use, and repair water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public
                streets within the County
                Granting to Baseline Gardens Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use,
4218 - -2013  and repair water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets
                within the County
                Granting to Alpine Water Users Association a franchise to construct, use, and
4219 - -2013  repair water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets
                within the County
                Granting to Bar-H Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use, and repair
4220 - -2013  water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets within the
                County
                Granting to Center Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use, and
4221 - -2013    repair water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets
                within the County
4222 - -2014  Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding and/or removing positions from the
                unclassified service pursuant to the County Charter
4223 - -2014  Repealing 16.0123C
4224 - -2014  16.0203
4225 - -2014    23.0801
                12.4301—
                12.4313,
4226 - -2014    12.4316,
                12.4317,
                12.4319
4227 - -2014  First Cycle 2014 General Plan Land Use Amendments/Amending County General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4228 - -2014    Adopting the Hacienda at Fairview Valley Specific Plan
4229 - -2014    86.14.090
                16.0215A,
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                82.22.040,
                83.11.040,
                84.05.050,
                Ch. 84.23 (title),
                84.23.010—
                84.23.030,
                84.28.020,
                84.28.060,
4230 - -2014  84.31.010—
                84.31.090,
                84.32.010—
                84.32.040,
                85.20.010—
                85.20.030,
                810.01.040,
                810.01.050,
                810.01.070,
                810.01.090,
                810.01.100,
                810.01.180,
                810.01.200,
                810.01.220
                16.0205,
                16.0215A,
                41.2701,
                41.2801—
                41.2810,
                41.2901—
                41.2910,
4239 - -2014    82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                84.02.010—
                84.02.050,
                85.01.030,
                85.21.010—
                85.21.100,
                810.01.030, repealing Ch. 41.13
4240 - -2014  41.1701—
                41.1713
4241 - -2014  14.0204
                83.05.070,
4242 - -2014  83.09.030—
                83.09.050
4243 - -2014  87.07.040
4244 - -2014  85.03.120
                82.02.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                82.13.060,
                82.19.040,
                82.21.030,
                82.23.030,
                83.01.080,
                83.01.110,
                83.02.040,
4245 - -2014  83.02.080,
                83.07.040,
                83.10.010,
                83.11.040,
                83.13.110,
                84.01.050,
                84.12.050,
                85.12.010—
                85.12.030,
                86.09.050,
                810.01.150,
                810.01.210
4246 - -2014  Repealed by Ord. 4366
4247 - -2014  16.0201—
                16.0231
4248 - -2014  Authorizing the levy of special taxes within the Improvement Area No. 4 of
                Communities Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4249 - -2014  Second Cycle 2014 General Plan Land Use Element Amendments/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4250 - -2014  Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding a position to the unclassified service
                pursuant to the County Charter
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
4251 - -2014  82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                84.33.010—
                84.33.030
4253 - -2014    27.1501—
                27.1512
4254 - -2014    82.14.030,
                82.14.050
                63.0101—63.0107,
                63.0151—63.0153,
                63.0201,
                63.0202,
                63.0301—63.0306,
4255 - -2014    63.0401—63.0403,
                63.0501,
                63.1301,
                63.1302,
                63.1401,
                63.1402,
                63.1501
4256 - -2014    Franchise
4257 - -2014    52.0204
4258 - -2014    85.19.020 ,
                810.01.080
4259 - -2014    14.0801 —
                14.0805
4260 - -2014    31.0304
4261 - -2014    Third Cycle 2014 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
                46.0201 ,
4262 - -2014    46.0301 ,
                46.0402 ,
                46.1001
                41.1901 —
4263 - -2014    41.1920 ,
                41.2001 —
                41.2018
4264 - -2014    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding a position to the unclassified service
                pursuant to the County Charter
4265 - -2014    12.0406
4266 - -2014    Amending the Glen Helen Specific Plan
4267 - -2015  52.0120
4268 - -2015  82.19.040
4269 - -2015    Repealed by Ord. 4374
                13.0602,
                13.0604—
                13.0613,
                13.0615,
                13.0616,
4270 - -2015  13.0617c,
                13.0617f,
                13.0617m,
                13.0628,
                13.0629,
                13.0660
4271 - -2015  13.0618
4273 - -2015    16.0223
4274 - -2015    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding three positions to the unclassified
                service
4275 - -2015    Granting to Praxair, Inc. a franchise to construct, use and repair industrial
                gas pipelines along, across, upon and under the public streets
4276 - -2015    First Cycle 2015 General Plan Land Use Element Amendments/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4277 - -2015    16.0201—
                16.0231
                Establishing a temporary moratorium on the establishment of new commercial uses
4278 - -2015    that may conflict with the Valley Boulevard Corridor Specific Plan, to allow
                time for completion and implementation of the Specific Plan
4279 - -2015    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding three positions to the classified and
                unclassified service
                16.0215A,
                85.19.010,
4280 - -2015    85.19.020,
                810.01.080,
                810.01.210
                Extending Interim Urgency Ordinance No. 4278 establishing a temporary moratorium
4281 - -2015    on the establishment of new commercial uses that may conflict with the Valley
                Boulevard Corridor Specific Plan, to allow time for completion and
                implementation of the Specific Plan
4282 - -2015    Repealed by Ord. 4308
4283 - -2015    33.0402,
                33.0408
4284 - -2015  Repealing 16.0205(a)(1); 41.0201—41.0209
                63.0801—
4285 - -2015    63.0810,
                63.1601—
                63.1606
4286 - -2015    Franchise
4287 - -2015    Franchise
4288 - -2015    Franchise
4289 - -2015    Franchise
4290 - -2015    13.0201—
                13.0214
4291 - -2015    Repealing 12.0801—12.0807
4292 - -2015    Terminating franchise
4293 - -2015    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding four positions to the classified and
                unclassified service
                13.0602,
4294 - -2016    13.0604,
                13.0613
4295 - -2016    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding a position to the unclassified service
4296 - -2016    First Cycle 2016 General Plan Land Use Element Amendments/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4297 - -2016    31.1102,
                31.1106
                16.0204,
4298 - -2016    16.0215A,
                83.13.030—
                83.13.090
4299 - -2016    Franchise
4300 - -2016    Second Cycle 2016 General Plan Land Use Element Amendments/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
                16.0102,
4301 - -2016  16.0201—
                16.0231
4302 - -2016  Authorizing the levy of special taxes within Improvement Area No. 5 of County of
                San Bernardino Community Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4303 - -2016  Third Cycle 2016 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees) index (
                16.0208,
                16.0211B),
4304 - -2016  16.0204,
                16.0215A,
                82.04.040,
                82.14.050,
                810.01.080
4305 - -2016  Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding a position to the unclassified service
                Repealing 12.3906 and 12.4006, amending
4306 - -2016  13.0602,
                13.0604,
                13.0613
4307 - -2016  14.0102,
                14.0111
                Repealing and replacing
4308 - -2016  41.3001—
                41.3008
                84.34.010—
4309 - -2016  84.34.070,
                810.01.150; repealing 82.02.070
4310 - -2016    63.1701—
                63.1705
4311 - -2016    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 adding positions to the unclassified service
4314 - -2016    Repealed by Ord. 4375
4315 - -2017    Repealing 13.06171
                Adding
                110.0101—
                110.0106,
                110.0201—
                110.0207,
                110.0301—
                110.0305,
4316 - -2017    110.0401—
                110.0403,
                110.0501—
                110.0504,
                110.0601,
                110.0602,
                110.0701—
                110.0704
4317 - -2017    First Cycle 2017 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amendi ng General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4318 - -2017    Adopting the Valley Corridor Specific Plan, implementing land use regulations
                for an area in Bloomington as defined by the Plan
4319 - -2017    82.23.030,
                86.14.090
4320 - -2017    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding two positions to the unclassified service
4321 - -2017    Levying special taxes within certain territory annexed to County of San
                Bernardino Community Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4322 - -2017    16.0201—
                16.0231
4323 - -2017    Second Cycle 2017 General Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan Land
                Use Zoning District Maps
4324 - -2017    Amending the Glen Helen Specific Plan
4325 - -2017    Amending Table 2.F of Subsection KC2.0115(h)(2) of the Kaiser Commerce Center
                Specific Plan
                Levying special taxes within certain territory annexed to County of San
4326 - -2017    Bernardino Community Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
                (Repealed by Ord. 4348)
4327 - -2017    41.2101—
                41.2120
4328 - -2017    41.2501—
                41.2515
                63.1901,
4329 - -2017    84.34.050—
                84.34.070
4330 - -2017  33.0890—
                33.0897
                82.04.040,
                83.11.040,
                84.28.010—
4331 - -2017    84.28.100,
                85.14.020,
                86.08.010,
                810.01.180,
                810.01.210
4332 - -2017    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding two positions to the unclassified service
                82.14.020,
                82.14.040,
                82.14.050,
4333 - -2017    85.07.010,
                85.07.030,
                85.11.010—
                85.11.030
                82.13.010—
                82.13.050,
                82.13.090,
4334 - -2017    83.08.040,
                84.16.040,
                84.18.030,
                84.21.030
4335 - -2017    Third Cycle 2017 General Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan Land
                Use Zoning District Maps
4336 - -2017    12.4306
4337 - -2017    Fourth Cycle 2017 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4338 - -2017    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding three positions to the unclassified
                service
                13.0602,
                13.0604,
                13.0613,
                13.0614,
4339 - -2018  13.0616,
                13.0617a,
                13.0617c,
                13.0617f,
                13.0617m
4340 - -2018    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by removing two positions from the unclassified
                service
                16.0101,
4341 - -2018  16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                83.11.040,
                84.01.010—
                84.01.050,
                84.04.090,
4342 - -2018    84.12.070,
                84.21.030,
                84.22.020,
                85.14.020,
                85.14.060,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.060,
                810.01.100; adding
                84.01.060; repealing Ch. 84.08
4343 - -2018    Levying special taxes within certain territory annexed to County of San
                Bernardino Community Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4344 - -2018    13.0619
4345 - -2018  Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and
                unclassified service
4346 - -2018  First Cycle 2018 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4347 - -2018    Repealing 13.0617h
4348 - -2018  Repealing Ord. 4326
4349 - -2018    Levying special taxes within Improvement Area No. 6 of County of San Bernardino
                Community Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4350 - -2018    12.4304; adding
                12.4319
4351 - -2018    Second Cycle 2018 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4352 - -2018    13.0619
4353 - -2018    13.0619
4354 - -2018    Amending General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
                14.0102,
4355 - -2019    14.0103,
                14.0109,
                14.0115
4356 - -2019    12.1908
4357 - -2019    13.0601—
                13.0660
4358 - -2019    21.0104,
                21.0106
                16.0101,
4359 - -2019    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
                82.14.050,
                84.16.040,
                84.21.030,
4360 - -2019    84.34.030,
                84.34.050,
                85.03.020,
                85.03.090,
                85.03.120
4361 - -2019    24.0701—
                24.0710
4362 - -2019    33.0501—
                33.0508
4363 - -2019    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and
                unclassified service.
4364 - -2019    35.0116,
                35.0121
4365 - -2019    13.0618
4366 - -2019    Repealing 12.4701—12.4712
4367 - -2019    28.0801—
                28.0809; repealing 37.0201, 37.0202, 37.0203, 37.0204, 37.0205, 37.0206, 37.0207
                12.0201—
                12.0213,
                12.3401—
4368 - -2019    12.3406,
                12.3501—
                12.3506,
                12.2400; repealing 12.2501—12.2506
4369 - -2019    23.0801
4370 - -2019    12.4302,
                12.4311
                84.01.060,
4371 - -2019    84.28.010—
                84.28.110
4372 - -2019    Adding
                13.0617
4373 - -2019    First Cycle 2019 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4374 - -2020    Repealing 27.1401—27.1404
                Repealing 63.0106, 63.0107, 63.0153, 63.0306, 63.0403; repealing and replacing
                63.0101—
                63.0105,
                63.0151,
                63.0152,
                63.0201,
                63.0202,
                63.0301—
                63.0305,
                63.0401,
4375 - -2020    63.0402,
                63.0501,
                63.1301,
                63.1302,
                63.1401,
                63.1402,
                63.1501,
                63.1801,
                63.1901; adding
                63.2001,
                63.2101, and
                63.2102
4376 - -2020    13.0613,
                13.0614
4377 - -2020    First Cycle 2020 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4378 - -2020    41.2901—
                41.2910
4379 - -2020    41.2801—
                41.2810
4380 - -2020    41.1701—
                41.1713
4381 - -2020    41.1901—
                41.1920
4382 - -2020    63.2201
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
4383 - -2020    83.02.080,
                83.11.040,
                84.01.010—
                84.01.060,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.120
                16.0101,
4384 - -2020    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
4385 - -2020    Repealing and replacing Title 4, Division 6
4386 - -2020    13.0613,
                13.0614
4387 - -2020    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding positions to the unclassified service
4388 - -2020    16.0226
4391 - -2020    Second Cycle 2020 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4392 - -2020    13.0613
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.04.060,
                82.06.040,
                82.14.040,
                82.14.050,
4393 - -2020    83.10.070,
                83.13.050,
                84.01.020,
                84.21.030,
                84.25.070,
                84.28.020,
                87.07.040,
                810.01.200
4394 - -2020    16.0215B
4395 - -2020    12.0104
4399 - -2021    12.4801—
                12.4810
                82.01.030,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                83.08.030,
                83.10.010—
                83.10.080,
4400 - -2021    84.01.050,
                84.01.060,
                84.28.020—
                84.28.070,
                810.01.040,
                810.01.060,
                810.01.070
4401 - -2021    33.1201—
                33.1298
4402 - -2021    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map CJ29
                16.0101,
4403 - -2021    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
4404 - -2021    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29
4405 - -2021    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29
4406 - -2021    16.0223
4407 - -2021    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding positions to the unclassified service
4408 - -2021    Repealed by Ord. 4424
                13.0613,
4409 - -2021    13.0614,
                13.0617
4410 - -2021    Amending Land Use Zoning District Maps DJ04, FH29 and FH28.
4411 - -2021    Repealed by Ord. 4424
4412 - -2021    Repealed by Ord. 4424
4413 - -2021    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH23
4414 - -2021    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding positions to the unclassified service
                82.04.060,
4415 - -2021    83.03.010—
                83.03.130
4416 - -2021    13.0613,
                13.0614
4417 - -2021    Amending the Agua Mansa Industrial Corridor Specific Plan
4418 - -2021    Amending the Agua Mansa Industrial Corridor Specific Plan
4419 - -2021    83.07.010—
                83.07.090
4420 - -2021    12.4001—
                12.4004
4421 - -2021    12.0102
4422 - -2021    12.1908
4423 - -2021    84.34.080
4424 - -2021    11.0201—
                11.0214
4425 - -2022    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
4426 - -2022    Amending the San Bernardino County Land Use Zoning District Map FH29
                16.0101,
4427 - -2022    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
4428 - -2022    Adopting a Military Equipment Use Policy for the San Bernardino County District
                Attorney’s Office
4429 - -2022    Adopting a Military Equipment Use Policy for the San Bernardino County Probation
                Department
4430 - -2022    Adopting a Military Equipment Use Policy for the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s
                Department
4431 - -2022    Amending Land Use Zoning District Maps FH29A and FH24A
4432 - -2022    11.0206
                13.0613,
                13.0614,
                13.0617c,
4433 - -2022    13.0617f,
                13.0628,
                13.0629,
                13.0660
                14.0117,
                33.1501—
                33.1508,
                46.0101,
                46.0102,
                46.0201,
                46.0301—
                46.0304,
                46.0401—
                46.0404,
                46.0501—
                46.0509,
                46.0601—
                46.0605,
                46.0801—
4434 - -2022    46.0803,
                46.0901—
                46.0906,
                46.1001—
                46.1004,
                46.1101,
                46.1102,
                46.1201—
                46.1203,
                46.1301,
                46.1302,
                46.1401—
                46.1405,
                46.1501,
                46.1601,
                46.1701
4435 - -2022    11.0206
4436 - -2022    Placing a temporary pause on approval of new short-term residential rental unit
                permits
4437 - -2022    13.0628
4438 - -2022    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
                16.0215C,
4439 - -2022    84.28.010—
                84.28.110
4440 - -2022    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map EH06A
4441 - -2022    Proposed Charter amendment for taxpayer protection and government reform, to
                submit to the qualified electors at the November 8, 2022 election
4442 - -2022    Proposed Measure on pursuing the County's fair share of state and federal
                resources, to submit to the qualified electors at the November 8, 2022 election
4443 - -2022    27.1601—
                27.1604
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
4444 - -2022    82.06.040,
                84.35.010—
                84.35.120
4445 - -2022    33.1601—
                33.1613
                16.0209,
4446 - -2022    52.0130,
                53.0603 -
                53.0608
4447 - -2022    Amending Land Use Zoning District Maps FH29A and FH27A
4448 - -2022    82.23.030,
                86.14.090
4449 - -2022    Amending Land Use Zoning District Maps FH28A and FH29A
4450 - -2022    82.23.030,
                86.14.090
4451 - -2022    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29A
                63.0101—
                63.0105,
                63.0151,
                63.0152,
                63.0201,
                63.0202,
                63.0301—
                63.0305,
                63.0401,
                63.0402,
4452 - -2022    63.0501,
                63.1301,
                63.1302,
                63.1401,
                63.1402,
                63.1501,
                63.1801,
                63.1901,
                63.2001,
                63.2101,
                63.2102
4453 - -2023    12.0307—
                12.0310
                13.0613,
4454 - -2023    13.0614,
                13.0617m,
                13.0660
4455 --2023     Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
                13.0613,
4456 - -2023    13.0614,
                13.0617m,
                13.0660
                16.0101,
4457 - -2023    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
4459 - -2023    Repealing Title 2, Division 3, Chapter 1
4458 - -2023    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29A
                46.0101,
                46.0102,
                46.0201,
                46.0301,
                46.0302,
4460 - -2023    46.0401,
                46.0402,
                46.1001,
                46.1002,
                46.1402,
                46.1403,
                46.1405
4461 - -2023    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
4462 - -2023    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29A
4463 - -2023    33.1017
4464 - -2023    13.0619
4465 - -2024    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
                13.0613,
4466 - -2024    13.0617a,
                13.0617m
4467 - -2024    12.1303
4468 - -2024    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
                82.14.010—
4469 - -2024    82.14.070,
                86.04.010,
                810.01.080
                16.0101,
4470 - -2024    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
4471 - -2024    Amending the Glen Helen Specific Plan
4472 - -2024    Amending Ord. No. 1904 relating to the classified and unclassified service
                32.0101,
                32.0103,
                32.0107,
4473 - -2024    32.0108,
                32.0208,
                32.1201,
                32.1203
4475 - -2024    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29A
                13.0613,
                13.0614,
4476 - -2024    13.0617c,
                13.0617f,
                13.0660
4477 - -2024    Proposed Charter amendment for law enforcement staffing and community
                protection, to submit to the qualified electors at the November 5, 2024 election
4478 - -2024    31.0820
4479 - -2024    12.4301—
                12.4319
4480 - -2024    16.0215B
4481 - -2024    33.06558—
                33.06562
4482 - -2025    Amending Ord. No. 1904 relating to the classified and unclassified service
                16.0101,
                16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0207D,
                16.0208A—
                16.0210A,
                16.0213A,
                16.0213B,
                16.0215A—
4483 - -2025    16.0216,
                16.0218,
                16.0220,
                16.0220B,
                16.0220C,
                16.0222—
                16.0226,
                16.0228,
                16.0228B,
                16.0231
4484 - -2025    21.0101—
                21.0110
                46.0506,
4485 - -2025    46.0508,
                46.0604,
                46.1003
4486 - -2025    Levying special taxes within Community Facilities District No. 2025-1 (Commerce
                Center II)
4487 - -2025    41.1801—
                41.1815
4488 - -2025    84.26.030
4489 - -2025    Designating the fire hazard severity zones
4490 - -2025    Amending Ord. No. 1904 relating to the classified and unclassified service
4491 - -2025    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH04A
4492 - -2025    12.0206
4493 - -2025    13.0617
4494 - -2025    28.0901—
                28.0905
4495 - -2025    Amending the Glen Helen Specific Plan
4496 - -2025    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29A and CHDHA
4498 - -2025    12.1907,
                12.3405
4499 - -2025    16.0215B
               
 
 
REFERENCES TO SPECIAL DISTRICTS ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section/Disposition
Ord. Date       Code Section/Disposition
No.  Passed
SD-             Collection of road maintenance service charges on tax roll, CSA 70-R-23 (Mile
91-  - -1991    High Park), Crestline
10
SD-
91-  - -1991    Collection of street and highway sweeping charges on tax roll, CSA 70-CH
11
SD-             Collection of service charge on tax roll for road maintenance, CSA 70-R-31
91-  - -1991    (Lytle Creek)
12
SD-             Collection of road maintenance service charge on tax roll, CSA 70-R-29 (Yucca
91-  - -1991    Mesa)
13
SD-
91-  - -1991    Collection of water service charges on tax roll, CSA 53-C (Fawnskin)
14
SD-
91-  - -1991    Establishing Facilities Benefit Assessment, Chino Hills Specific Plan
15
SD-
91-  - -1991    Increasing Facilities Development Fee, Chino Hills Specific Plan
16
SD-
91-  - -1991    Levy of Special Tax, CFD #9 (Rincon Village)
18
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #1
19
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #2
20
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #4
21
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #5
22
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #6
23
SD-  - -1992    Recreation and Park fees for CSAs, Improvement Zones and Park Districts
92-2
SD-  - -1992    Sewer User fees and Standby charges for Crestline Sanitation District
92-3
SD-  - -1992    Ambulance fees for CSAs, Improvement Zones and Fire Protection Districts
92-4
SD-  - -1992    Cemetery charges for CSA 29
92-5
SD-  - -1992    Increasing sewer connection charge for CSA 70-B and increasing water
92-6            connection fee for CSA 70-C and repealing Ordinance SD-91-8
SD-  - -1992    Collection of service charge and interest on tax rolls, CSA 70-R-32, Phelan
92-7
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election to Inland
93-1            Empire West Resource Conservation District
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election to Mojave
93-2            Desert Resource Conservation District
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election, East Valley
93-3            Resource Conservation District
SD-  - -1993    Repealing Ordinance SD-92-4 and establishing various ambulance fees for CSAs
93-4            29, 56 and 82-SV-1 and Lake Arrowhead and Yucca Vly. FPDs
SD-  - -1993    Repealing Ordinance SD-92-1 and amending Ordinance SD-85-4 increasing sewer
93-5            connection charge for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1993    Sewer and water connection fees, CSA 70 B and C
93-6
SD-  - -1993    Various recreation and park activity fees for named CSAs and recreation and
93-7            park districts
SD-  - -1993    Sewer standby and user charges for Crestline Sanitation District
93-8
SD-  - -1993    Cemetery fees and charges CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley)
93-9
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge for park maintenance CSA 20 (Joshua Tree)
10
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge for park maintenance CSA 70-M (Wonder Valley)
11
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of CSA 79-R-1 service charge on tax rolls
12
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge and interest for CSA 70-R-33
13
SD-  - -1994    CSA 70-R-34 (Big Bear) collection of service charge on tax roll
94-1
SD-  - -1994    Crestline Sanitation District increasing sewer connection charge
94-2
SD-  - -1994    CSA 70-B and C (Helendale) sewer and water connection fees
94-3
SD-  - -1994    Recreation and Park Districts activity fees
94-4
SD-  - -1994    CSA 20 (Joshua Tree) and CSA 70-M (Wonder Valley) recreation and park service
94-5            charges
SD-  - -1994    CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley) cemetery fees
94-6
SD-  - -1994    Collection of park service charges on tax roll
94-7
SD-  - -1994    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll, CSA 70-R-36
94-8
SD-  - -1994    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll, CSA 70-R-35
94-9
SD-
94-  - -1994    Repealing Ordinance SD-93-4 and establishing various ambulance fees
10
SD-  - -1995    Appointing members to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District Board
95-1            of Directors
SD-  - -1995    Appointing members to East Valley Resource Conservation District Board of
95-2            Directors
SD-  - -1995    Increasing sewer connection charge - Crestline Sanitation District
95-3
SD-  - -1995    Sewer and water connection charges/fees for CSA 70-B and C and repealing
95-4            Ordinance SD-94-3
SD-  - -1995    Fixing various recreation and park activity fees for various CSAs and
95-5            repealing Ordinance SD-94-4
SD-  - -1995    Repealing Ordinance 94-10 and establishing ambulance fees for various CSAs
95-6            and FPDs
SD-  - -1995    Repealing Ordinance 93-8 and establishing and modifying sewer user fees and
95-7            standby charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1995    Establishing fire emergency response service fees for CSA 70
95-8
SD-  - -1995    Establishment of rules relating to issuance of road permits for various CSAs
95-9
SD-
95-  - -1995    CSA 70-R-22 (Twin Peaks) collection of service charge on tax roll
10
SD-
95-  - -1995    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll (CSA 70-R-33)
11
SD-  - -1996    Authorizing collection of park service charges on tax roll for CSAs 70-P-10
96-1            and 11
SD-  - -1996    Increasing sewer connection charges for CSA 70-B; increasing water connection
96-2            fee for CSA 70-C and repealing Ord. SD-95-4
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-5 and fixing recreation and park fees for CSAs and
96-3            improvement zones and recreation and park districts
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-6 and establishing ambulance fees for CSA 29, 56, 82-SV-
96-4            1, Lake Arrowhead and Yucca Valley FPDs and CSA 70- HL
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-7 and establishing and modifying sewer user fees and
96-5            standby charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-3 and increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline
96-6            Sanitation District
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-94-6 and fixing cemetery charges for CSA 29
96-7
SD-  - -1996    Modifying emergency response charges (fire)
96-8
SD-  - -1996    Establishing cost recovery program for fire suppression and emergency
96-9            response costs
SD-             Authorizing collection of service charge on tax roll for CSA 70-R-38 (Pinon
96-  - -1996    Hills road maintenance district)
10
SD-             Collection of service charge on tax roll for CSA 70-R-37, Hillview, Drive
96-  - -1996    South
11
SD-
96-  - -1996    Reduction or waiver of various recreation and park activities fees
12
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to East Valley Resource Conservation District in lieu of
97-1            election
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District in
97-2            lieu of election
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to Mojave Desert Resource Conservation District in lieu of
97-3            election
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ordinance SD-96-3 and fixing recreation and park fees for CSAs,
97-4            improvement zones and recreation and park districts
SD-             Repealing Ordinance SD-96-4 and confirming and/or modifying ambulance fees
97-5 - -1997    for CSAs 29, 56 and 82-SV-1, Lk. Arrowhead and Yucca Valley FPDs and CSA 70-
                HL
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ordinance SD-96-5 and confirming sewer user charges and standby
97-6            charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ordinance SD-96-6 and increasing sewer connection charges for
97-7            Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ordinance SD-96-7 and confirming cemetery charges for CSA 29
97-8
SD-  - -1997    Confirming fire protection service fees and repealing Ordinance SD-96-8 and
97-9            SD-95-8
SD-             Increasing sewer connection charges for CSA 70-B (Helendale) and water
97-  - -1997    connection fee for CSA 70-C (Helendale) and repealing Ordinance SD-96-2
10
SD-  - -1998    Fixing various recreation and park activity fees
98-1
SD-  - -1998    Ambulance fees
98-2
SD-  - -1998    Sewer standby and user charges, Crestline Sanitation District
98-3
SD-  - -1998    Increasing sewer connection charges, Crestline Sanitation District
98-4
SD-  - -1998    Cemetery fees and charges
98-5
SD-  - -1998    Fire protection service fees
98-6
SD-  - -1998    Sewer and water connection fees, CSA 70-B and C, Helendale
98-7
SD-  - -1999    Fixing recreation and park activity fees
99-1
SD-  - -1999    Confirming and/or modifying ambulance fees
99-2
SD-  - -1999    Increasing sewer user fees and confirming standby charges
99-3
SD-  - -1999    Increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline Sanitation District
99-4
SD-  - -1999    Confirming cemetery charges for CSA 29
99-5
SD-  - -1999    Confirming and/or modifying fire protection service fees
99-6
SD-  - -1999    Confirming report of connection fees
99-7
SD-  - -1999    Confirming report of connection fees for CSAs and Improvement Zones
99-8
SD-  - -2000    Recreation and Park Activities Fees
00-1
SD-  - -2000    Ambulance Fees
00-2
SD-  - -2000    Cemetery Fees
00-3
SD-  - -2000    Fire Protection Service Fees
00-4
SD-  - -2000    Sewer User and Standby Fees
00-5
SD-  - -2000    Sewer Connection Charges
00-6
SD-  - -2000    Confirming report regarding connection fees with proposed increases and sewer
00-7            and water connection fees
SD-  - -2001    Appointments in lieu of election for East Valley Resource Conservation
01-1            District.
SD-  - -2001    Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
01-2
SD-  - -2001    Mojave Resource Conservation District
01-3
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-1 fixing various rec. and park activity fees for various
01-4            CSAs
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-2 confirming various ambulance fees for various CSAs
01-5
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-3 confirming existing cemetery charges for CSA 29
01-6
SD-  - -2001    Amending Ord. SD-96-9 confirming cost recovery for fire suppression and
01-7            emergency response cost
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-4 confirming existing fire protection service fees
01-8
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-5 increasing sewer user fees and confirming standby
01-9            charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD-00-6 increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline
01-  - -2001    Sanitation District
10
SD-             Repealing Ordinance SD-00-7 confirming report of connection fees with
01-  - -2001    proposed increases for various CSAs
11
SD-             Repealing Ordinance SD-83-1 authorizing collection of water/sewer service
01-  - -2001    charges and standby charges on tax bill
12
SD-             Appointments in Lieu of Election to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation
01-  - -2001    District
13
SD-             Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-04 and fixing various recreation and park
02-  - -2002    activity fees for FY 2002-2003 for county service areas and improvement
01              zones, and recreation and park districts
SD              Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-05 and increases various ambulance fees for CSA
02-  - -2002    29 (Lucerne Valley), CSA 56 (Wrightwood), CSA 82 SV-1 (Searles Valley), Lake
02              Arrowhead Fire Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire Protection District and
                CSA 70 HL (Havasu Lake)
SD
02-  - -2002    Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-06, confirms existing cemetery charges for CSA 29
03
SD              Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-09, increases sewer user fee and confirms standby
02-  - -2002    charges with no proposed increases for Crestline Sanitation District
04
SD              Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-10, increases sewer connection charge for
02-  - -2002    Crestline Sanitation District
05
SD              Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-11, increases water and sewer connection charges
02-  - -2002    for named County Service Areas and Improvement Zones
06
SD              Appointing, In Lieu of Election, Sybrand Vander Dussen to the office of
02-  - -2002    Director of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
07
SD              Levying a Special Tax for the Fiscal Year 2002-2003 and Following Fiscal
02-  - -2002    Years Solely Within and Relating to Community Facilities District No 2002-1
08              (Kaiser Commerce Center)
SD              Levying a Special Tax for the Fiscal Year 2002-2003 and Following Fiscal
02-  - -2002    Years Solely Within and Relating to Community Facilities District No. 2002-2
09              (Central Valley FPD - Fire Protection Services)
SD-             Ordinance of named County Service Areas and Recreation and Park Districts in
03-  - -2003    the County of San Bernardino, State of California, fixing various recreation
05              and park activity fees commencing with fiscal year 2003-2004 and repealing
                Ordinance No. SD 02-01
SD              Ordinance of named County Service Areas and Fire Protection Districts in the
03-  - -2003    County of San Bernardino, State of California fixing ambulance fees and
06              charges and repealing Ordinance No. SD 02-02
SD              Ordinance of County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley) County of San
03-  - -2003    Bernardino, State of California, fixing cemetery fees and charges and
07              repealing Ordinance No. SD 02-03
SD              Ordinance of the Crestline Sanitation District of the County of San
03-  - -2003    Bernardino, State of California, fixing sewer standby and user charges and
08              repealing Ordinance No. SD 02-04
SD              Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino, State
03-  - -2003    of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of Crestline
09              Sanitation District amending Ordinance No. SD 85-4 to increase sewer
                connection charges and repealing Ordinance No. SD 02-05
SD              Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino, State
03-  - -2003    of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of the named
10              County Service Areas and improvement zones thereof, establishing and
                continuing sewer and water connection fees and repealing Ordinance No. 02-06
SD              Acting in its capacity as the governing body of CSA 70 S-7 (Lenwood)
04-  - -2003    requiring that all buildings or other structures containing plumbing or
01              drainage fixtures be connected to the sewer system, and providing for the
                payment of connection fees
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-05
02
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-06
03
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-07
04
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-08
05
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-09
06
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-10
07
SD              Appointing a member of the Board of Directors of the East Valley Resource
04-  - -2004    Conservation District
08
SD   - -2005    Appointing a member of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
05-1            (Cheryl Karns-Avent)
SD   - -2005    Appointing a member of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
05-2            (Terrie Andrews)
SD   - -2005    Appointing members of the Board of Directors of the Mojave Desert Resource
05-3            Conservation District
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-02
05-4
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-03
05-5
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-04
05-6
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-05
05-7
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-06
05-8
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-07
05-9
SD   - -2006    Increasing Ambulance Fees and Charges for various county services areas and
06-1            fire protection districts. (Repealed by SD-06-08)
SD-             Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 05-04 and fixing various recreation and
06-  - -2006    park activity fees for FY 2006-07 for County Service Areas and Improvement
02              Zones, and recreation and park districts as shown on Exhibits I through XII
SD-             Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 05-06 and confirming cemetery charges
06-  - -2006    for County Service Area 29, as shown on Attachment B
03
SD-             Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 05-09 and setting the water and sewer
06-  - -2006    connection charges for named County Service Areas and Improvement Zones, as
04              shown on Exhibits IC and IIC
SD
06-  - -2006    Public Hearing to establish Fire Service Fees and Charges
05
SD              Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 05-07 setting sewer user fees and
06-  - -2006    standby charges for Crestline Sanitation District
06
SD              Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-08 and setting the sewer connection
06-  - -2006    charge for Crestline Sanitation District.
07
                Repealing ordinance SD 06-01 and establishing increased ambulance service
SD-             rates for County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley), County Service Area 56
06-  - -2006    (Wrightwood), County Service Area 82, Improvement Zone SV-1 (Searles Valley),
08              Lake Arrowhead Fire Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire Protection
                District and County Service Area 70, Improvement Zone HL (Havasu Lake)
SD-             Ordinance authorizing CSA 70 and its Improvement Zones to regulate the use
06-  - -2006    and construction of Public Storm Drain Systems owned and maintained by the
09              Special Districts Department for unincorporated areas within the County
SD-             Ordinance appointing individuals, in lieu of election, to the position of
07-  - -2007    director for the Inland Empire Resource Conservation District
01
SD-             Ordinance appointing individuals, in lieu of election, to the position of
07-  - -2007    director for the Mojave Desert Resource Conservation District
02
SD-             Ordinance regulating the use and operation of skateboard/skating facilities
07-  - -2007    within County Service Areas, Improvement Zones, and Recreation and Park
03              Districts in order to ensure the orderly and safe use of facilities
                Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-01 and confirming ambulance service
SD-             and subscription fees for County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley), County
07-  - -2007    Service Area 56 (Wrightwood), County Service Area 82, Improvement Zone SV-1
04              (Searles Valley), Lake Arrowhead Fire Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire
                Protection District and County Service Area 70 HL (Havasu Lake), as shown on
                Exhibits I and II.
SD-             Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-05 and confirming existing fees and
07-  - -2007    fee increases for the Office of the Fire Marshal as shown on Attachment A
05
SD              Adopt ordinance for CSAs and recreation and park districts in the County of
07-  - -2007    San Bernardino fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing
06              with fiscal year 2007-08 and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley) fixing cemetery fees and charges
07-  - -2007    and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-03.
07
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Crestline Sanitation District of the county of San
07-  - -2007    Bernardino fixing sewer standby and user charges and repealing Ordinance No.
08              SD 06-06
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, acting in its capacity as the
07-  - -2007    governing body of Crestline Sanitation District, fixing sewer connection
09              charges and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-07
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, acting in its capacity as the
07-  - -2007    governing body of the named CSAs and improvement zones, thereof, establishing
10              and continuing sewer and water connection fees, and repealing Ordinance No.
                SD 06-04
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to the 2007 California Fire Code for the Board-
07-  - -2007    governed County Service Areas and Improvement Zones amending Chapter 1 of
11              Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino Code and repealing Ordinance No.
                4002
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to amending the Rate and Method of Apportionment and
07-  - -2007    to increase the amount of Bonded indebtedness and rescinding of Ordinance No.
12              SD 03-04 Community Facilities District 2003-1 (Citrus Plaza/Mountain Grove)
SD              An Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
08-  - -2008    State of California, Amending Ordinance No. SD 05-3, Relating To The Terms Of
01              Office Of Existing Members of the Board of Directors of the Mojave Desert
                Resource Conservation District
SD              Adopt Ordinance to Continue Certain Fees and Charges for County Service Area
08-  - -2008    70, Improvement Zone CG (Cedar Glen)
02
SD              An Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
08-  - -2008    State of California, Acting in its Capacity as the Governing Body of County
03              Service Area 60 - Apple Valley Airport, Establishing Fees for Apple Valley
                Airport Use
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-06 and fixing various
08-  - -2008    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2008-09 for County Service Areas and
04              Improvement Zones as shown on Exhibits I through VIII
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-07 and confirming cemetery
08-  - -2008    charges for County Service Area 29, as shown on Attachment B
05
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-10 and setting the water and
08-  - -2008    sewer connection fees for named County Service Areas and Improvement Zones,
06              as shown on Exhibits I-C and II-C
SD              Adopt ordinance setting fees and charges for all County Service Areas and
08-  - -2008    their Improvement Zones
07
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-08 setting sewer user fees and
08-  - -2008    standby charges and other various fees and charges for Crestline Sanitation
08              District as shown in Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-09 and setting the sewer
08-  - -2008    connection charge for Crestline Sanitation District
09
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD-4025 and establishing ambulance
08-  - -2008    service and subscription fees, as shown on Exhibits I and II
10
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD-4026 and establishing fire service
08-  - -2008    fees for the Office of the Fire Marshal as shown on Attachment A
11
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance Nos. SD-95-8 and SD-96-9 and establishing
08-  - -2008    fees for fire protection service and cost recovery for fire suppression and
12              emergency response costs as shown on Attachment B
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-06 and fixing various
08-  - -2008    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2008-09 for Big Bear Valley
13              Recreation and Park District as shown on Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-06 and fixing various
08-  - -2008    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2008-09 for Bloomington Recreation
14              and Park District as shown on Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing existing Exhibit II to Ordinance No. SD 09-04 and
10-  - -2010    adding new Exhibit II to establish ambulance service fees
01
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing existing Exhibit II to Ordinance No. SD 09-04 and
10-  - -2010    adding new Exhibit II to establish ambulance service fees
01
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-07 and fixing various
10-  - -2010    recreation and park activity fees commencing with FY 2010-11 for named County
02              Service Areas and Improvement Zones as shown on Exhibits I through VIII
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-08 and fixing cemetery fees and
10-  - -2010    charges for County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley) as shown on Attachment A
03
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-09 and establishing and
10-  - -2010    continuing sewer and water connection fees for named County Service Areas and
04              Improvement Zones as shown on Exhibits I-C and II-C
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-10 and fixing certain fees and
10-  - -2010    charges for all County Service Areas and their Improvement Zones as shown on
05              Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-12 and fixing various
10-  - -2010    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2010-11 for Bloomington Recreation
06              and Park District as shown on Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-11 and fixing various
10-  - -2010    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2010-11 for Bloomington Recreation
07              and Park District as shown on Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-13 and establishing sewer
10-  - -2010    standby and user charges and other various fees for Crestline Sanitation
08              District as shown on Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-14 and fixing sewer connection
10-  - -2010    charges for Crestline Sanitation District
09
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-04 and establishing ambulance
10-  - -2010    fees and charges for San Bernardino County Fire Protection District as shown
10              on Exhibits I and II
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-05 and fixing fire service fees
10-  - -2010    for San Bernardino County Fire Protection District as shown on Attachment A
11
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-06 and establishing fire
10-  - -2010    protection service and cost recovery fees for San Bernardino County Fire
12              Protection District as shown on Attachment B
FPD             Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 10-11 and fixing fire service fees
11-  - -2011    for San Bernardino County Fire Protection District as shown on Attachment A
01
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the Bloomington Recreation and
11-  - -2011    Park District fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing
01              with FY 2011-2012 and repealing Ordinance No. SD 10-07
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
11-  - -2011    various recreation and park activity fees commencing with FY 2011-2012 and
02              repealing Ordinance No. SD 10-06
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the San Bernardino Fire
11-  - -2011    Protection District establishing fire protection service and cost recovery
02              fees and repealing Ordinance No. SD 10-12
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the San Bernardino Fire
11-  - -2011    Protection District establishing ambulance fees and charges and repealing
03              Ordinance No. SD 10-10
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
12-  - -2012    fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost recovery
01              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees and repealing Ordinance Nos.
                FPD 11-01, FPD 11-02 and FPD 11-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
12-  - -2012  State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of named
01              County service areas and zones, fixing various recreation and park activity
                fees commencing with FY 2012-13 and repealing Ord. No. SD 11-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
12-  - -2012    State of California, acting as the governing body of County Service Area 29
02              (Lucerne Valley), fixing cemetery fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD
                11-04
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
12-  - -2012  State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of the
03              named County service areas and zones, establishing and continuing sewer and
                water connection fees, and repealing Ord. No. SD 11-05
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
12-  - -2012  as the governing body of all Board-governed County service areas and their
04              zones, fixing certain fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD 11-06
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
12-  - -2012  various recreation and park activity fees commencing with FY 2012-13 and
05              repealing Ord. No. SD 11-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the Bloomington Recreation and
12-  - -2012    Park District fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing
06              with FY 2012-13 and repealing Ord. No. SD 11-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
13-  - -2013    various recreation and park activity fees commencing with FY 2013-14 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 12-05
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the Bloomington Recreation and
13-  - -2013    Park District fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing
02              with FY 2013-14 and repealing Ord. No. SD 12-06
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
13-  - -2013    State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of named
03              County service areas and zones, fixing various recreation and park activity
                fees commencing with fiscal year 2013-14 and repealing Ord. No. SD 12-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
13-  - -2013    State of California, acting as the governing body of County Service Area 29
04              (Lucerne Valley), fixing cemetery fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD
                12-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
13-  - -2013    State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of the
05              named County Service Areas and Zones, establishing and continuing sewer and
                water connection fees, and repealing Ord. No. SD 12-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
13-  - -2013    as the governing body of all Board-governed County Service Areas and their
06              Zones, fixing certain fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD 12-04
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
13-  - -2013    as the governing body of County Service Area 120 (North Etiwanda Preserve)
07              and fixing certain fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD 09-01
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
14-  - -2014  fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost recovery
01              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees and repealing Ordinance No. FPD
                12-01 A-1
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the Bloomington Recreation and
14-  - -2014    Park District fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing
02              with FY 2014-15 and repealing Ord. No. SD 13-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
14-  - -2014    State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of named
03              County service areas and zones, fixing various recreation and park activity
                fees commencing with fiscal year 2014-15 and repealing Ord. No. SD 13-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
14-  - -2014    State of California, acting as the governing body of County Service Area 29
04              (Lucerne Valley), fixing cemetery fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD
                13-04
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
14-  - -2014    State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of the
05              named County Service Areas and Zones, establishing and continuing sewer and
                water connection fees, and repealing Ord. No. SD 13-05
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
14-  - -2014    as the governing body of all Board-governed County Service Areas and their
06              Zones, fixing certain fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD 13-06
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
14-  - -2014    as the governing body of County Service Area 120 (North Etiwanda Preserve)
07              and fixing certain fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD 13-07
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
14-  - -2014    various recreation and park activity fees and repealing Ord. No. SD 14-01
08
                Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District,
FPD             adopting the San Bernardino County Fire Code (referencing the 2013 edition of
14-  - -2014    the California Fire Code and 2013 edition of the California Residential Code)
03              along with certain changes, modifications, amendments, additions, deletions,
                and exceptions, relating to fire regulations.
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
15-  - -2015    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2015-16 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 14-08
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing
15-  - -2015  various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2015-16 and
02              repealing Ord. No. 14-02
                Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
SD              as the governing body of all Board-governed County service areas and their
15-  - -2015    zones relating to fees and charges for fiscal year 2015-16, and repealing
03              Ord. Nos. SD 14-03, SD 14-04, SD 14-05, SD 14-06, SD 14-07 and Res. Nos.
                2014-81, 2014-83 and 2014-85
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
15-  - -2015    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees and repealing Ord. No.
                FPD 14-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
15-  - -2015    as the governing body of named County Service Areas and Zones thereof,
04              establishing a Water Conservation Program to comply with the Statewide
                drought regulations and repealing Ord. No. SD 90-11
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
16-  - -2016    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2016-17 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 15-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing
16-  - -2016    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2016-17 and
02              repealing Ord. No. SD 15-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
16-  - -2016    as the governing body of all Board-governed County service areas and their
03              zones relating to fees and charges for fiscal year 2016-17, and repealing
                Ord. No. SD 15-03
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
16-  - -2016  establishing fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees and repealing Ord. No.
                FPD 15-01
FPD             Adding section 1(a)(10), amending section 1(e), and amending section 2 of the
16-  - -2016    San Bernardino County Fire Protection District Code (Ord. No. 14-03),
02              relating to fire regulations
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to repealing Ord. No. SD 15-03 and establishing
16-  - -2016    various fees and charges.
03
                Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District adopting the
FPD             San Bernardino County Fire Code (referencing the 2016 edition of the
17-  - -2017    California Fire Code and 2016 edition of the California Residential Code),
01              along with certain changes, modifications, amendments, addition, deletions,
                and exceptions, relating to fire regulations, and repealing Ord. No. FPD No.
                14-03
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
17-  - -2017    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost
02              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord.
                No. FPD 16-01
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to the 2017-18 fees and charges for Big Bear Valley
17-  - -2017    Recreation & Park District, and repealing Ord. No. SD 16-01
03
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to the 2017-18 fees and charges for Bloomington
17-  - -2017    Recreation and Park District, and repealing Ord. No. SD 16-02
04
SD              Adopt ordinance acting as the governing body of Board Governed County Service
17-  - -2017    Area 70 CG (Cedar Glen) providing water services & establishing various fees
05              and charges for a five-year period
SD              Adopt ordinance amending Ord. No. SD 17-02 to establish new fees and sewer
17-  - -2017    connections in County Service Area 70 Zone BL (Bloomington) for 2017-18
02-A
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
18-  - -2017    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord.
                No. FPD 17-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
18-  - -2018    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2018-19 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 17-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing
18-  - -2018  various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2018-19 and
02              repealing Ord. No. SD 17-04
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
18-  - -2018  as the governing body of all Board-governed County Service Areas and their
03              zones relating to fees and charges for fiscal year 2018-19, and repealing
                Ord. No. SD 17-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
19-  - -2019    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2019-2020 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 18-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing
19-  - -2019    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2019-2020 and
02              repealing Ord. No. SD 18-04
SD              Adopt ordinance as the governing body of all board-governed County Service
19-  - -2019    areas and their zones relating to fees and charges for fiscal year 2019-2020
03              and repealing Ord. No. SD 18-02
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
19-  - -2019    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord.
                No. FPD 18-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
19-  - -2019  County Service Area 70, adopting to the employee election worker program
04
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
19-  - -2019    adopting the employee election worker program
02
                Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District adopting the
FPD             San Bernardino County Fire Code (referencing the 2019 edition of the
20-  - -2020    California Fire Code), along with certain changes, modifications, amendments,
01              addition, deletions, and exceptions, relating to fire regulations, and
                repealing Ord. No. FPD No. 17-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District repealing
20-  - -2020    Ord. Nos. 75-6 and 79-1 and adopting new provisions
01
SD-             Adopt ordinance of Board of Supervisors of Sand Bernardino County, acting as
20-  - -2020    the governing body of County Service Areas and Zones, repealing Ord. Nos. 75-
02              6 and 79-1 and adopting new provisions
SD              Adopt ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District repealing Ord.
20-  - -2020    Nos. 75-6 and 79-1 and adopting new provisions
03
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
20-  - -2020    various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2020-21 and repealing Ord.
04              No. SD 19-03
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing various
20-  - -2020    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2020-21 and repealing Ord. No. SD
05              19-04
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
20-  - -2020    fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost recovery
02              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord. No. FPD 19-
                01
SD              Adopt ordinance of Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County, acting as
20-  - -2020    the governing body of County Service Areas and their zones relating to fees
06              and charges for Fiscal Year 2020-21, and repealing Ord. No. SD19-02
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
21-  - -2021    fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost recovery
01              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord. No. FPD 20-
                02
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing various
22-  - -2022    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2022-23 and repealing Ord. No. SD
02              20-05
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing various
22-  - -2022    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2022-23 and repealing Ord. No. SD
03              20-05
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
22-  - -2022    fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost recovery
01              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord. No. FPD 21-
                01
                Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District adopting the
FPD             San Bernardino County Fire Code (referencing the 2022 edition of the
23-  - -2023    California Fire Code), along with certain changes, modifications, amendments,
01              addition, deletions, and exceptions, relating to fire regulations, and
                repealing Ord. No. FPD No. 20-01
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
23-  - -2023    fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost recovery
02              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord. No. FPD 22-
                01
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District to amend Ord.
23-  - -2023    No. FPD 23-02 and establishing fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency
03              response and cost recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, to repeal Ord No. SD 17-01 and
23-  - -2023    SD 17-05, and establishing sanitation and water service rates
01
SD              Adopting ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District
23-  - -2023    establishing various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2023-24 and
02              repealing Ord. No. SD 22-02
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing various
23-  - -2023    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2023-24 and repealing Ord. No. SD
03              22-03
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
23-  - -2023    all board-governed County Service Areas and their Zones to repeal Ord. No. SD
04              22-01 and to adopt fees and charges for FY 2023-24
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
23-  - -2023    all board-governed County Service Areas and their Zones to amend Ord. No. SD
05              23-01, relating to sanitation and water fees and charges for County Service
                Area 53, Zone B, and County Service Area 70, Zone CG
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing various
23-  - -2023    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2023-24 and repealing Ord. No. SD
06              23-03
SD              Adopting ordinance of the Bloomington Recreation and Park District to adopt
23-  - -2023    by reference §§ 52.0130, 53.0603, 53.0604, 53.0605, 53.0606, and 53.0607 of
07              the San Bernardino County Code and add new regulations relating to electric
                vehicle charging and station fees and time limits for District parking lots
FPD             Adopting ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
24-  - -2024    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord.
                No. FPD 23-02 and Ord. No. FPD 23-03
SD              Adopting ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District
24-  - -2024    establishing various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2024-25 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 23-02
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District to establish
24-  - -2024    various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2024-25 and repealing Ord.
02              No. SD 23-06
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
24-  - -2024    all board-governed County Service Areas and their Zones to repeal Ord. No. SD
03              23- 04 and to adopt fees and charges for FY 2024-25
FPD             Adopting ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
25-  - -2025    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord.
                No. FPD 24-01
FPD
25-  - -2025    Adopting the Employee Poll Worker Program
02
SD              Adopting ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District
25-  - -2025    establishing various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2025-26 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 24-01
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District to establish
25-  - -2025    various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2025-26 and repealing Ord.
02              No. SD 24-02
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
25-  - -2025    all board-governed County Service Areas and their Zones to repeal Ord. No. SD
03              24- 03 and to adopt fees and charges for FY 2025-26
SD
25-  - -2025    County Service Area 70 adopts the Employee Poll Worker Program
04
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
25-  - -2025    all board-governed County Service Areas and their Zones to amend Ord. No. SD
05              25- 03
               
 
 
REFERENCES TO FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section/Disposition
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section/Disposition
                      An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino Flood
FCD 08-01 - -2008     Control District, State of California, Relating to the
                      Adoption of Service Fees
                      An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino Flood
FCD 10-01 - -2010     Control District, State of California, Repealing Ord. No.
                      FCD 08-01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and
                      Services
                      An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino Flood
FCD 11-01 - -2011     Control District, State of California, Repealing Ord. No.
                      FCD 10-01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and
                      Services
                      An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino Flood
FCD 12-01 - -2012     Control District, State of California, Repealing Ord. No.
                      FCD 11-01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and
                      Services
                      An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino Flood
                      Control District, State of California, Relating to Public
FCD 12-02 - -2012     Safety; the Protection and Preservation of District
                      Property, Resources, and Infrastructure; Prohibition of
                      Trespass; Enforcement
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 12-03 - -2012     District, County of San Bernardino, State of California,
                      Relating to the Prohibition of Parking on All District
                      Property
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 13-01 - -2013     District, State of California, repealed Ord. No. FCD 12-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 14-01 - -2014     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 13-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 15-01 - -2015     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 14-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 16-01 - -2016     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 15-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 17-01 - -2017     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 16-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 18-01 - -2018     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 17-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 19-01 - -2019     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 18-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 22-01 - -2022     District, State of California, repealing Od. No. FCD 20-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
                      District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 12-
FCD 22-02 - -2022     02 and to add an uncodified ordinance relating to public
                      safety; the protection and preservation of district
                      property, resources, and infrastructure; prohibition of
                      trespass; and enforcement
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 23-01 - -2023     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 22-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 24-01 - -2024     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 23-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 25-01 - -2025     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 24-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                     
 
REFERENCES TO INLAND COUNTIES EMERGENCY MEDICAL AGENCY ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No.    Date Passed Code Section/Disposition
                        An Ordinance of the Inland Counties Emergency Medical
ICEMA 08-01 - -2008     Agency, State of California, Relating to the Adoption
                        of Fees for Emergency Medical Services
ICEMA 09-01 - -2009     Adopt ordinance relating to 2009-10 Inland Counties
                        Emergency Medical Agency Fees
ICEMA 11-01 - -2011     31.1101 -
                        31.1106
                        Ordinance of the Board of Directors of the Inland
ICEMA 17-01 - -2017     Counties Emergency Medical Agency, Pertaining to the
                        Medical Control of EMS Aircraft Services and Providers
                        within Inyo, Mono, and San Bernardino Counties
                       
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to California Codes
References to Ordinances
References to Special Districts Ordinances
References to Flood Control District Ordinances
References to Inland Counties Emergency Medical Agency Ordinances
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites                                              Code Section
                                                                   31.0801,
Title 13                                                           31.0804,
                                                                   31.0816
Title 17                                                           33.0401
Title 17, Division 1, Chapter 5, Subchapter 1                      33.0612
Title 17, Division 1, Chapter 5, Subchapter 1, Group 4, Articles 1 33.0619
through 4
Title 19, Chapter 10, Subchapter 2 (commencing with § 1550)       45.0402
                                                                   33.0612,
                                                                   33.0639,
Title 22                                                           33.0640,
                                                                   33.1101,
                                                                   33.1102
Title 22, Chapter 20                                               33.1130
Title 22, Division 9                                               31.0801
Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 15                                   33.0615,
                                                                   33.0616
Title 24                                                           33.1101,
                                                                   33.1132
Title 24, Chapter 2-90                                             33.1130
Title 25                                                           33.1108
Title 25, Chapter 1                                                33.1003
Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1                                    33.1005
§ 2-901l(c)                                                       33.1130
§ 2-9021                                                          33.1128
§ 2-9022                                                          33.1128
§ 2-9023                                                          33.1128
§§ 9.80-9.98                                                     33.1031
§§ T17-7583 through T17-7594                                     33.1031
§ 1500                                                            45.0402
§§ 1500 et seq.                                                  45.0402
§§ 17200 et seq.                                                 33.08141
§§ 30700—30751                                                 33.1031
§ 30720                                                           33.1031
§§ 64511—64644                                                 33.08130
§ 65527                                                           33.1129
§§ P1001—P1118                                                 33.1031
                                                                   
 
BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONS CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites                             Code Section
                                                  41.2207,
Division V                                        41.2208,
                                                  41.2210
                                                  41.1901 ,
                                                  41.1913 ,
Division 2, Chapter 10.5                          41.2001 —
                                                  41.2003 ,
                                                  41.2012
Division 2, Chapter 10.5 (commencing with § 4600)41.1901,
                                                  41.1915
Division 3, Chapter 14                            12.2205
§ 2725                                           13.0205
                                                  41.1913 ,
§§ 4600 et seq.                                 41.2002 ,
                                                  41.2003
§ 4609(a)(11)                                    41.1915
§§ 5000 et seq.                                 12.2801
§§ 6300 et seq.                                 12.1700
§§ 6700 et seq.                                 23.0721
§§ 7589 et seq.                                 41.0403
§ 12015.3                                        41.2209,
                                                  41.2211
§ 12103.5                                        41.2201
§ 12210                                          41.2201
§ 12211                                          41.2201
§ 12236                                          41.1710
§ 12240                                          41.2201
§ 13531                                          53.0703
§ 13532                                          53.0703
§ 17210                                          33.1503
§§ 17510 et seq.                                41.0510
§ 17910                                          41.0414
§§ 20700 et seq.                                23.0721
§§ 20880 et seq.                                53.0704
§§ 21500 et seq.                                41.0202
§ 21610                                          27.1602
§§ 23000 et seq.                                24.0501
                                                  
 
CIVIL CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 799.29             33.1015
§ 1942.5             11.0205
§ 3051               71.0202,
                      71.0206
§ 3068               71.0202,
                      71.0206
§ 3479               28.0802
                      23.0502,
§§ 3479 et seq.     33.0302,
                      33.08122
§ 4080               63.1705
                      
 
CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 405.20             11.0211
§ 995.120            51.0111,
                      46.0904
§ 995.260            51.0111
§ 995.310            51.0111
§ 995.350            51.0111
§ 995.529            51.0111
§ 995.610            51.0111
§ 995.630            51.0111
§ 995.660            51.0111
§§ 995.660 et seq.  46.0904
§ 996.010            51.0111
§ 1021.5             13.0700
§ 1094.5             11.0502,
                      31.0812
                      11.0403,
§ 1094.6             11.0501,
                      41.0510, 41.1410
§ 1094.8             41.2805
§ 1161, subsection 4 33.1017
§ 1204               14.0203
§ 1206               14.0203
§ 1208.61            71.0206
§ 1208.62            71.0202
§§ 1822.50—1822.5911.0203,
                      33.0106
§§ 1822.50 et seq.  32.0907,
                      35.0117
                      
 
CODE OF REGULATIONS
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites                                       Code Section
Title 2                                                     63.1704
Title 2, § 18523.1                                         12.4318
Title 2, § 18525(a)                                        12.4318
Title 3                                                     33.0501,
                                                            33.0502
Title 3, § 4902                                            33.1603
Title 3, § 4902(b)                                         33.1606
Title 3, § 4940                                            33.1606
Title 3, § 4946                                            33.1606
Title 3, § 4950                                            33.1606,
                                                            33.1608
Title 3, § 4950.1                                          33.1608
Title 4, Division 18, Chapter 8 (§§ 12480 et seq.)        41.1710
Division 9 of Title 4                                       41.2207
Division 9, Chapter 7                                       31.1102
Part 1 of Title 24                                          63.1901
Part 2 of Title 24                                          63.0101
Part 2.5 of Title 24                                        63.0151
Part 3 of Title 24                                          63.0201
Part 4 of Title 24                                          63.0401
Part 5 of Title 24                                          63.0301
Part 6 of Title 24                                          63.0501
Part 8 of Title 24                                          63.1301
Part 10 of Title 24                                         63.1401
Part 11, Ch. 1—8, of Title 24                             63.1501
Part 12 of Title 24                                         63.2001
Title 14                                                    46.0201
Title 14, Chapter 12, Article 2                             46.1101
Chapter 16 of Division 3 of Title 23                        23.0724,
                                                            23.0727
                                                            23.0711,
Title 22                                                    23.0713,
                                                            46.0201
Title 22, Division 4.5, Chapter 10                          46.0201
Title 22, Division 4.5, Chapter 11                          46.0201
Title 23                                                    23.0411
Title 24                                                    63.0105,
                                                            63.0107
§§ 490 through 495 of Chapter 2.7 of Division 2 of Title 263.2201
                                                            23.0401,
§§ 2610 et seq.                                           23.0725,
                                                            23.07214
§ 2649                                                     23.07213
§§ 2650 et seq.                                           23.07213
§ 2652                                                     23.07214
§ 2653                                                     23.07214
§ 2654                                                     23.07214
§ 2671(d)                                                  23.07210
§§ 2672 et seq.                                           23.07212
§ 2672(b)                                                  23.07211
§ 6130                                                     29.0207
§§ 12480 et seq.                                          41.1710
§§ 15110 et seq.                                          23.0403
§ 17200                                                    33.0801
Title 14                                                    33.1503,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12                            33.1503,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, § 17332                                          46.0101
Title 14, § 17333                                          46.0101
Title 14, § 17402(a)(6.6)                                  46.0201
Title 14, § 17402(a)(7.5)                                  46.0201
Title 14, § 17402(a)(11.5)                                 46.0201
Title 14, § 17402(a)(18.7)                                 46.0201
Title 14, § 17402(a)(21)                                   46.0201
Title 14, § 17402(a)(26.6)                                 46.0201
Title 14, § 17402(a)(30) or (31)                           46.0201
Title 14, § 17402(a)(30) and (31)                          14.0117,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, § 17402.5(b)(4)                                  46.0201
Title 14, § 17409.5.8(c)(2)                                46.0201
Title 14, § 17409.5.8(c)(3)                                46.0201
Title 14, Division 7, § 17852(a)(10)                       14.0117,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, Division 7, § 17852(a)(12)                       14.0117,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, Division 7, § 17852(a)(24.5)(A)1—3             14.0117,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, § 17855(a)(4)                                    46.0201
Title 14, § 17896.2(a)(4)                                  46.0201
Title 14, § 17896.5                                        46.0201
Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12                            33.1503,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12, § 18791.2                33.1502
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(13)                                 46.0201
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(49)                                 46.0201
Title 14, § 18815.2(a)(62)                                 46.0201
Title 14, § 18815.5(d)                                     46.0201
Title 14, § 18815.5(e)                                     46.0201
Title 14, § 18815.5(f)                                     46.0201
Title 14, § 18815.7                                        46.0201
Title 14, § 18981.2                                        33.1503,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)                                       46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(4)                                    46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(5)                                    46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(6)                                    46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(7)                                    33.1503
Title 14, § 18982(a)(8)                                    46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(14.5)                                 46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(16.5)                                 46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(18)                                   33.1503,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(24)                                   33.1503,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(33)                                   46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(38)                                   33.1503,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(39)                                   33.1503,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(40)                                   33.1503
Title 14, § 18982(a)(43)                                   46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(45)                                   33.1503
Title 14, § 18982(a)(46)                                   46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(55)                                   46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(62)                                   46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(64)                                   33.1503
Title 14, § 18982(a)(66)(A)                                46.0201
Title 14, § 18982(a)(71)                                   33.1503
Title 14, § 18982(a)(73)                                   33.1503
Title 14, § 18982(a)(74)                                   33.1503
Title 14, § 18982(a)(76)                                   33.1503
Title 14, § 18982.2(a)                                     46.0201
Title 14, § 18982.2(a)(5)                                  46.0201
Title 14, § 18983.1(b)                                     46.0201
Title 14, § 18984.1                                        46.0201
Title 14, § 18984.1(a) and (b)                             46.0201
Title 14, § 18984.1(a)(1)(A)                               33.1503,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, § 18984.2                                        46.0201
Title 14, § 18984.2(a)(1)(C)                               33.1503,
                                                            46.0201
Title 14, § 18984.3                                        46.0201
Title 14, § 18984.8                                        46.1202
Title 14, § 18984.9(b)                                     46.1202
Title 14, § 18984.9(b)(3)                                  46.1202
Title 14, § 18984.9(c)                                     46.1202,
                                                            46.1302
Title 14, § 18984.11(a)(3)                                 46.1404
Title 14, § 18989.1                                        46.1101
Title 14, § 18991.3                                        33.1504
Title 14, § 18993.1(f)(4)                                  46.0201
Title 14, § 18995.4                                        33.1503
Title 14, § 18996.2                                        33.1508
§§ 22000 et seq.                                          63.1704
§§ 66001 et seq.                                          23.07214
§ 66260.10                                                 23.0712
§§ 66265.50 et seq.                                       23.0403,
                                                            23.0712
§§ 66272.60 et seq.                                       23.0715
Title 22, § 66261.9                                        46.0201
Title 22, § 66273.2                                        46.0201
Title 22, § 66273.4                                        46.0201
Title 22, § 66273.5                                        46.0201
Title 22, § 66273.6                                        46.0201
Title 27, Division 2                                        14.0117,
                                                            46.0201
§ 189852(a)(76)                                            33.1503
                                                            
 
CORPORATION CODE
 
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 102                41.0414
                      
 
ELECTIONS CODE
 
California Code Cites                              Code Section
Chapter 9 (commencing with § 23000) of Division 2112.4801
§ 2167                                            16.0224
§ 9103                                            16.0224
§§ 21500 et seq.                                 12.0102
§ 21500, Subdivision (c)                          12.4809
                                                   
 
FAMILY CODE
 
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 297                12.4315,
                      13.0613
§ 6389               16.0226
§ 6502               41.1701
                      
 
FISH AND GAME CODE
 
California Code Cites Code Section
30505                 16.0213A
31751.4               16.0213A
                      
 
FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites  Code Section
Division 4             12.2205
Division 6             12.2205
Division 7             12.2205
Division 12            12.2205
Division 13            12.2205
Division 15            33.0501 —
                       33.0504
Division 17            12.2205
Division 18            12.2205
Division 23            12.2205
§§ 32.501 et seq.    33.0501
§§ 33.111 et seq.    33.0501
§§ 33.141 et seq.    33.0501
§§ 33.171 et seq.    33.0501
§ 11503               29.0201 
§ 11503.5             29.0201
§ 12753               29.0202
§ 12999.5             29.0207
§ 30503(c)            32.0103
§ 30804.7             16.0213A
§ 30850               32.1502
§ 31108               32.0102
§ 31108(b)            32.0103
§ 31751.7             16.0213A
§ 31752               32.0102
§ 31752(b)            32.0103
§ 81000               33.1602
§§ 81003 through 810033.1603
§ 81005               33.1610
§ 81006               33.1608
                       
 
GOVERNMENT CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites                                                          Code
                                                                               Section
Chapter 4 (commencing with § 84100)                                           12.4311
Chapter 16 (commencing with § 7260) of Division 7 of Title 1                  110.0403
Chapter 7 of Division I of Title 2                                             31.0802,
                                                                               31.0823
Chapter 7 (commencing with § 38000) of Part 2 of Division 3 of Title 4        110.0304
Chapter 2.5 (commencing with § 53311) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5      110.0304
Chapter 2.6 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5                                 110.0201
Chapter 2.6 (commencing with § 53369) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5      110.0304
Chapter 2.8 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5                                 110.0201
Chapter 2.8 (commencing with § 53395) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5      110.0304
Chapter 2.99 (commencing with § 53398.50) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5  110.0304
Chapter 2.99 of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5                                110.0201
Chapter 6.4 (commencing with § 54703) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5      110.0304
Article 3 (commencing with § 87300) of Chapter 7 of Title 9                   12.4808
Article 4.5 (commencing with § 53506) of Chapter 3 of Part 1 of Division 2 of 110.0302
Title 5
Article 5 (commencing with § 53510) of Chapter 3 of Part 1 of Division 2 of   110.0302
Title 5
Division 4 of Title 6                                                          110.0201
Division 4 (commencing with § 62000) of Title 6                               110.0304
§ 16.5                                                                        63.1704
§ 900                                                                         11.0301
§§ 900 et seq.                                                               12.3404
§ 905                                                                         11.0301
§ 1090                                                                        13.0700
§ 1126                                                                        13.0700
                                                                               12.4207,
§§ 3500 et seq.                                                              12.4208,
                                                                               12.4209
§ 3502.5                                                                      13.0213
§ 3505.2                                                                      13.0210
§ 3505.4                                                                      13.0210
§ 3505.5                                                                      13.0210
§ 3505.7                                                                      13.0210
§ 3508                                                                        13.0205
§ 3511                                                                        13.0211
§ 3546.5                                                                      13.0213
§ 6061                                                                        18.0103
§ 6066                                                                        110.0502
§ 6150                                                                        16.0102
§ 6157                                                                        16.0102
                                                                               12.4808,
§§ 6250 et seq.                                                              23.0409,
                                                                               33.0108,
                                                                               33.1507
§ 6253                                                                        16.0226
§ 6253.9                                                                      16.0226
§ 6255                                                                        41.2803,
                                                                               41.2903
§§ 6350 et seq.                                                              19.0103
§ 8314                                                                        13.0402
§ 8558                                                                        21.0102
§ 8630                                                                        14.0106
§ 11342.610                                                                   110.0105
§§ 11371 et seq.                                                             45.0101
§§ 12410 et seq.                                                             12.0310
§ 12945                                                                       13.0613
§ 12945.6                                                                     13.0613
§ 12945.6(a)(7)                                                               13.0613
§ 14999.20                                                                    41.2302,
                                                                               41.2402
§ 14999.21                                                                    41.2302,
                                                                               41.2402
§ 15335.22(d)                                                                 41.2302
§ 15338                                                                       41.2302
                                                                               110.0102,
§ 23004                                                                       110.0103,
                                                                               41.3003
§ 23136                                                                       110.0105
§ 24260                                                                       11.0402
§ 25100.5                                                                     12.2301
                                                                               11.0102,
§ 25126                                                                       11.0208,
                                                                               33.0113
                                                                               11.0102,
§ 25127                                                                       11.0208,
                                                                               33.0113
                                                                               11.0102,
§ 25128                                                                       11.0208,
                                                                               33.0113
                                                                               11.0206,
                                                                               11.0208,
                                                                               23.0317,
                                                                               28.0905,
§ 25132                                                                       32.0124,
                                                                               33.0112,
                                                                               33.0113,
                                                                               41.2808,
                                                                               41.2908
§§ 25170—25176                                                             12.2719
§ 25303                                                                       13.0404
§ 25303.1                                                                     16.0102
§ 25303.2                                                                     16.0102
§ 25303.4                                                                     16.0102
§ 25303.5                                                                     16.0102
§ 25303.6                                                                     16.0102
                                                                               12.0503,
§ 25351                                                                       12.0506,
                                                                               12.0507,
                                                                               12.0508
§ 25485                                                                       23.0401
§§ 25503—25507                                                             14.0102
§§ 25526—25535                                                             18.0101
§ 25827                                                                       46.0101
§ 25830                                                                       14.0401,
                                                                               14.0409
§ 25831                                                                       14.0401
§ 25842.5                                                                     33.0942,
                                                                               33.0943
                                                                               11.0207,
                                                                               11.0213,
                                                                               23.0301,
§ 25845                                                                       23.0501,
                                                                               33.0111,
                                                                               33.1201,
                                                                               35.0127
§ 25845(h)                                                                    11.0208,
                                                                               33.0113
§ 25845(i)                                                                    11.0208,
                                                                               33.0113
§ 25845.5                                                                     11.0214
§ 25845(b)                                                                    11.0212
                                                                               12.0503,
§ 26005                                                                       12.0506,
                                                                               12.0507,
                                                                               12.0508
§ 26109                                                                       16.0226
§ 26614                                                                       12.0511
§ 26920                                                                       12.0303
§ 26945                                                                       12.0302
§ 27000.1                                                                     12.2803
§ 27000.7                                                                     12.2801
§ 27000.8                                                                     12.2802
§ 27280                                                                       23.0413
§§ 27280 et seq.                                                             33.0114
§ 27321                                                                       14.0312
§ 27431                                                                       12.1202
§ 27432                                                                       12.1202
§ 27584                                                                       14.0601
§ 27585                                                                       14.0601
§ 27721                                                                       12.2719
§ 27727                                                                       12.2705,
                                                                               33.1607
§ 29125                                                                       12.0211
§ 29373.1                                                                     16.0228B
§ 29375.1                                                                     16.0228B
§§ 29530 et seq.                                                             14.0201
§ 29550(b)(8)                                                                 16.0207A
§ 29742                                                                       12.0306
§ 29851                                                                       12.0304
§ 31000.1                                                                     12.4501
§ 31010                                                                       12.4501
§ 31469.1                                                                     13.0205
§ 31469.3                                                                     13.0613
§ 31469.4                                                                     13.0613
§ 31558.1                                                                     12.1303,
                                                                               12.1402
§ 31625.3                                                                     13.0613
§ 31641.04                                                                    12.1303,
                                                                               12.1404
§ 31664.1                                                                     13.0613
§ 31678.2                                                                     13.0613
§ 31725.5                                                                     12.1303,
                                                                               12.1403
§ 31855.12                                                                    13.0613 ,
                                                                               13.0614
§ 31870                                                                       12.1303,
                                                                               12.1405
§ 31874                                                                       12.1405
§ 31877                                                                       12.1401
§ 31879                                                                       12.1401
§ 51032                                                                       41.1904,
                                                                               41.2004
§ 51201(b)                                                                    110.0401
§§ 52200 et seq.                                                             110.0102
§ 52200                                                                       110.0103
§ 52200.2                                                                     110.0105
§ 52201                                                                       110.0203
§ 53051                                                                       12.4207
§ 53066                                                                       42.0505
§ 53066.2                                                                     42.0521
                                                                               11.0208,
                                                                               23.0319,  
                                                                               28.0809,
§ 53069.4                                                                     32.0126,
                                                                               33.0113,
                                                                               41.2808,
                                                                               41.2908
§ 53069.4(a)(2)(C)                                                            11.0208
§§ 53083                                                                     110.0102
                                                                               12.3305,
                                                                               12.4204,
                                                                               12.4205,
§§ 54950 et seq.                                                             12.4314,  
                                                                               12.4508,
                                                                               12.4808,
                                                                               19.0103,
                                                                               63.0107
§ 54956                                                                       12.4205
§ 54956.5                                                                     12.0101
§ 56033.5                                                                     110.0302
§ 65080                                                                       110.0203
§ 65850.1(a)                                                                  41.2302,
                                                                               41.2402
                                                                               63.1701,
§ 65850.7                                                                     63.1702,
                                                                               63.1704
§ 66496                                                                       16.0215B
§ 68055.1(g)                                                                  35.0103
§§ 68631 et seq.                                                             16.0206
§ 69740                                                                       15.0103,
                                                                               15.0301
§ 81008                                                                       16.0224
§ 82007                                                                       12.4304
§ 84101                                                                       12.4319
§ 84104                                                                       12.4313
§ 84302                                                                       12.4306
§ 84615                                                                       12.4311
§ 85200                                                                       12.4318
§ 85704                                                                       12.4306
§ 87100                                                                       13.0700
§ 91013                                                                       13.0709
                                                                               
 
HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites                                                      Code
                                                                           Section
Division 2.5                                                               31.0801
Chapter 6.7                                                                23.0725
Article 12.5 (commencing with § 33459) of Chapter 4 of Part 1 of Division 110.0206
4
Division 5, Part 1, Chapter 7                                              33.0612
Division 13, Part 1.5                                                      33.1003,
                                                                           33.1005
Division 13, Part 2                                                        33.1031
Division 13, Part 3                                                        33.1031
Chapter 6.10 (commencing with § 25403) of Division 20                     110.0206
§ 1250                                                                    33.1503
§ 1418                                                                    31.0302
§ 1596.750                                                                29.0202
§ 1797.200                                                                31.1102
§ 1797.224                                                                31.0801
§ 1797.270                                                                31.1103
§ 1797.276                                                                31.1106
§ 1797.6                                                                  31.0801
§ 1797.85                                                                 31.0801
§§ 2000 et seq.                                                          33.0942
§§ 5400 et seq.                                                          33.0870
                                                                           33.0850,
§§ 5410 et seq.                                                          33.0890,
                                                                           33.08100
§§ 5473—5473a                                                          46.0506
§ 5473.4                                                                  46.0506
§ 5473.5                                                                  46.0506
§ 5473.6                                                                  46.0506
§ 5473.10                                                                 46.0506
                                                                           27.1502,
§§ 11000 et seq.                                                         27.1511,
                                                                           33.1016
§§ 11053 through 11058                                                   27.1502
§§ 11054 through 11058                                                   41.2004
                                                                           27.1502,
§ 11357.5                                                                 27.1504,
                                                                           27.1511
§ 11375.5                                                                 27.1502,
                                                                           27.1511
§ 11401                                                                   27.1502,
                                                                           27.1511
§§ 11470 et seq.                                                         27.1002
§ 11550                                                                   45.0302
§ 11590                                                                   41.2103,
                                                                           41.2109
                                                                           41.2307,
§§ 12000 et seq.                                                         41.2407,
                                                                           45.0402
§ 12081                                                                   45.0304
§ 13114                                                                   23.0205
§§ 13700 et seq.                                                         33.0501
§§ 15000 et seq.                                                         33.08121
§ 17920.5                                                                 63.0107
§ 17920.6                                                                 63.0107
§ 17958                                                                   63.0810
§ 17958.7                                                                 63.0810
§ 18010                                                                   41.2502
§ 18941.5                                                                 63.1110
§§ 19955 through 19958                                                   63.0107
§ 20701                                                                   23.0721
                                                                           23.0401,
                                                                           23.0402,
                                                                           23.0711,
§§ 25100 et seq.                                                         23.0713,
                                                                           23.0714,
                                                                           23.07212,
                                                                           23.07214
§ 25115                                                                   23.0711
                                                                           23.0711,
§ 25117                                                                   28.0802,
                                                                           33.0863,
                                                                           46.0201 
§ 25122.7                                                                 46.0201
§ 25123.5                                                                 23.0711
§ 25140                                                                   46.0201
§§ 25160 et seq.                                                         23.0713
§ 25187                                                                   23.0714,
                                                                           23.0715
§ 25250.1                                                                 46.0201
§ 25270.5(c)                                                              23.0760
                                                                           23.0411,
§§ 25280 et seq.                                                         23.0725,
                                                                           23.07212,
                                                                           23.07214
§ 25281                                                                   46.0201
§ 25295                                                                   23.07214
§§ 25299 et seq.                                                         23.0411
§ 25299.2                                                                 23.0727
§§ 25299.36 et seq.                                                      23.07214
§ 25316                                                                   23.0711,
                                                                           46.0201
§ 25364                                                                   46.0902
§§ 25404 et seq.                                                         23.0402,
                                                                           23.0403
§ 25411(c)                                                                33.0863
§§ 25500 et seq.                                                         23.0730,
                                                                           23.0732
§ 25501(j)                                                                46.0201
§ 25501(k)                                                                46.0201
§ 25501(p)                                                                23.0403
§ 25501.1                                                                 46.0201
                                                                           14.0102,
§ 25502.5                                                                 14.0109,
                                                                           14.0115
§ 25503                                                                   23.0732
§ 25503.5                                                                 23.0732
§ 25503.5(c)(2)                                                           23.0732
§ 25504                                                                   23.0731
§ 25507                                                                   23.0732
§ 25507(b)                                                                23.0732
Ch. 6.95                                                                   35.0103
§ 11489(b)(2)(D)                                                          27.1002
§§ 25531 et seq.                                                         23.0740
§ 34176                                                                   110.0402
§ 34183                                                                   110.0302
§ 34188                                                                   110.0302
§ 34191.5                                                                 110.0402,
                                                                           110.0502
§ 37602                                                                   110.0203
§ 39730.5                                                                 46.0201
§ 39730.6                                                                 46.0201
§ 39730.7                                                                 46.0201
§ 39730.8                                                                 46.0201
§ 40460                                                                   53.1002
§ 44243                                                                   53.1001
§ 50052.5                                                                 110.0403
§ 50053                                                                   110.0403
§ 50079.5                                                                 110.0202
                                                                           110.0105,
§ 50093                                                                   110.0202,
                                                                           110.0402,
                                                                           110.0601
§ 50105                                                                   110.0202,
                                                                           110.0402
§ 50106                                                                   110.0202
§ 50519(b)(1)                                                             41.2502
§ 62101(c)(2)                                                             110.0202
§ 62101(f)                                                                110.0202
§ 101000                                                                  31.0101
§§ 101025 et seq.                                                        23.0401,
                                                                           33.0101
§§ 101075 et seq.                                                        23.0401,
                                                                           23.0402
§§ 101275 et seq.                                                        33.0101
§ 101310                                                                  33.0102
§ 101325                                                                  33.0875
§ 101340                                                                  33.0875
§ 101345                                                                  33.0875
§§ 101375 et seq.                                                        23.0401,
                                                                           33.0101
§§ 101450 et seq.                                                        33.0101
§ 101490                                                                  23.0722
§ 102380                                                                  31.0901
§§ 108850 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 109875 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 110970 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 111070 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 111955 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 112355 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 112500 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 112650 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 113310 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 113700 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 113728 et seq.                                                        33.0402
§ 113783                                                                  33.1503,
                                                                           46.0201
§ 113789                                                                  33.1503
§ 113841                                                                  33.1503,
                                                                           46.0201
§ 113842                                                                  33.1503,
                                                                           46.0201
§ 113871                                                                  33.0402
§ 113947.1                                                                33.0409
§§ 114294 et seq.                                                        33.0408
§ 114295                                                                  33.0408
§§ 114960 et seq.                                                        46.0201
§§ 115825 et seq.                                                        33.1101
§§ 115875 et seq.                                                        33.1101
§ 115980                                                                  33.1125
§§ 116025—116975                                                       33.1130
§ 116028                                                                  33.1124
§ 116810                                                                  33.0655
§§ 117505 et seq.                                                        33.1101
§§ 117510 et seq.                                                        33.1101
§§ 117600 et seq.                                                        33.1301,
                                                                           46.0201 
§ 117680                                                                  33.1302
§ 117690                                                                  33.08155
§ 117760                                                                  33.1302
§ 117825                                                                  33.1305
§ 118245(b)                                                               33.1305
§§ 118375 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 118425 et seq.                                                        33.0401
§§ 120125 et seq.                                                        33.0101
§ 130150                                                                  12.2906
§ 25404(c)(1)                                                             23.0710
§ 25404(c)(2)                                                             23.0750
§ 25404(c)(3)                                                             23.0720
§ 25404(c)(4)                                                             23.0730
§ 25404(c)(5)                                                             23.0740
§ 25404(c)(6)                                                             23.0760
                                                                           
 
LABOR CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites Code Section
Division 4            13.0502
§ 245.5              13.0613
§ 3363.5             13.0501
§ 3364.55            13.0502
§ 3364.6             13.0502
§ 4453               13.0502
§ 4850               13.0613,
                      13.0617a
                      
 
MILITARY AND VETERANS CODE
 
California Code Cites Code Section
§§ 395 et seq.      13.0613
§ 970                12.3506
                      
 
PENAL CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites                                  Code Section
Chapter 4.5 of Title 3, Part 2                         13.0204
Chapter 5.5 of Title 9, Part 1 (commencing with § 290)41.1904
§ 148                                                 41.0406
§ 171b                                                27.1302
§ 186.22(f)                                           33.1015
§ 244.5                                               27.1302
§ 266i                                                41.2004,
                                                       41.2103
                                                       41.0503,
                                                       41.0504,
                                                       41.0511,
                                                       41.1809,
§ 290                                                 41.2004,
                                                       41.2009,
                                                       41.2103,
                                                       41.2109,
                                                       45.0302
§§ 290 et seq.                                       41.1904
§ 315                                                 41.2004,
                                                       41.2103
§ 316                                                 41.2004,
                                                       41.2103
§ 318                                                 41.2004,
                                                       41.2103
                                                       41.1701,
§ 326.4                                               41.1702,
                                                       41.1709,
                                                       41.1710
                                                       41.1701,
                                                       41.1702,
§ 326.5                                               41.1708,
                                                       41.1709,
                                                       41.1710,
                                                       41.1713
§ 326.5(b)                                            41.1713
§ 326.5(c)                                            41.1713
§ 365                                                 28.0504
                                                       23.0502,
§ 370                                                 33.0302,
                                                       33.08122
§§ 370 et seq.                                       23.0401
§ 374.3                                               53.0501
§ 383                                                 33.0401
§ 415                                                 28.0504
§ 597                                                 27.0901
§ 597t                                                32.1405
§ 597.5 Subdivision (a)                               32.0101
§ 599aa                                               32.0101
§ 647, excluding subdivisions (c), (e), and (f)       41.1904
§ 647(b)                                              41.2004,
                                                       41.2103
§ 647c                                                28.0504
Part 2, Title 3, Chapter 4.5                           52.0120
§ 829.5                                               11.0202
§ 830.1                                               12.0513,
                                                       13.0205
§ 830.3(b)                                            13.0205
§ 830.6(a)(1)                                         12.0513
§ 830.6(a)(2)                                         12.0513
§ 830.7(j)                                            28.0802,
                                                       28.0806
§ 832.6(a)(1)                                         12.0513
§ 832.6(a)(2)                                         12.0513
§ 832.6(a)(3)                                         12.0513
                                                       11.0202,
§ 836.5                                               24.0710,
                                                       31.0102
§ 853.5                                               11.0206,
                                                       33.0112
§ 853.6                                               11.0206,
                                                       33.0112
§ 1203.1                                              12.0509
§ 1203.1c                                             12.0607
§ 1203.4                                              16.0219,
                                                       31.0806
§ 1209                                                12.0408,
                                                       12.0510
§ 1276                                                51.0111
§§ 1407—1413                                       12.0502
§§ 6040 et seq.                                      12.0606
§§ 12000 et seq.                                     27.1101
                                                       27.1302,
§ 12020                                               33.1016,
                                                       71.0405
§ 12071                                               22.0112
§ 12301                                               45.0101
§ 12401                                               27.1302
§ 12402                                               27.1302
§ 13324(b)                                            27.0805
§ 13324(c)                                            27.0801
§ 13522                                               12.0501,
                                                       12.2101
§ 11105(b)(11)                                        41.2105
§ 13300(b)(11)                                        41.2105
                                                       
 
PUBLIC CONTRACTS CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 22000              14.0102
§ 22020              14.0114
§§ 22030 et seq.    14.0114
§ 22032(a)           14.0114
§ 22032(b)           14.0114
§ 22034              14.0114
§ 22034(f)           14.0114
§ 22036              14.0114
                      
 
PUBLIC RESOURCES CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites                               Code Section
Division 30                                         46.0201
§ 4291                                             23.0301
§ 14500 et seq.                                    33.08160
§ 21000                                            12.2303
§§ 21000 et seq.                                  23.0401,
                                                    33.06554
§§ 21050 et seq.                                  33.0101
§ 21155                                            110.0203
§ 40000                                            33.0850
§§ 40000 et seq.                                  33.08155,
                                                    46.0201
§ 40004                                            46.0201
§§ 40057—40059                                  46.0101
§ 40059                                            33.0801,
                                                    33.0840
§ 40059.4                                          46.0201
§ 40059.4(b)(1-5)                                  46.0201
§ 40141                                            33.08155
                                                    33.0802,
§ 40191                                            33.0841,
                                                    33.08155
§ 40194                                            33.0802
§ 40195                                            33.0802
§ 40195.1                                          14.0117,
                                                    46.0201
§ 40201                                            46.0201
§ 40507                                            46.0201
§ 41500                                            46.0201
§ 41730                                            46.0201
§ 41731                                            46.0201
§ 41734                                            46.0201
§ 41734.5                                          46.0201
§ 41735                                            46.0201
§ 41736                                            46.0201
§ 41780                                            46.0201
§ 41780.01                                         46.0201
§ 41781.3                                          46.0201
§ 41800                                            46.0201
§ 41802                                            46.0201
§ 41903                                            33.08151
§ 41952                                            46.0605,
                                                    46.1202
§ 40201                                            46.0201
§ 42649                                            46.0201
§ 42649.1                                          46.0201
§ 42649.2                                          46.0201
§ 42649.5                                          46.0605,
                                                    46.1203
§ 42649.8                                          46.0201,
                                                    46.1202
§ 42649.81                                         46.0201
§ 42649.81(a)(4)                                   46.0604
§ 42649.84                                         46.0605,
                                                    46.1203
§§ 42652 et seq.                                  46.0201
§ 43200                                            33.0821
§ 43209                                            33.0821,
                                                    33.08180
§ 44004                                            46.0201
§ 44014                                            33.08180
§§ 49200—49205                                  46.0101
§ 49520                                            46.0301
§ 50001                                            46.0201
Division 30, Part 3, Chapter 12.8, §§ 42649 et seq46.0201
                                                    
 
PUBLIC UTILITIES CODE
 
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 21670(e)           12.4105
§ 21670.1            12.4105
§§ 24230—24410    71.0104
                      
 
REVENUE AND TAXATION CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites  Code Section
Part 1.5 of Division 2 14.0201
Part 1 of Division 2   14.0201
Part 6.7 of Division 2 14.0309
§ 51(a)               14.0505
§§ 60 et seq.        14.0204
                       14.0801 ,
§ 69.5                14.0802 ,
                       14.0804
§§ 70 et seq.        14.0204
§ 70(c)               14.0505
§ 155.1               14.0205
§ 170                 14.0205
§ 218                 14.0801
§§ 5096 et seq.      14.0314,
                       14.0506
§ 6066                41.0503
§ 6067                14.0201
§ 6366                14.0201
§ 6366.1              14.0201
§ 6701                14.0201
§ 6702                14.0201
§ 6711                14.0201
§ 6715                14.0201
§ 6737                14.0201
§ 6797                14.0201
§ 6828                14.0201
§ 7202                14.0201
§ 7202(h)             14.0201
§§ 11901 et seq.     14.0301,
                       14.0311
§ 11911.1             14.0318
                       41.0501,
§ 23701a              41.0503,
                       41.1704,
                       41.1705
                       41.0501,
§ 23701b              41.0503,
                       41.1704,
                       41.1705
                       41.0501,
§ 23701d              41.0503,
                       41.1704,
                       41.1705
                       41.0501,
§ 23701e              41.0503,
                       41.1704,
                       41.1705
                       41.0501,
§ 23701f              41.0503,
                       41.1704,
                       41.1705
                       41.0501,
§ 23701g              41.0503,
                       41.1704,
                       41.1705
§ 23701k              41.1704,
                       41.1705
                       41.0501,
§ 23701l              41.0503,
                       41.1704,
                       41.1705
§ 23701w              41.1704,
                       41.1705
                       
 
STREETS AND HIGHWAYS CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites                         Code Section
Division 7 (commencing with § 5000)          110.0304
Division 10 (commencing with § 8500)         110.0304
Division 12 (commencing with § 10000)        110.0304
Division 15, Part 2 (commencing with § 22500)110.0304
Division 18, Part 1 (commencing with § 31500)110.0304
Division 18, Part 4 (commencing with § 35100)110.0304
§ 25                                         28.0901,
                                              28.0903
§ 942.6                                      53.0801
§ 960.5                                      28.0901,
                                              28.0903
§ 1480                                       28.0901,
                                              28.0903
§§ 2800 et seq.                             17.0101
§§ 5000 et seq.                             17.0101
§§ 10000 et seq.                            17.0101
§§ 10000—10609                            17.0203
                                              
 
UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
 
California Code Cites Code Section
                      
                      
 
VEHICLE CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites                               Code Section
Article 2 of Chapter 10 of Division 11              52.0132
Chapter 10 (commencing with § 22650) of Division 1133.1290,
                                                    53.0607
Chapter 11 of Division 11                           53.0607
§ 111                                              16.0223
§ 165                                              53.0302
§ 165.5                                            53.0302
§ 415                                              28.0401
§ 2501                                             31.0804
§ 5007                                             53.0604
§ 21055                                            31.0801
§ 22511.8                                          53.0603,
                                                    53.0604
§ 22511.55                                         53.0604
§ 22511.59                                         53.0604
§ 22651                                            28.0905
§ 22651.9                                          52.0120
§ 22651.9(a)                                       52.0120
§ 22651.9(a)(4)                                    52.0120
§ 22660                                            33.1201,
                                                    33.1210
§ 22852                                            52.0120
§ 31600 et seq.                                    45.0201,
                                                    45.0402
§ 35100                                            52.0129
§ 35401.5                                          52.0129
§ 35780 et seq.                                    51.0417
§ 38006                                            28.0401
§ 40209                                            52.0130
§ 40215                                            53.1102
§ 40519(b)                                         15.0501
§ 42001                                            53.0308,
                                                    53.0903
§ 42006                                            15.0501
                                                    
 
WATER CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites Code Section
§§ 10750 et seq.    33.06551,
                      33.06553
§§ 13000 et seq.    23.07214
§ 13050              46.0201
§ 13050(d)           35.0111
§§ 13240 et seq.    23.07214
§ 13304              23.0401,
                      33.0850
§ 13305              23.0401
§§ 13520 et seq.    33.0890
§ 79505.5            110.0302
                      
 
WELFARE AND INSTITUTIONS CODE
California Code Cites Code Section
California Code Cites Code Section
§ 225                12.1303
§ 233                12.1301
§ 258                13.0502
§ 654                13.0502
§ 725                13.0502
                      12.0601,
§§ 880—891        12.0603,
                      12.0604
§ 889                12.0602
§ 10800              12.3502
§ 10801              12.3505,
                      12.3506
§ 12301.3            12.4211
§ 12301.4            12.4211
                      12.4201,
§ 12301.6            12.4208,
                      12.4211,
                      12.4213
§ 12301.6(b)(3)(C)   12.4211
§ 12301.6(c)(1)      12.4202,
                      12.4207
§ 12301.6(e)         12.4202
§ 12301.6(f)(3)      12.4207
§ 12301.6(h)         12.4207
§ 12302              12.4207
§ 12302.1            12.4207
§ 12302.2            12.4207
                      12.4201,
§ 12302.25           12.4207,
                      12.4211
§ 12302.25(a)        12.4207
§ 12304.6(b)(3)(D)   12.4211
                      
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section/Disposition
Ord. Date       Code Section/Disposition
No.  Passed
1    - -        Repealed
2    - -        Repealed
3    - -        Repealed
4    - -        Franchise
5    - -        Repealed
6    - -        Repealed
7    - -        Repealed
8    - -        Repealed
9    - -        Repealed
10   - -        Repealed
11   - -        Repealed
12   - -        Repealed
13   - -        Repealed
14   - -        Repealed
15   - -        Repealed
16   - -        Repealed
17   - -        Repealed
18   - -        Repealed
19   - -        Franchise
20   - -        Repealed
21   - -        Repealed
22   - -        Repealed
23   - -        Repealed
24   - -        Repealed
25   - -        Repealed
26   - -        Repealed
27   - -        Repealed
28   - -        Repealed
29   - -        Repealed
30   - -        Repealed
31   - -        Repealed
32   - -        Repealed
33   - -        Repealed
34   - -        Repealed
35   - -        Repealed
36   - -        Repealed
37   - -        Repealed
38   - -        Repealed
39   - -        Repealed
40   - -        Repealed
41   - -        Repealed
42   - -        Repealed
43   - -        Repealed
44   - -        Repealed
45   - -        Repealed
46   - -        Repealed
47   - -        Repealed
48   - -        Repealed
49   - -        Repealed
50   - -        Repealed
51   - -        Repealed
52   - -        Repealed
53   - -        Repealed
54   - -        Repealed
55   - -        Repealed
56   - -        Repealed
57   - -        Repealed
58   - -        Repealed
59   - -        Franchise
60   - -        Franchise
61   - -        Franchise
62   - -        Franchise
63   - -        Franchise
64   - -        Franchise
65   - -        Franchise
66   - -        Franchise
67   - -        Franchise
68   - -        Franchise
69   - -        Franchise
70   - -        Franchise
71   - -        Franchise
72   - -        Franchise
73   - -        Franchise
74   - -        Franchise
75   - -        Franchise
76   - -        Franchise
77   - -        Franchise
78   - -        Franchise
79   - -        Franchise
80   - -        Franchise
81   - -1901    42.0201,
                42.0202
82   - -        Franchise
83   - -        Repealed
84   - -        Repealed
85   - -        Repealed
86   - -        Franchise
87   - -        Repealed
88   - -        Repealed
89   - -        Franchise
90   - -        Franchise
91   - -        Repealed
92   - -        Franchise
93   - -        Franchise
94   - -        Repealed
95   - -        Repealed
96   - -        Repealed
97   - -        Repealed
98   - -        Repealed
99   - -        Repealed
100  - -        Repealed
101  - -        Repealed
102  - -        Repealed
103  - -        Franchise
104  - -        Repealed
105  - -        Repealed
106  - -        Repealed
107  - -        Repealed
108  - -        Franchise
109  - -        Repealed
110  - -        Repealed
111  - -        Repealed
112  - -        Franchise
113  - -        Repealed
114  - -        Repealed
115  - -        Repealed
116  - -        Franchise
117  - -1906    22.0105
118  - -        Franchise
119  - -        Franchise
120  - -1907    53.0101
122  - -        Repealed
123  - -        Franchise
124  - -        Franchise
125  - -        Repealed
126  - -        Franchise
127A - -        Repealed
127  - -        Franchise
128  - -        Repealed
129  - -        Franchise
130  - -        Franchise
131  - -        Repealed
132  - -        Repealed
133  - -        Franchise
134  - -        Franchise
135  - -        Repealed
136  - -        Repealed
137  - -        Franchise
138  - -        Repealed
139  - -        Franchise
140  - -        Repealed
141  - -        Repealed
142  - -        Repealed
143  - -        Franchise
144  - -        Repealed
145  - -        Franchise
146  - -        Franchise
147  - -        Franchise
148  - -        Repealed
149  - -        Repealed
150  - -        Charter
151  - -        Charter
152  - -        Repealed
153  - -        Franchise
154  - -        Not enacted
155  - -        Repealed
156  - -        Repealed
157  - -        Franchise
158  - -        Franchise
159  - -        Franchise
160  - -        Repealed
161  - -        Repealed
162  - -        Repealed
163  - -        Franchise
164  - -        Franchise
165  - -        Repealed
166  - -        Repealed
167  - -        Repealed
168  - -        Repealed
169  - -        Franchise
170  - -        Franchise
171  - -1915    41.0701
172  - -        Franchise
173  - -        Repealed
174  - -        Repealed
175  - -        Repealed
176  - -        Repealed
177  - -        Franchise
178  - -        Repealed
179  - -        Repealed
180  - -        Repealed
181  - -        Repealed
182  - -        Repealed
183  - -        Repealed
184  - -        Repealed
185  - -        Franchise
186  - -        Repealed
187  - -        Repealed
188  - -        Repealed
189  - -        Repealed
190  - -        Repealed
191  - -        Repealed
192  - -        Repealed
193  - -        Franchise
194  - -        Repealed
195  - -        Repealed
196  - -        Repealed
197  - -1921    12.1001
198  - -        Franchise
199  - -        Franchise
200  - -        Repealed
201  - -        Repealed
202  - -        Franchise
203  - -        Repealed
204  - -        Repealed
205  - -        Franchise
206  - -        Repealed
207  - -        Repealed
208  - -        Repealed
209  - -        Franchise
210  - -        Repealed
211  - -        Franchise
212  - -        Repealed
213  - -        Franchise
214  - -        Repealed
215  - -        Franchise
216  - -        Franchise
217  - -        Franchise
218  - -1923    12.0604
219  - -        Repealed
220  - -        Repealed
221  - -        Repealed
222  - -        Franchise
223  - -        Franchise
224  - -        Franchise
                53.0401,
225  - -1924    53.0402,
                53.0403
226  - -        Repealed
227  - -        Repealed
228  - -        Franchise
229  - -        Franchise
230  - -        Repealed
231  - -        Franchise
232  - -        Repealed
233  - -        Repealed
234  - -        Repealed
235  - -        Repealed
236  - -        Repealed
237  - -        Repealed
238  - -        Repealed
239  - -        Repealed
240  - -        Repealed
241  - -        Franchise
242  - -        Repealed
243  - -        Repealed
244  - -        Repealed
245  - -        Repealed
246  - -        Repealed
247  - -        Repealed
248  - -        Repealed
249  - -        Repealed
250  - -        Repealed
251  - -        Repealed
252  - -        Repealed
253  - -        Franchise
254  - -        Repealed
255  - -        Repealed
256  - -        Repealed
257  - -        Repealed
258  - -        Repealed
259  - -        Repealed
260  - -        Repealed
261  - -        Repealed
262  - -1925    53.0201
263  - -        Repealed
264  - -        Franchise
265  - -        Franchise
266  - -        Repealed
267  - -        Repealed
268  - -        Repealed
269  - -        Repealed
270  - -        Repealed
271  - -        Repealed
272  - -        Repealed
273  - -        Repealed
274  - -        Repealed
275  - -        Repealed
276  - -        Repealed
277  - -        Repealed
278  - -        Franchise
279  - -        Repealed
280  - -        Repealed
281  - -        Repealed
282  - -        Repealed
283  - -1927    12.1001
284  - -        Repealed
285  - -        Repealed
286  - -        Repealed
287  - -        Repealed
288  - -        Repealed
289  - -        Repealed
290  - -        Repealed
291  - -        Franchise
292  - -        Repealed
293  - -        Repealed
294  - -1928    32.0601—
                32.0607
295  - -        Repealed
296  - -        Repealed
297  - -        Repealed
298  - -        Repealed
299  - -        Repealed
300  - -        Repealed
301  - -        Repealed
302  - -        Repealed
303  - -        Repealed
304  - -        Repealed
305  - -        Franchise
306  - -        Repealed
307  - -        Franchise
308  - -        Repealed
309  - -1928    22.0109
310  - -        Forestry Permit
311  - -        Franchise
312  - -        Repealed
313  - -        Repealed
314  - -        Repealed
315  - -        Franchise
316  - -        Repealed
317  - -        Repealed
318  - -        Big Bear Pound
319  - -1929    12.0504
320  - -        Bond Issue
321  - -        Repealed
322  - -        Repealed
323  - -        Repealed
324  - -        Repealed
325  - -        Repealed
326  - -        Repealed
327  - -        Repealed
328  - -        Repealed
329  - -        Repealed
330  - -        Repealed
331  - -        Repealed
                27.0301,
332  - -1930    27.0302,
                27.0401
333  - -        Franchise
334  - -        Franchise
335  - -        Franchise
336  - -        Franchise
337  - -        Repealed
338  - -        Franchise
339  - -        Repealed
340  - -        Repealed
341  - -        Repealed
342  - -        Repealed
343  - -        Repealed
344  - -        Repealed
345  - -        Repealed
346  - -        Repealed
347  - -        Repealed
348  - -        Repealed
349  - -        Repealed
350  - -        Franchise
351  - -        Repealed
352  - -        Repealed
353  - -        Repealed
354  - -        Repealed
355  - -        Franchise
356  - -        Repealed
357  - -        Franchise
358  - -        Repealed
359  - -        Repealed
360  - -        Repealed
361  - -        Repealed
362  - -        Repealed
363  - -        Repealed
364  - -        Repealed
365  - -        Franchise
366  - -        Franchise
367  - -        Repealed
368  - -        Repealed
369  - -        Repealed
370  - -        Repealed
371  - -        Franchise
372  - -        Repealed
373  - -        Repealed
374  - -        Repealed
375  - -        Repealed
376  - -        Repealed
377  - -        Repealed
378  - -1933    41.0501—
                41.0512
379  - -        Repealed
380  - -        Repealed
381  - -1933    41.0601,
                41.0602
382  - -        Repealed
383  - -        Repealed
384  - -        Repealed
385  - -        Repealed
386  - -        Repealed
387  - -        Repealed
388  - -        Repealed
389  - -        Repealed
390  - -        Repealed
391  - -        Bond Issue
392  - -        Bond Issue
393  - -        Bond Issue
394  - -        Bond Issue
395  - -        Bond Issue
396  - -        Bond Issue
397  - -        Repealed
398  - -        Bond Issue
399  - -        Repealed
400  - -        Repealed
401  - -        Bond Issue
402  - -        Repealed
403  - -        Repealed
404  - -        Franchise
405  - -        Franchise
406  - -1934    27.0101,
                27.0102
407  - -        Repealed
408  - -        Repealed
409  - -        Repealed
410  - -        Repealed
411  - -        Repealed
412  - -        Repealed
413  - -        Repealed
414  - -        Repealed
415  - -        Repealed
416  - -        Repealed
417  - -        Repealed
418  - -        Repealed
419  - -        Repealed
420  - -        Franchise
421  - -        Repealed
422  - -        Repealed
423  - -        Repealed
424  - -        Repealed
425  - -        Franchise
426  - -        Repealed
427  - -        Repealed
428  - -        Repealed
429  - -        Repealed
430  - -        Repealed
431  - -        Repealed
432  - -        Repealed
433  - -        Repealed
434  - -        Repealed
435  - -        Repealed
436  - -        Repealed
437  - -        Franchise
438  - -        Repealed
439  - -        Franchise
440  - -        Repealed
441  - -        Repealed
442  - -        Repealed
443  - -        Repealed
444  - -        Repealed
445  - -1937    41.0601,
                41.0602
446  - -        Repealed
447  - -        Franchise
448  - -        Repealed
449  - -        Repealed
450  - -        Repealed
451  - -        Repealed
452  - -        Repealed
453  - -        Repealed
454  - -        Repealed
455  - -        Repealed
456  - -        Repealed
457  - -1937    41.0301—
                41.0316
458  - -        Repealed
459  - -        Repealed
460  - -        Repealed
461  - -        Repealed
462  - -        Repealed
463  - -        Repealed
464  - -        Repealed
465  - -        Repealed
466  - -        Repealed
467  - -        Repealed
468  - -        Repealed
469  - -        Repealed
470  - -        Repealed
471  - -        Repealed
472  - -        Repealed
473  - -        Repealed
474  - -1939    42.0101—
                28.0101
474  - -1950    Repealed by Ord. 4272
475  - -        Repealed
476  - -        Repealed
477  - -        Repealed
478  - -        Repealed
479  - -        Repealed
480  - -        Repealed
481  - -        Repealed
482  - -        Franchise
483  - -        Repealed
484  - -        Repealed
485  - -        Franchise
486  - -1940    28.0101
487  - -1940    28.0101
488  - -        Franchise
489  - -        Repealed
490  - -        Repealed
491  - -        Repealed
492  - -        Repealed
493  - -        Robbins
494  - -        Robbins
495  - -        Repealed
496  - -        Repealed
497  - -        Franchise
498  - -        Repealed
499  - -        Repealed
500  - -        Repealed
501  - -        Repealed
502  - -        Repealed
503  - -        Repealed
504  - -        Deleted by Ord. 2425
505  - -        Franchise
506  - -        Repealed
507  - -        Franchise
508  - -        Repealed
509  - -        Franchise
510  - -        Repealed
511  - -        Repealed
512  - -        Franchise
513  - -        Repealed
514  - -        Repealed
515  - -        Franchise
516  - -1942    27.0201
517  - -        Repealed
518  - -        Repealed
519  - -        Repealed
520  - -        Repealed
521  - -        Repealed
522  - -        Repealed
523  - -        Repealed
524  - -        Repealed
525  - -        Repealed
526  - -        Repealed
                33.0101,
                33.0102,
                33.0103,
                33.0104,
527  - -1942    33.0105,
                33.0106,
                33.0107,
                33.0108,
                33.0109
                31.0101—
                31.0104,
                31.0201,
                31.0202,
                32.0401—
527  - -1958    32.0409,
                32.0502—
                32.0510,
                34.0301—
                34.0311,
                34.0501,
                34.0502
528  - -        Repealed
529  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3726
530  - -        Repealed
531  - -        Repealed
532  - -        Repealed
533  - -        Repealed
534  - -        Repealed
535  - -        Franchise
536  - -        Repealed
537  - -        Repealed
538  - -        Repealed
539  - -        Franchise
540  - -        Repealed
541  - -        Repealed
542  - -        Repealed
543  - -        Repealed
544  - -        Repealed
545  - -        Repealed
546  - -        Repealed
547  - -        Repealed
548  - -        Deleted
549  - -        Repealed
550  - -        Repealed
551  - -        Repealed
552  - -        Franchise
553  - -        Franchise
554  - -        Repealed
555  - -        Repealed
556  - -        Repealed
557  - -        Franchise
558  - -        Repealed
559  - -        Salary
560  - -        Repealed
561  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3896
562  - -        Repealed
563  - -        Repealed
564  - -        Repealed
565  - -        Repealed
566  - -        Repealed
567  - -        Franchise
568  - -        Repealed
569  - -        Repealed
570  - -        Repealed
571  - -        Repealed
572  - -        Repealed
573  - -        Repealed
574  - -        Repealed
575  - -        Salary
576  - -        Salary
577  - -        Salary
578  - -        Salary
579  - -        Salary
580  - -        Repealed
581  - -        Franchise
582  - -        Repealed
583  - -        Salary
584  - -        Repealed
585  - -        Franchise
586  - -        Salary
587  - -        Repealed
588  - -        Repealed
589  - -        Repealed
590  - -        Repealed
591  - -        Repealed
592  - -1947    Repealed by Ord. 4272
593  - -        Salary
594  - -        Repealed
595  - -        Salary
596  - -1947    52.0101—
                52.0130
597  - -        Repealed
598  - -1947    52.0101—
                52.0130
599  - -        Repealed
600  - -        Repealed
601  - -        Repealed
602  - -        Repealed
603  - -        Repealed
604  - -        Repealed
605  - -        Repealed
606  - -        Repealed
607  - -        Repealed
608  - -        Repealed
609  - -        Repealed
610  - -        Repealed
611  - -        Deleted
612  - -        Repealed
613  - -        Repealed
614  - -        Repealed
615  - -        Cemetery
616  - -        Repealed
617  - -        Repealed
618  - -        Repealed
619  - -        Repealed
620  - -        Repealed
621  - -        Repealed
622  - -        Repealed
623  - -        Repealed
624  - -        Repealed
625  - -        Repealed
626  - -        Repealed
627  - -1949    25.0101,
                25.0102
628  - -        Repealed
629  - -        Repealed
630  - -        Salary
631  - -        Repealed
632  - -        Repealed
634  - -        Repealed
635  - -        Repealed
636  - -        Franchise
637  - -        Repealed
638  - -        Repealed
639  - -        Repealed
640  - -        Repealed
641  - -1949    11.0401,
                11.0402
642  - -        Repealed
643  - -        Franchise
644  - -        Repealed
645  - -        Repealed
646  - -        Repealed
647  - -        Repealed
648  - -        Repealed
                41.1401—41.1413  (Repealed by Ord. 4272),
649  - -1950    42.0101—
                42.0112
650  - -        Repealed
651  - -        Repealed
652  - -        Repealed
653  - -        Repealed
654  - -        Repealed
655  - -        Repealed
656  - -        Repealed
657  - -        Repealed
658  - -        Repealed
659  - -        Repealed
660  - -        Repealed
661  - -1950    41.0301—
                41.0316
662  - -        Repealed
663  - -        Repealed
664  - -        Repealed
665  - -        Salary
666  - -        Repealed
667  - -        Repealed
668  - -        Repealed
669  - -        Repealed
670  - -        Repealed
671  - -        Repealed
672  - -        Repealed
673  - -        Repealed
674  - -        Repealed
675  - -        Repealed
676  - -        Repealed
677  - -        Orchard heaters
678  - -1951    41.0301—
                41.0316
679  - -        Repealed
680  - -        Repealed
681  - -        Repealed
682  - -        Repealed
683  - -1951    41.0401—
                41.0416
684  - -        Repealed
685  - -        District Map
686  - -        Repealed
687  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3726
688  - -        District Map
689  - -1952    Repealed by Ord. 4284
690  - -        Repealed
691  - -        Franchise
692  - -        District Map
693  - -        Salary
694  - -        Franchise
695  - -        Bond Issue
696  - -        Repealed
697  - -        District Map
698  - -        Salary
699  - -1952    22.0101
700  - -        Repealed
701  - -1953    12.0401—
                12.0408
702  - -1953    52.0101—
                52.0130
703  - -        District Map
704  - -        Franchise
705  - -        Repealed
706  - -        Repealed
707  - -        Franchise
708  - -        Repealed
709  - -        Repealed
710  - -        District Map
711  - -        Repealed
712  - -        Salary
713  - -        Franchise
714  - -        Franchise
715  - -        Franchise
716  - -        District Map
717  - -        Franchise
718  - -        Repealed
719  - -        Repealed
720  - -1953    12.0405
721  - -        District Map
722  - -        Repealed
723  - -        Repealed
724  - -        District Map
725  - -        Repealed
726  - -1954    27.0201
727  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3896
728  - -        Repealed
729  - -        Repealed
730  - -        Repealed
731  - -        Repealed
732  - -1954    41.0301—
                41.0316
733  - -        Repealed
734  - -        Repealed
735  - -1954    12.0502
736  - -        Repealed
737  - -1954    Salary,
                12.0303
738  - -        Salary
739  - -        District Map
740  - -        Franchise
741  - -        Repealed
742  - -        Repealed
743  - -        Salary
744  - -        Repealed
745  - -        Repealed
746  - -        District Map
747  - -        Repealed
748  - -1950    Repealed by Ord. 4272
749  - -        Repealed
750  - -        District Map
751  - -        Repealed
752  - -        Repealed
753  - -        Repealed
754  - -        Repealed
755  - -        Repealed
756  - -        Repealed
757  - -        District Map
758  - -        Repealed
759  - -        District Map
760  - -        Franchise
761  - -        Repealed
762  - -        Deleted
763  - -        Repealed
764  - -        Salary
765  - -        District Map
766  - -        Repealed
767  - -        Repealed
768  - -        District Map
769  - -        Salary
770  - -        District Map
771  - -        Repealed
772  - -        Repealed
773  - -        District Map
774  - -        Repealed
775  - -        District Map
776  - -        District Map
                26.0201,
777  - -1955    26.0202,
                26.0203,
                26.0204
778  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
779  - -        Franchise
780  - -        District Map
781  - -        Franchise
782  - -        Repealed
783  - -        District Map
784  - -        Repealed
785  - -        Charter Amendment
786  - -        District Map
787  - -        Franchise
788  - -        District Map
789  - -        Franchise
790  - -        Repealed
791  - -        Salary
792  - -1952    Repealed,
                22.0101
793  - -        Repealed
794  - -        Franchise
795  - -        District Map
796  - -        District Map
797  - -        Franchise
798  - -        Bond Issue
799  - -        District Map
800  - -        Repealed
801  - -        District Map
802  - -        Franchise
803  - -        Deleted by Ord. 2425
804  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3560
805  - -        Repealed
806  - -        District Map
807  - -        Franchise
808  - -        District Map
809  - -        District Map
                33.0101,
                33.0102,
                33.0103,
                33.0104,
810  - -1956    33.0105,
                33.0106,
                33.0107,
                33.0108,
                33.0109
811  - -        Repealed
812  - -        Salary
813  - -        Salary
814  - -        District Map
                51.0101—
                51.0120,
                51.0201—
                51.0213,
                51.0301,
                51.0302,
815  - -1957    51.0303,
                51.0304,
                51.0306,
                51.0307,
                51.0308,
                51.0310,
                51.0501—
                51.0509
816  - -        Repealed
817  - -        District Map
818  - -        Repealed
819  - -1957    Repealed by Ord. 4090
820  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
821  - -        Deleted
822  - -        District Map
823  - -        Repealed
824  - -        Repealed
825  - -        Salary
826  - -        District Map
827  - -        Repealed
828  - -        District Map
829  - -        Repealed
830  - -        Repealed
831  - -        Franchise
832  - -        Repealed
833  - -        Salary
834  - -        Repealed
835  - -        District Map
836  - -1956    12.0302
837  - -        District Map
838  - -        Repealed
839  - -        Franchise
840  - -        Franchise
841  - -        Repealed
842  - -        Repealed
843  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3560
844  - -        Repealed
845  - -1957    Repealed by Ord. 4212
846  - -        Repealed
847  - -        District Map
848  - -        District Map
849  - -        District Map
                33.0101—
850  - -1958    33.0109,
                33.0200—
                33.0210
851  - -        District Map
852  - -        District Map
853  - -        Salary
854  - -        District Map
855  - -        Charter Amend
856  - -        District Map
857  - -        District Map
858  - -        Repealed
859  - -        Superseded by California Code
860  - -        District Map
861  - -        District Map
862  - -        Repealed
863  - -        District Map
864  - -        District Map
865  - -        Repealed
866  - -        Repealed
867  - -1958    Repealed by Ord. 4090
868  - -        District Map
869  - -        District Map
870  - -1958    23.0201
871  - -        Repealed
872  - -        Charter amend
873  - -        Repealed
874  - -        District Map
875  - -        Repealed
876  - -        Repealed
877  - -        Repealed
878  - -        District Map
879  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
880  - -        District Map
881  - -        District Map
882  - -        District Map
883  - -        Repealed
884  - -        Deleted
885  - -        Repealed
886  - -        District Map
887  - -        Franchise
888  - -        District Map
889  - -        Deleted
890  - -        District Map
891  - -        Salary
892  - -1959    41.0401—
                41.0416
893  - -1959    Repealed by Ord. 4291
894  - -        Franchise
895  - -        Franchise
896  - -        District Map
897  - -        District Map
898  - -        District Map
899  - -        District Map
900  - -        District Map
901  - -        Repealed
902  - -        District Map
903  - -        District Map
904  - -        Repealed
905  - -        District Map
906  - -        Repealed
907  - -        Repealed
908  - -        Repealed
909  - -        District Map
910  - -        District Map
911  - -1959    12.0503
912  - -        District Map
913  - -        District Map
914  - -1960    22.0106, 22.0107, 22.0108, 22.0110
915  - -        District Map
916  - -        District Map
917  - -        District Map
918  - -        District Map
919  - -        District Map
920  - -1960    22.0107
921  - -        District Map
                51.0101—
922  - -1960    51.0120,
                51.0202—
                51.0213
923  - -        Repealed
924  - -        Repealed
925  - -        District Map
926  - -        Salary
927  - -1960    42.0301—
                42.0312
928  - -        Repealed
929  - -        District Map
930  - -        Repealed
931  - -        District Map
932  - -        District Map
933  - -        Deleted
934  - -1960    14.0101—
                14.0115
935  - -        Franchise
936  - -        District Map
937  - -        Repealed
938  - -        Repealed
939  - -1960    53.0601—
                53.0606
940  - -        District Map
941  - -        District Map
942  - -        Repealed
943  - -        Deleted
944  - -        Repealed
945  - -        District Map
946  - -        District Map
947  - -        District Map
948  - -        Subdivision
949  - -        District Map
950  - -        Franchise
951  - -        Deleted
952  - -        District Map
953  - -        Salary
954  - -        Repealed
955  - -        Salary
956  - -        District Map
957  - -        District Map
958  - -        District Map
959  - -        Deleted
960  - -        District Map
961  - -        Deleted
                32.0101—
962  - -1961    32.0111,
                32.0113—
                32.0118
963  - -        Deleted
964  - -1961    14.0115
965  - -        District Map
966  - -        Franchise
967  - -        Repealed
968  - -        Repealed
969  - -1961    41.0101—
                41.0104
970  - -1961    32.0501
971  - -        District Map
972  - -        Repealed
973  - -        District Map
974  - -1961    12.0101
975  - -1961    11.0101—
                11.0113
976  - -        District Map
977  - -        Repealed
978  - -1962    41.0301—
                41.0316
979  - -        District Map
980  - -        Repealed
981  - -        District Map
982  - -        Repealed
983  - -        Repealed
984  - -        Salary
985  - -        Franchise
                12.0807,
986  - -1962    12.0901,
                12.0902,
                12.0903
987  - -        Deleted
988  - -        District Map
989  - -        District Map
990  - -        Franchise
991  - -        District Map
992  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3325
993  - -        District Map
994  - -        District Map
995  - -        District Map
996  - -        Repealed by Ord. 3484
997  - -        District Map
998  - -        District Map
999  - -        Repealed
1000 - -        Salary
1001 - -        District Map
1002 - -        Deleted
1003 - -        District Map
1004 - -        Deleted
1005 - -        District Map
1006 - -        District Map
                41.0101—41.0104, 41.0401—41.0416, 41.0501—41.0512, 41.0601, 41.0602, 41.0701,
                41.0801—41.0810 (Repealed by Ord. 4272) , 41.1401—41.1413 (Repealed by Ord. 4272) ,
1007 - -1962    43.0101,
                43.0102,
                43.0103
1008 - -        District Map
1009 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3484
1010 - -        District Map
1011 - -        Franchise
1012 - -        District Map
1013 - -        Incorporating
1014 - -        District Map
1015 - -1962    22.0101,
                22.0102
1016 - -        District Map
1017 - -        District Map
1018 - -        Repealed
1019 - -        District Map
1020 - -        Repealed
1021 - -1962    12.0405
1022 - -        District Map
1023 - -        District Map
1024 - -        Repealed
1025 - -        District Map
1026 - -        District Map
1027 - -1962    53.0601—
                53.0606
1028 - -        District Map
1029 - -        Franchise
1030 - -        District Map
1031 - -        Franchise
1032 - -        District Map
1033 - -        District Map
1034 - -        District Map
1035 - -        Deleted
1036 - -        Repealed
1037 - -        Repealed
1038 - -        Referendum validation
1039 - -        Repealed
1040 - -        Repealed
1041 - -        District Map
1042 - -        District Map
1043 - -        District Map
1044 - -        Franchise
1045 - -        District Map
1046 - -        District Map
1047 - -        District Map
1048 - -        Repealed
1049 - -        Repealed
1050 - -        Repealed
1051 - -        Repealed
1052 - -        Repealed
1053 - -        District Map
1054 - -        District Map
1055 - -        District Map
1056 - -        District Map
1057 - -        Deleted
1058 - -        District Map
1059 - -        Franchise
1060 - -        District Map
1061 - -        Repealed
1062 - -        Repealed
1063 - -        District Map
1064 - -        District Map
1065 - -        District Map
1066 - -        Franchise
1067 - -        District Map
1068 - -        District Map
1069 - -        District Map
1070 - -        Repealed
1071 - -        District Map
1072 - -        Repealed
1073 - -1963    12.0501
1074 - -        Deleted
1075 - -        District Map
1076 - -        Franchise
1077 - -        District Map
1078 - -        District Map
1079 - -        Repealed
1080 - -        District Map
1081 - -        District Map
1082 - -        Salary
1083 - -        District Map
1084 - -1963    53.0501
1085 - -        District Map
1086 - -        District Map
1087 - -        District Map
1088 - -        Repealed
1089 - -        Repealed
1090 - -        Repealed
1091 - -        District Map
1092 - -        District Map
1093 - -1963    32.0301—
                32.0307
1094 - -        Franchise
1095 - -        District Map
1096 - -        District Map
1097 - -1963    Repealed by Ord. 4272
1098 - -        Franchise
1099 - -        District Map
1100 - -        District Map
1101 - -1963    Repealed by Ord. 4291
1102 - -        District Map
1103 - -        District Map
1104 - -        District Map
1105 - -        Repealed
1106 - -        District Map
1107 - -        District Map
1108 - -        District Map
1109 - -        Repealed
1110 - -        District Map
1111 - -        District Map
1112 - -1963    41.0601,
                41.0602
1113 - -        District Map
1114 - -        District Map
1115 - -1963    11.0301—
                11.0306
1116 - -        District Map
1117 - -1963    Repealed by Ord. 4272
1118 - -        Salary
1119 - -1963    52.0101—
                52.0130
1120 - -1963    12.0504
1121 - -        District Map
1122 - -        Repealed
1123 - -        District Map
1124 - -        Deleted
1125 - -1963    42.0401—
                42.0405
1126 - -        District Map
1127 - -        District Map
1128 - -        Repealed
1129 - -        District Map
1130 - -        Deleted
1131 - -        Deleted
1132 - -        District Map
1133 - -        District Map
1134 - -        District Map
1135 - -        Deleted
1136 - -        District Map
1137 - -1964    41.0401—
                41.0416
1138 - -        Deleted
1139 - -1964    32.0701,
                32.0702
1140 - -        District Map
1141 - -        Repealed
1142 - -        District Map
1143 - -        District Map
1144 - -        Franchise
1145 - -        Franchise
1146 - -        District Map
1147 - -        Franchise
1148 - -        Franchise
1149 - -        District Map
1150 - -        District Map
1151 - -        Deleted
1152 - -        District Map
1153 - -        District Map
1154 - -        District Map
1155 - -        Franchise
1156 - -        Franchise
1157 - -        District Map
1158 - -        District Map
1159 - -        District Map
1160 - -        Deleted
1161 - -        District Map
1162 - -        District Map
1163 - -        District Map
1164 - -        Salary
1165 - -        District Map
1166 - -        District Map
1167 - -        Repealed
1168 - -        Deleted
1169 - -        District Map
1170 - -        District Map
1171 - -        District Map
1172 - -        Deleted
1173 - -        Deleted
1174 - -        Repealed
1175 - -        District Map
1176 - -1964    41.0401—
                41.0416
1177 - -        District Map
1178 - -        District Map
1179 - -        District Map
1180 - -        Repealed
1181 - -        District Map
1182 - -        District Map
1183 - -        Salary (Working hours hospital)
1184 - -        District Map
1185 - -        District Map
1186 - -        District Map
1187 - -        District Map
1188 - -        District Map
1189 - -        Franchise
1190 - -        District Map
1191 - -        District Map
1192 - -        District Map
1193 - -        District Map
1194 - -        District Map
1195 - -        District Map
1196 - -        Repealed
1197 - -        District Map
1198 - -        District Map
1199 - -        District Map
1200 - -1964    11.0403
1201 - -        District Map
1202 - -        District Map
1203 - -        District Map
1204 - -        District Map
1205 - -        Deleted
1206 - -        District Map
1207 - -        District Map
1208 - -        District Map
1209 - -        Repealed
1210 - -        District Map
1211 - -        Franchise
1212 - -        Repealed
1213 - -        District Map
1214 - -        Franchise
1215 - -        District Map
1216 - -        District Map
1217 - -        District Map
1218 - -        Deleted
1219 - -        District Map
1220 - -        District Map
1221 - -        Franchise
1222 - -        District Map
1223 - -        District Map
1224 - -1965    12.0102
1225 - -        District Map
1226 - -        Repealed
1227 - -        District Map
1228 - -        Deleted
1229 - -        District Map
1230 - -        District Map
1231 - -        District Map
1232 - -        Deleted
1233 - -1965    52.0201—
                52.0209
1234 - -1965    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1235 - -        District Map
1236 - -        District Map
1237 - -        District Map
1238 - -        District Map
1239 - -        District Map
1240 - -        Repealed
1241 - -        District Map
1242 - -        Salary
1243 - -        District Map
1244 - -        Deleted
1245 - -        District Map
1246 - -        District Map
1247 - -1965    22.0101
1248 - -        District Map
1249 - -        District Map
1250 - -        Repealed
1251 - -        District Map
1252 - -        Franchise
1253 - -        District Map
1254 - -        District Map
1255 - -1965    12.0506
1256 - -        District Map
1257 - -        District Map
1258 - -        Land Use Map
1259 - -        District Map
1260 - -        District Map
1261 - -        District Map
1262 - -        District Map
1263 - -        District Map
1264 - -        District Map
1265 - -        Repealed
1266 - -        District Map
1267 - -        District Map
1268 - -        Repealed
1269 - -        District Map
1270 - -        District Map
1271 - -        District Map
1272 - -        District Map
1273 - -        District Map
1274 - -        District Map
1275 - -        District Map
1276 - -        District Map
1277 - -        Deleted
1278 - -        District Map
1279 - -        Salary
1280 - -        District Map
1281 - -1966    42.0501—
                42.0556
1282 - -        District Map
                12.1301,
1283 - -1966    12.1302,
                12.1303
1284 - -        District Map
1285 - -        District Map
1286 - -        District Map
1287 - -1966    51.0401—
                51.0418
1288 - -        District Map
1289 - -        Deleted
1290 - -        District Map
1291 - -        District Map
1292 - -        District Map
1293 - -        Repealed
1294 - -        Land Use Map
1295 - -        District Map
1296 - -1966    12.1401
1297 - -        Not Adopted
1298 - -        District Map
1299 - -        Repealed
1300 - -        District Map
1301 - -        District Map
1302 - -        District Map
1303 - -        District Map
1304 - -        District Map
1305 - -1966    52.0208
1306 - -        District Map
1307 - -        District Map
1308 - -        District Map
1309 - -        Charter, Article V
1310 - -        District Map
1311 - -        District Map
1312 - -        District Map
1313 - -        Repealed by Ord. 1970
1314 - -        District Map
1315 - -        District Map
1316 - -        District Map
1317 - -        District Map
1318 - -        Repealed by Ord. 1970
1319 - -        Deleted
1320 - -        District Map
1321 - -        Repealed
1322 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1323 - -        Not Adopted
1324 - -        District Map
1325 - -        District Map
1326 - -        District Map
1327 - -1966    51.0213,
                51.0305
1328 - -        District Map
1329 - -1966    Repealed by Ord. 4284
1330 - -        District Map
1331 - -        District Map
1332 - -        District Map
1333 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1334 - -        District Map
1335 - -1967    33.0200—
                33.0210
1336 - -        District Map
1337 - -        Repealed
1338 - -        Repealed
1339 - -        District Map
1340 - -        District Map
1341 - -        District Map
1342 - -        District Map
1343 - -1967    Repealed by Ord. 4284
1344 - -        Repealed
1345 - -        District Map
1346 - -        Repealed
1347 - -1967    11.0101—
                11.0113
1348 - -        Repealed
1349 - -        Deleted
1350 - -1967    12.1401
1351 - -1967    12.1601—
                12.1607
1352 - -        Deleted
1353 - -1967    31.0204
1354 - -        District Map
1355 - -1967    Repealed by Ord. 4284
1356 - -        Deleted
1357 - -        District Map
1358 - -        Consolidation of judicial districts
1359 - -        District Map
1360 - -        District Map
1361 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1362 - -        District Map
1363 - -        District Map
1364 - -        Franchise
1365 - -        District Map
1366 - -        District Map
1367 - -        Repealed
1368 - -        Repealed
1369 - -        District Map
1370 - -        District Map
1371 - -        District Map
1372 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1373 - -        Repealed
1374 - -        District Map
1375 - -        District Map
1376 - -        Repealed
1377 - -        District Map
1378 - -        District Map
1379 - -        Deleted
1380 - -        District Map
1381 - -        Airport approach map district
1382 - -        District Map
1383 - -        District Map
1384 - -        Repealed
1385 - -        District Map
1386 - -        District Map
1387 - -        District Map
1388 - -        District Map
1389 - -        District Map
1390 - -        Deleted
1391 - -        District Map
1392 - -        District Map
1393 - -        District Map
                14.0301—
1394 - -1967    14.0312,
                14.0314—
                14.0317
1395 - -        District Map
1396 - -        District Map
1397 - -        District Map
1398 - -        District Map
1399 - -        District Map
1400 - -        District Map
1401 - -        District Map
1402 - -        District Map
1403 - -1968    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1404 - -        Repealed
1405 - -        Repealed
1406 - -        District Map
1407 - -        Repealed
1408 - -1968    Repealed by Ord. 4272
1409 - -        District Map
1410 - -        District Map
1411 - -        District Map
1412 - -        District Map
1413 - -        Deleted
1414 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1415 - -        Deleted
1416 - -        Repealed
1417 - -        District Map
1418 - -        District Map
1419 - -        District Map
1420 - -1968    52.0103
1421 - -        District Map
1422 - -        District Map
1423 - -        District Map
1424 - -        District Map
1425 - -1968    12.1401
1426 - -        District Map
                52.0204,
1427 - -1968    52.0205,
                52.0206
1428 - -        District Map
1429 - -1968    67.0101—
                67.0107
                14.0205,
1430 - -1968    14.0310—
                14.0313
1431 - -        Deleted
1432 - -        District Map
1433 - -        Repealed
1434 - -        District Map
1435 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1436 - -        District Map
1437 - -        Deleted
1438 - -        District Map
1439 - -        Deleted
1440 - -        District Map
1441 - -1968    28.0301—
                28.0305
1442 - -        Deleted
1443 - -1968    22.0101
1444 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1445 - -        District Map
1446 - -        Park Hours
1447 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1448 - -        District Map
1449 - -        District Map
1450 - -        District Map
1451 - -1968    22.0103
1452 - -        District Map
1453 - -        District Map
1454 - -        Park hours
                32.0101,
1455 - -1968    32.0102,
                32.0301—
                32.0305
1456 - -        District Map
1457 - -        District Map
1458 - -        District Map
1459 - -        Repealed
                12.0608,
1460 - -1968    12.0701,
                12.0702
1461 - -        District Map
1462 - -        District Map
1463 - -        District Map
1464 - -        District Map
1465 - -        District Map
1466 - -1968    32.0901—
                32.0916
1467 - -        District Map
1468 - -        District Map
1469 - -        District Map
1470 - -        Deleted
1471 - -        Deleted
1472 - -1968    27.0501—
                27.0507
1473 - -        District Map
1474 - -        District Map
1475 - -        District Map
1476 - -        Deleted
1477 - -        District Map
1478 - -        District Map
1479 - -        District Map
1480 - -        District Map
1481 - -        District Map
1482 - -1969    12.1401
1483 - -        District Map
1484 - -        District Map
1485 - -        District Map
1486 - -        District Map
1487 - -        Repealed
1488 - -1969    12.1700
1489 - -        District Map
1490 - -        District Map
1491 - -        District Map
1492 - -        District Map
1493 - -        District Map
1494 - -        Repealed
1495 - -        District Map
1496 - -        District Map
1497 - -1969    37.0101—
                37.0113
1498 - -        District Map
1499 - -1969    32.1001—
                32.1009
1500 - -        District Map
1501 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1502 - -        Treasurer-Tax and License Collector
1503 - -        No copy
1504 - -        District Map
1505 - -        District Map
1506 - -        District Map
1507 - -1969    67.0201—
                67.0216
1508 - -        District Map
1509 - -        District Map
1510 - -        District Map
1511 - -        Special Districts
                32.0110,
1512 - -1969    32.0204,
                32.0205
1513 - -        Repealed
1514 - -        District Map
1515 - -        District Map
1516 - -        Repealed
1517 - -        District Map
1518 - -        Airport dist. maps
1519 - -        Repealed
1520 - -        District Map
1521 - -        District Map
                41.0301—
                41.0316,
                41.0401—
1522 - -1969    41.0416,
                42.0101—
                42.0112,
                42.0301—
                42.0312
1523 - -        District Map
1524 - -        Repealed
1525 - -        District Map
1526 - -        District Map
1527 - -1969    33.0200—
                33.0210
1528 - -        District Map
1529 - -        District Map
1530 - -        District Map
1531 - -        Repealed
1532 - -        Deleted
1533 - -        District Map
1534 - -        District Map
1535 - -        District Map
1536 - -        District Map
1537 - -        District Map
1538 - -1970    12.1800
1539 - -        District Map
1540 - -        District Map
1541 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1542 - -        District Map
1543 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3654
1544 - -        Judicial district boundaries
1545 - -        District Map
1546 - -1970    12.1401
1547 - -        Interim grading
1548 - -        District Map
                23.0101—
1549 - -1970    23.0104,
                23.0108—
                23.0111
1550 - -        District Map
1551 - -        District Map
1552 - -        District Map
1553 - -        District Map
1554 - -        District Map
1555 - -        Interim zoning
1556 - -1970    27.0601—
                27.0603
1557 - -        Repealed
1558 - -        District Map
1559 - -        Deleted
1560 - -        District Map
1561 - -        District Map
1562 - -        District Map
1563 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3654
1564 - -        District Map
1565 - -        Interim land use
1566 - -        Omitted
1567 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1568 - -        Deleted by Ord. 2540
1569 - -        District Map
1570 - -        District Map
1571 - -        Deleted
                12.0605,
1572 - -1970    12.0606,
                12.0607
1573 - -        District Map
1574 - -        Omitted
1575 - -        District Map
1576 - -        District Map
1577 - -        District Map
1578 - -        Repealed
1579 - -        District Map
1580 - -        District Map
1581 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1582 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1583 - -        Charter amendment
1584 - -        District Map
1585 - -        Repealed
1586 - -        Repealed
1587 - -        Interim zoning
1588 - -        District Map
1589 - -        Airport approach zoning maps
1590 - -1970    28.0407
1591 - -        District Map
1592 - -        District Map
1593 - -        District Map
1594 - -        Not passed
1595 - -        Interim zoning
1596 - -        District Map
1597 - -        Deleted
1598 - -        Repealed
1599 - -        Deleted
1600 - -1970    53.0601—
                53.0606
                12.1901—
1601 - -1970    12.1908,
                12.2001—
                12.2006
1602 - -        Repealed
                32.0101,
1603 - -1970    32.0102,
                32.0107
                45.0101,
                45.0201—
                45.0205,
1604 - -1970    45.0301—
                45.0309,
                45.0401,
                45.0402
1605 - -        District Map
1606 - -        District Map
1607 - -1970    27.0502,
                27.0507
1608 - -        District Map
1609 - -        District Map
1610 - -1970    28.0301—
                28.0305
1611 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1612 - -        District Map
1613 - -        District Map
1614 - -        District Map
                12.1700,
1615 - -1970    12.1800,
                12.1801
1616 - -        Deleted
1617 - -1971    12.2201—
                12.2205
1618 - -        Interim zoning
1619 - -        District Map
1620 - -        District Map
1621 - -        Repealed
1622 - -        Repealed
1623 - -        District Map
1624 - -        District Map
1625 - -        District Map
1626 - -        District Map
1627 - -        District Map
1628 - -        District Map
1629 - -        Deleted
1630 - -        District Map
1631 - -        District Map
1632 - -1971    12.1401
1633 - -1971    33.0200—
                33.0210
1634 - -        District Map
1635 - -        District Map
1636 - -        District Map
                12.2301,
1637 - -1971    12.2302,
                12.2303
1638 - -1971    Repealed by Ord. 4272
1639 - -        District Map
1640 - -        District Map
1641 - -        District Map
1642 - -        Franchise
1643 - -        Interim zoning
1644 - -1971    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1645 - -        Deleted
1646 - -        District Map
1647 - -1969    67.0201—
                67.0216
1647 - -1971    67.0101—
                67.0107
1648 - -        District Map
1649 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1650 - -        District Map
1651 - -        District Map
1652 - -        District Map
1653 - -        Interim zoning
1654 - -        District Map
                32.0904,
1655 - -1971    32.0905,
                32.0913
1656 - -        District Map
1657 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1658 - -        District Map
1659 - -1971    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1659 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1660 - -        District Map
1661 - -        District Map
1662 - -        District Map
1663 - -        District Map
1664 - -        Deleted
1665 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1666 - -        District Map
1667 - -        District Map
1668 - -        District Map
1669 - -        District Map
1670 - -        District Map
1671 - -        District Map
1672 - -        District Map
1673 - -        District Map
1674 - -        Repealed
1675 - -1971    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1676 - -1971    12.0102
1677 - -        District Map
1678 - -        Repealed
1679 - -        District Map
1680 - -        Deleted
1681 - -        District Map
1682 - -        District Map
1683 - -        District Map
                41.1601,
1684 - -1971    41.1602,
                41.1603
1685 - -        District Map
1686 - -1971    Repealed by Ord. 4212
1687 - -        Repealed
1688 - -        District Map
1689 - -        District Map
1690 - -        District Map
1691 - -        District Map
1692 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1693 - -        District Map
1694 - -1972    12.0507
1695 - -        Deleted
1696 - -        District Map
1697 - -        District Map
1698 - -        District Map
1699 - -        District Map
1700 - -        District Map
1701 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4212
1702 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4314
1703 - -        District Map
1704 - -1972    12.0502
1705 - -        District Map
1706 - -        District Map
1707 - -        Deleted
1708 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1709 - -1972    12.2700—
                12.2730
1710 - -        Repealed
1711 - -1972    12.1401
1712 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1713 - -        District Map
1714 - -        Deleted
1715 - -        Deleted
1716 - -        District Map
1717 - -        District Map
1718 - -        Deleted
1719 - -        Repealed
1720 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
1721 - -        Deleted
1722 - -        District Map
1723 - -1972    12.0509
                52.0201—
                52.0209,
1724 - -1972    52.0301—
                52.0309,
                52.0401,
                52.0404
1725 - -        District Map
1726 - -        Map “T” Standards
1727 - -        District Map
1728 - -        District Map
1729 - -        District Map
1730 - -        Repealed
1731 - -        District Map
1732 - -        District Map
1733 - -        Deleted
1734 - -        District Map
1735 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1736 - -        District Map
1737 - -        Repealed
1738 - -        Repealed
1739 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1740 - -        Repealed
1741 - -1972    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1742 - -        Repealed
1743 - -        Repealed
1744 - -1972    12.1700,
                12.1801
1745 - -        District Map
1746 - -        District Map
1747 - -        District Map
1748 - -        District Map
1749 - -        Repealed
1750 - -        District Map
1751 - -        Repealed
1752 - -        District Map
1753 - -1972    31.0102—
                32.0107
1754 - -        District Map
1755 - -        Deleted
1756 - -        District Map
1757 - -        District Map
1758 - -        District Map
1759 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1760 - -        District Map
1761 - -        District Map
1762 - -        District Map
1763 - -        Deleted
                32.0101—
                32.0111,
1764 - -1972    32.0113—
                32.0118,
                32.0201—
                32.0223
1765 - -        District Map
1766 - -        District Map
1767 - -1972    32.0106,
                32.0108
1768 - -        District Map
1769 - -        Repealed
1770 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1771 - -        District Map
1772 - -1972    53.0701—
                53.0704
1773 - -        Repealed
1774 - -        Repealed
1775 - -        District Map
1776 - -        District Map
1777 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1778 - -        District Map
1779 - -1972    32.0106,
                32.0108
1780 - -        District Map
1781 - -        Repealed
1782 - -        Deleted
1783 - -        District Map
1784 - -        District Map
1785 - -        District Map
1786 - -        Deleted
1787 - -        Deleted
1788 - -        District Map
1789 - -        District Map
1790 - -1973    33.0200—
                33.0210
1791 - -        District Map
1792 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1793 - -        District Map
1794 - -        District Map
1795 - -1973    32.0211
1796 - -        District Map
1797 - -        Deleted
1798 - -        District Map
1799 - -        District Map
1800 - -        District Map
1801 - -        District Map
1802 - -        District Map
1803 - -        District Map
1804 - -        Deleted by Ord. 2425
                12.0608,
1805 - -1973    12.0702,
                31.0101
1806 - -        District Map
1807 - -        District Map
1808 - -        District Map
1809 - -        District Map
1810 - -        District Map
1811 - -        District Map
1812 - -1973    12.2303
1813 - -1973    12.0102
1814 - -        District Map
1815 - -        District Map
1816 - -1973    12.1201—
                12.1205
1817 - -1973    12.1401
1818 - -        Repealed
1819 - -        District Map
1820 - -        District Map
1821 - -1973    32.0106,
                32.0108
1822 - -        Repealed
1823 - -1973    41.0501—
                41.0512
1824 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
1825 - -        District Map
1826 - -        Repealed
1827 - -1973    12.3301—
                12.3309
1828 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3654
1829 - -        District Map
1830 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1831 - -        District Map
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
1832 - -1973    33.0200—
                33.0210
1833 - -        District Map
1834 - -        District Map
1835 - -        Map
1836 - -        Deleted
1837 - -        Map
1838 - -        Repealed
1839 - -        Map
1840 - -        Map
1841 - -        Map
1842 - -        Repealed
1843 - -1973    31.0101,
                31.0102
1844 - -        Map
1845 - -        Map
1846 - -        Repealed
1847 - -        Repealed
1848 - -        Repealed
1849 - -        Repealed
1850 - -        Map
1851 - -        Map
1852 - -        Map
1853 - -        Map
1854 - -1973    14.0201
1855 - -        Map
1856 - -        Map
1857 - -        District Fees
1858 - -        Map
1859 - -        Map
1860 - -        Deleted
1861 - -        Map
1862 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
1863 - -        Map
1864 - -        Map
1865 - -        Map
1866 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1867 - -        Bonds
1868 - -1973    32.1201—
                32.1207
1869 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1870 - -        Repealed
1871 - -1973    12.3506
1872 - -        Map
1873 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1874 - -1973    12.1601—
                12.1607
1875 - -1973    14.0115
1876 - -        Map
1877 - -        Repealed
1878 - -        Deleted
1879 - -1973    Repealed by Ord. 4212
1880 - -        Map
1881 - -        Interim Land Use Zone
1882 - -1974    12.0508
1883 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1884 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1885 - -1974    Repealed by Ord. 4153
1886 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1887 - -        Deleted
1888 - -        Repealed
1889 - -        Map
1890 - -        Repealed
1891 - -        Map
1892 - -        Map
1893 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
                53.0701,
1894 - -1974    53.0702,
                53.0703
1895 - -        Map
1896 - -        Charter
1897 - -        Repealed
1898 - -1974    Repealed by Ord. 4272
1899 - -        Repealed
1900 - -        Map
1901 - -        Charter
1902 - -        Charter
1903 - -        Deleted
1904 - -        Charter
1905 - -        Map
1906 - -        Deleted
1907 - -        Map
1908 - -        Map
1909 - -        Charter
1910 - -        Map
                53.0701,
1911 - -1974    53.0702,
                53.0704
1912 - -1974    12.1401
1913 - -        Map
1914 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1915 - -        Map
1916 - -        Map
1917 - -        Map
1918 - -1974    13.0501
1919 - -1974    17.0101—
                17.0107
                18.0101—
1920 - -1974    18.0104,
                11.0601
1921 - -        Map
1922 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                14.0401—14.0405,
1923 - -1974    14.0407—
                14.0409
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
1924 - -1974    33.0200—
                33.0210
1925 - -        Map
1926 - -        Map
1927 - -        Interim Land Use Zone
1928 - -1974    Repealed by Ord. 4130
1929 - -        Map
1930 - -        Repealed
1931 - -        Map
1932 - -        Repealed
1933 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3707
1934 - -        Repealed
1935 - -        Deleted
1936 - -        Deleted
                51.0112,
1937 - -1974    51.0301,
                51.0310
1938 - -        Map
1939 - -        Charter
                14.0501—
1940 - -1974    14.0503,
                14.0505,
                14.0506
1941 - -        Repealed
1942 - -        Map
1943 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1944 - -        Map
1945 - -        Map
1946 - -        Map
1947 - -        Deleted
1948 - -        Map
1949 - -1974    12.0608,
                12.0701
1950 - -1974    12.1101
1951 - -        Map
1952 - -        Repealed
1953 - -        Repealed
1954 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3105
1955 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3596
1956 - -        Map
1957 - -        Map
1958 - -        Map
1959 - -        Map
1960 - -        Map
1961 - -        Charter
1962 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1963 - -        Deleted
1964 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1965 - -        Deleted
1966 - -        Map
1967 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1968 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1969 - -        Deleted
1970 - -        Repeals Ords. 1313 and 1318
1971 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1972 - -        Map
1973 - -        Map
1974 - -        Map
1975 - -        Map (Chino Hills)
1976 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1977 - -        Map
1978 - -1975    12.1402
1979 - -1975    37.0102
1980 - -        Special Census
1981 - -        Map
1982 - -        Map
1983 - -        Map
1984 - -        Deleted
1985 - -        Deleted
1986 - -        Map
1987 - -        Position in Unclassified Service
1988 - -        Deleted
1989 - -1975    Repealed by Ord. 4212
1990 - -        Vehicle Parking Dist.
1991 - -        Map
1992 - -        Map
1993 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
1994 - -1975    14.0203
1995 - -        Repealed
1996 - -        Map
1997 - -        Map
1998 - -        Repealed
1999 - -        Map
2000 - -1975    32.0211
2001 - -1975    Repealed by Ord. 4314
2002 - -        Map
2003 - -        Map
2004 - -1975    12.1401
2005 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2006 - -        Map
2007 - -        Prohibit Construction Wrightwood
2008 - -        Map
2009 - -        Deleted
2011 - -1975    Repealed by Ord. 4459
2013 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2018 - -1975    31.0204
2019 - -1975    12.1401
2024 - -1975    53.0301—
                53.0307
2029 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2030 - -1976    14.0201
2034 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2037 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2039 - -1975    41.0401—
                41.0416
2042 - -1975    13.0501,
                13.0502
                12.0402,
2043 - -1975    12.0403,
                12.0405,
                12.0406
2044 - -        Map
2045 - -        Map
2046 - -        Map
2047 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2048 - -        Map
2049 - -        Map
2050 - -1976    Repealed by Ord. 4291
2051 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
2052 - -        Map
2053 - -1976    42.0501—
                42.0556
2054 - -        Map
2055 - -        Map
2056 - -        Map
2057 - -        Map
2058 - -1976    27.0505—
                27.0507
2059 - -        Map
2060 - -        Map
2061 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2062 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2063 - -        Map
2064 - -        Map
2065 - -        Map
2066 - -1976    12.0509
2067 - -        Map
2068 - -1976    22.0103
2075 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2076 - -1976    28.0501—
                28.0504
2077 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2081 - -1976    12.1401
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
2084 - -1976    31.0801—
                31.0827
                31.1106,
2100 - -1976    32.0106,
                32.0109
2104 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2105 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2106 - -        Repealed
2107 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2108 - -1976    63.0701—
                63.0706
2109 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
                41.1703,
2110 - -1976    41.1705,
                41.1710,
                41.1713
2111 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2112 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2113 - -        Repealed
2114 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2115 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2116 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
                14.0409,
2117 - -1976    14.0501—
                14.0507
2118 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3600
2119 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2120 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2121 - -        Deleted
2122 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2123 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2124 - -        Repealed
2125 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2126 - -        Deleted
2127 - -        Land Use Dist. Map
2128 - -        Deleted
2129 - -        Deleted
                71.0101—
                71.0105,
                71.0201—
                71.0210,
                71.0301—
2132 - -1977    71.0307,
                71.0401—
                71.0416,
                71.0501—
                71.0510,
                71.0601—
                71.0603
2139 - -1977    14.0318
2144 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2150 - -1977    12.0607,
                12.0608
2155 - 1977     14.0203
2159 - -1977    63.0801—
                63.0810
2167 - -1987    12.1607
2169 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2170 - -1977    14.0110
2171 - -1977    12.1401
2187 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                41.1703,
2193 - -1977    41.1705,
                41.1710,
                41.1713
2194 - -1973    12.2303
                23.0101—
2196 - -1980    23.0104,
                23.0108—
                23.0111
2198 - -1977    22.0101,
                22.0111
2200 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2203 - -1977    52.0128,
                52.0129
2209 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2210 - -1977    12.0304
2211 - -1977    12.0101
2213 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2223 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2226 - -1978    53.0601—
                53.0606
                42.0601—
                42.0606,
2228 - -1978    71.0101—
                71.0105,
                71.0603
2232 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2236 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2237 - -1978    12.1403
2240 - -1978    12.0608
2246 - -1978    33.0200—
                33.0210
2274 - -1978    14.0115
2287 - -1978    14.0402,
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2291 - -1978    12.2201—
                12.2205
2314 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2323 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2325 - -1979    53.0308
2329 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2330 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2332 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2339 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                67.0101—
2346 - -1979    67.0107,
                67.0201—
                67.0216
2348 - -1979    32.0906,
                32.0913
2352 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2353 - -1979    12.1401
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
2354 - -1979    32.0204,
                32.0209
2355 - -1979    42.0503,
                42.0513
2357 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2358 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2363 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2365 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2366 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2369 - -1979    14.0204
                51.0107,
2377 - -1979    51.0117,
                51.0210
2379 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2384 - -1979    15.0103
2389 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2390 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2398 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2400 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2402 - -1979    14.0115
2405 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2413 - -1980    12.2302,
                12.2303
2415 - -1980    41.0501—
                41.0512
2420 - -1980    12.1601—
                12.1607
2421 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                12.0601—
                12.0606,
                12.1001,
                12.1301,
2425 - -1980    12.1303,
                14.0104,
                14.0705,
                15.0101,
                15.0102,
                51.0101
2433 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2434 - -1980    12.1401
2440 - -1980    12.1604
2441 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2445 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2454 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2473 - -1980    63.0801—
                63.0810
2475 - -1980    Repealed by Ord. 4130
2492 - -1980    27.0801—
                27.0805
                13.0101—
2498 - -1980    13.0109,
                13.0404
                22.0101,
2499 - -1980    22.0103,
                22.0104,
                22.0105
2508 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2511 - -1981    31.0807,
                31.0820
2512 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                33.0601—
2518 - -1981    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
2519 - -1981    12.2303
2525 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2527 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2528 - -1981    Repealed by Ord. 4130
2533 - -1981    12.0301—
                12.0304
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.0601—
2537 - -1981    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
2543 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2544 - -1981    11.0401
2547 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2548 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2556 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2557 - -1981    12.0101
2562 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2568 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                52.0201—
                52.0209,
2572 - -1981    52.0301—
                52.0309,
                54.0402
2573 - -1980    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2581 - -1981    12.0102
2580 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2586 - -1981    31.0204
2587 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2591 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2606 - -1981    31.0101
2607 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2613 - -1982    12.0101
2623 - -1982    53.0801
2626 - -1982    12.1604
2630 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2639 - -1982    31.0901
2640 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2641 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2644 - -1982    12.0502
2646 - -1982    31.0601—
                31.0605
2654 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2655 - -1982    22.0112
2656 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                14.0409,
                14.0501—
2658 - -1982    14.0503,
                14.0505—
                14.0507
2659 - -1982    12.1401
2661 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
2663 - -1982    33.0200—
                33.0210
2667 - -1982    42.0501—
                42.0556
2668 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.0601—
2670 - -1982    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
2674 - -1982    Repealed by Ord. 4130
2676 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2678 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2680 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2691 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2696 - -1982    13.0501,
                13.0502
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.0601—
2701 - -1982    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
2702 - -1982    12.3701
2703 - -1982    14.0203
2715 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2706 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2707 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2709 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2714 - -1982    12.0101
2715 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2717 - -1982    42.0556
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                41.1801—
2718 - -1982    41.1804,
                41.1806—
                41.1815
2727 - -1983    12.0607
2732 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                11.0301—
2734 - -1983    11.0306,
                12.3401—
                12.3405
2736 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2741 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2745 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2750 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2751 - -1983    12.1404
                42.0505,
                42.0518,
                42.0520,
2754 - -1983    42.0533,
                42.0534,
                42.0535,
                42.0543
2755 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2761 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2763 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2764 - -1983    12.1405
2767 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2769 - -1983    12.0510
2771 - -1983    31.0201
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
2775 - -1983    42.0516,
                42.0519
2777 - -1983    14.0203
2778 - -1983    52.0101—
                52.0130
2779 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2783 - -1983    12.3301—
                12.3309
2789 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2790 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2792 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2799 - -1983    17.0101—
                17.0106
2803 - -1983    13.0101
2805 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                12.1908,
                12.2002,
                12.2003,
2809 - -1983    12.2201,
                12.2401,
                12.2402,
                12.3506
2815 - -1983    63.0801—
                63.0810
                23.0101—
2816 - -1983    23.0104,
                23.0108—
                23.0111
2818 - -1983    14.0201
                14.0601—
2821 - -1983    14.0607,
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2825 - -1984    12.3801,
                12.3802
2827 - -1984    12.2400
2830 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2836 - -1984    24.0101—
                24.0104
2838 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2841 - -1984    31.0819
2844 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                53.0602,
2847 - -1984    53.0603,
                53.0605
2849 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2854 - -1984    33.0801—
                33.0804
2856 - -1984    23.0108
                13.0502,
                13.0612,
                13.0630,
2860 - -        13.0639,
                13.0643,
                13.0651,
                13.0654
2862 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2868 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2880 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2881 - -1980    27.0901
2890 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2892 - -1984    31.0601
                42.0502,
                42.0504,
                42.0505,
2908 - -1984    42.0506,
                42.0516,
                42.0517,
                42.0544
2911 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2923 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2924 - -1985    Repealed by Ord. 4284
2926 - -1985    52.0501—
                52.0507
2933 - -1985    32.0701
2951 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2952 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2967 - -1985    12.3405
2971 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2977 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2982 - -1985    52.0501—
                52.0504
2986 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
2994 - -1986    23.0308,
                27.0504
2995 - -1986    32.0110
2996 - -1986    33.1201—
                33.1298
2998 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                53.0603,
3010 - -1986    53.0604,
                53.0606
3011 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3015 - -1986    Repealed by Ord. 4272
                52.0505,
3019 - -1986    52.0506,
                52.0507
3023 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3026 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3033 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3034 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3041 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                23.0101—
3055 - -1986    23.0104,
                23.0108—
                23.0111
3058 - -1986    12.2702
3059 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3062 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3066 - -1986    Repealed by Ord. 4191
3070 - -1986    Repealed by Ord. 4130
3075 - -1986    12.3701
3076 - -1986    12.0305
                14.0318,
3077 - -1986    14.0406,
                14.0407
3079 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3089 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3093 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3096 - -1986    28.0101,
                28.0407
3096 - -1987    28.0501—
                28.0504
3097 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                31.0203,
                31.0205—
                31.0214,
                32.0501—
                32.0511,
                33.0101—
                33.0115,
                33.0200—
                33.0210,
                33.0301—
                33.0305,
                33.0307,
                33.0311,
                33.0401—
                33.0410,
                33.0501—
                33.0508,
                33.0601—
                33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624,
                33.0630—
                33.0641,
                33.0643—
                33.0645,
                33.0801—
                33.0811,
                33.08100—
                33.08108,
                33.08120—
                33.08128,
                33.08130,
                33.08131,
                33.08141—
3105 - -1986    33.08147,
                33.0850—
                33.0865,
                33.0890—
                33.0897,
                33.0901—
                33.0903,
                33.0911,
                33.0912,
                33.0914—
                33.0920,
                33.0931—
                33.0936,
                33.0941—
                33.0945,
                33.0951,
                33.0952,
                33.1002—
                33.1012,
                33.1035—
                33.1038,
                33.1101—
                33.1112,
                33.1114—
                33.1127,
                33.1129,
                33.1131,
                33.1132,
                34.0301—
                34.0311,
                34.0501,
                34.0502,
                35.0101—
                35.0132, 41.1012—41.1015 (Repealed by Ord. 4272) ,
                51.0101
3111 - -1987    Repealed by Ord. 4130
                17.0101—
                17.0107,
3121 - -1987    17.0201—
                17.0214,
                17.0301,
                17.0401
3128 - -1987    Repealed by Ord. 4212
3130 - -1987    63.0801—
                63.0810
3132 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                12.3301—
3139 - -1987    12.3304,
                12.3306,
                12.3309
3140 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3144 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                33.08150,
3145 - -1987    33.08152,
                33.08153
3146 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3148 - -1987    33.08151
3150 - -1987    13.0205
                14.0601—
3154 - -1987    14.0607,
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3165 - -1987    Repealed by Ord. 4272
3168 - -1987    12.0504
3170 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3175 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3177 - -        15.0301,
                15.0402
3187 - -1987    22.0101,
                22.0103
3199 - -1987    27.1002—
                27.1007
3208 - -1988    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                32.0211
3209 - -1988    12.0511
3214 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3215 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3225 - -1988    14.0204
3229 - -1988    27.1101,
                27.1102
3230 - -1988    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.08151
3233 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3236 - -1988    18.0101—
                18.0104
3244 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3250 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                31.0801—
3251 - -1998    31.0819,
                31.0821—
                31.0827
3253 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3254 - -1988    28.0301—
                28.0308
3257 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3260 - -1988    33.08170—
                33.08177
3264 - -1988    14.0204
3267 - -1988    28.0601
3268 - -1988    28.0601
3279 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3280 - -1988    32.0119,
                32.0120
3283 - -1988    33.1201—
                33.1298
3292 - -1979    14.0408
3294 - -1988    33.0856,
                33.0857
3296 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3304 - -1989    13.0207
3308 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3314 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3322 - -1989    32.1301—
                32.1306
                Repealing,
3325 - -1989    12.0706—
                12.0710
3326 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3331 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3333 - -1989    Repealed by Ord. 4209
3334 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3335 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3338 - -1989    Repealed by Ord. 4306
3341 - -1989    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3343 - -1989    Repealed by Ord. 4306
3348 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3349 - -1989    33.1201—
                33.1298
3355 - -1989    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3356 - -1989    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
3357 - -1989    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
3358 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3361 - -1989    53.0901—
                53.0903
3363 - -1989    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3364 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3366 - -1989    12.3802
3367 - -1989    12.0305
3369 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3373 - -1990    Repealed by Ord. 4209
3374 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3376 - -1990    33.08151
3377 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3379 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3380 - -1990    52.0128
                23.0101—
3381 - -1990    23.0104,
                23.0108—
                23.0111
3383 - -1990    18.0103
3384 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3385 - -1990    41.0501—
                41.0512
3386 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3387 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3388 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                12.3401,
3390 - -1990    12.3403,
                12.3506
3391 - -1990    24.0501
3392 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3393 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3394 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4240
3395 - -1990    52.0129,
                52.0130
3396 - -1990    33.08151—
                33.08153
3397 - -1990    12.3401—
                12.3405
3399 - -1990    32.0304
                32.0305,
3399 - -1999    32.0306,
                32.0307
                32.0207,
                32.0211,
3402 - -1990    32.0214,
                32.0219,
                32.0221,
                32.0222
3403 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3411 - -1990    33.0826
3412 - -1990    24.0301—
                24.0304
3415 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3420 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3421 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3423 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3425 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3427 - -1990    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3428 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3429 - -1991    33.1035
3430 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3431 - -1991    53.1001—
                53.1005
3432 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3433 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3435 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3436 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3440 - -1991    42.0501—
                42.0556
3442 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3443 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                14.0402,
3445 - -1991    14.0403,
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3446 - -1991    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3449 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3455 - -1991    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
3458 - -1991    14.0403,
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
3459 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3460 - -1991    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3461 - -1991    14.0102
3462 - -1991    Repealed by Ord. 4314
3463 - -1992    12.0102
3464 - -1991    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3465 - -1991    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3466 - -1991    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3467 - -1991    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), 41.1401—41.1413 (Repealed by
                Ord. 4272)
3468 - -1991    25.0101,
                51.0101
3470 - -1991    18.0104,
                18.0105
3471 - -1991    33.08150—
                33.08153
3472 - -1991    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                12.0807,
3473 - -1991    12.0901,
                12.0903
3480 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-             Collection of road maintenance service charges on tax roll, CSA 70-R-23 (Mile High
91-  - -1991    Park), Crestline
10
SD-
91-  - -1991    Collection of street and highway sweeping charges on tax roll, CSA 70-CH
11
SD-             Collection of service charge on tax roll for road maintenance, CSA 70-R-31 (Lytle
91-  - -1991    Creek)
12
SD-
91-  - -1991    Collection of road maintenance service charge on tax roll, CSA 70-R-29 (Yucca Mesa)
13
SD-
91-  - -1991    Collection of water service charges on tax roll, CSA 53-C (Fawnskin)
14
SD-
91-  - -1991    Establishing Facilities Benefit Assessment, Chino Hills Specific Plan
15
SD-
91-  - -1991    Increasing Facilities Development Fee, Chino Hills Specific Plan
16
SD-
91-  - -1991    Levy of Special Tax, CFD #9 (Rincon Village)
18
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #1
19
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #2
20
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #4
21
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #5
22
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #6
23
3483 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                41.1901 —
                41.1910 ,
3484 - -1992    41.1912 —
                41.1920 ,
                41.2001 —
                41.2018
3485 - -1992    Fee for septic waste
3486 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3487 - -1992    Amending Official Land Use Plan
3488 - -1992    Location of Municipal Court sessions
3489 - -1992    Organization of Social Services Group
3490 - -1992    Fees for massage clinics and massage technicians
3491 - -1992    Revised fees
SD-  - -1992    Recreation and park fees for CSA’s, Improvement Zones and Park Districts
92-2
SD-  - -1992    Sewer user fees and standby charges for Crestline Sanitation District
92-3
SD-  - -1992    Ambulance fees for CSA’s, Improvement Zones and Fire Protection Districts
92-4
SD-  - -1992    Cemetery charges for CSA 29
92-5
3492 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3493 - -1992    Compensation of Radiology Trainee I’s
3494 - -1992    Compensation of exempt and other non-represented officers and employees
3495 - -1992    31.1101—
                31.1106
3496 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                42.0512,
3497 - -1992    42.0534,
                42.0541
3498 - -1992    12.2201,
                12.2202
3499 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3500 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                63.1101,
                63.1105,
                63.1110,
                63.1115,
3501 - -1992    63.1120,
                63.1125,
                63.1130,
                63.1135,
                63.1140
3502 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3503 - -1992    Land Use District Maps
SD-  - -1992    Increasing sewer connection charge for CSA 70-B and increasing water connection fee
92-6            for CSA 70-C and repealing Ord. SD-91-8
3504 - -1992    Extending and fixing benefit assessment rates for Vector Control Program for
                various cities
3505 - -1992    Extending and fixing benefit assessment rates for Vector Control Program for City
                of Needles
3506 - -1992    Extending and fixing benefit assessment rates for Vector Control Program for City
                of San Bernardino
3507 - -1992    Extending and fixing benefit assessment rates for Vector Control Program for San
                Bernardino Valley area
3508 - -1992    Extending and fixing benefit assessment rates for Vector Control Program for
                Colorado River Region
3509 - -1992    Including portion of City of Ontario in Vector Control Program and establishing
                rates
3510 - -1992    Establishing Mountain Region in Vector Control Program and establishing rates
3511 - -1992    Establishing Desert Region in Vector Control Program and establishing rates
SD-  - -1992    Collection of service charge and interest on tax rolls, CSA 70-R-32, Phelan
92-7
                33.0601—
                33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624,
                33.0650,
3512 - -1992    33.0655,
                33.06510,
                33.06515,
                33.06520,
                33.06525,
                33.06530,
                33.06535
3513 - -1992    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3514 - -1992    Toilet and lavatory requirements in establishments serving food and beverages
3515 - -1992    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                33.0601—
3516 - -1992    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
3517 - -1992    Repealed by Ord. 4130
                41.1901 ,
                41.1906 —
                41.1908 ,
                41.1915 ,
                41.2001 ,
3518 - -1992    41.2002 ,
                41.2004 ,
                41.2007 ,
                41.2012 ,
                41.2014 ,
                41.2015
3519           Land Use District Maps
3520 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3521 - -1992    12.0102
3522 - -1992    14.0203
3523 - -1992    Appointment of Fish and Game Commission members
3524 - -1992    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3525 - -1992    Internships, residents and externships
                41.0501,
3526 - -1992    41.0503,
                41.0504
3527 - -1992    12.3803
3528 - -1993    Salaries of elected officials
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election to Inland Empire
93-1            West Resource Conservation District
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election to Mojave Desert
93-2            Resource Conservation District
3529 - -1993    Urgency ordinance amending Development Code re businesses providing massage
                services
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election, East Valley
93-3            Resource Conservation District
3530 - -1993    One year extension for certain Conditional Use Permits expiring in 1993
3531 - -1993    Urgency ordinance extending Ord. 3529 re businesses providing massage services
3532 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3533 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-  - -1993    Repealing Ord. SD-92-4 and establishing various ambulance fees for CSA’s 29, 56 and
93-4            82-SV-1 and Lake Arrowhead and Yucca Vly. FPD’s
3534 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                43.0201,
3535 - -1993    43.0202,
                43.0203
3536 - -1993    12.0101
3537 - -1993    28.0701—
                28.0705
3538 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3539 - -1993    Amending Official Land Use Plan
3540 - -1993    County fees
3541 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3542 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3543 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-  - -1993    Repealing Ord. SD-92-1 and amending Ord. SD-85-4 increasing sewer connection charge
93-5            for Crestline Sanitation District
3544 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
SD-  - -1993    Sewer and water connection fees, CSA 70 B & C
93-6
SD-  - -1993    Various recreation and park activity fees for named CSA’s and recreation and park
93-7            districts
SD-  - -1993    Sewer standby and user charges for Crestline Sanitation District
93-8
SD-  - -1993    Cemetery fees and charges CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley)
93-9
3545 - -1993    Compensation of student nurses
3546 - -1993    14.0102,
                14.0113
3547 - -1993    Compensation of Exempt and other non-represented officers and employees
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge for park maintenance CSA 20 (Joshua Tree)
10
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge for park maintenance CSA 70-M (Wonder Valley)
11
                41.2101—
                41.2109,
                41.2111—
3548 - -1993    41.2113,
                41.2115,
                41.2117—
                41.2120
3549 - -1993    33.0941—
                33.0945
3550 - -1993    33.08181,
                33.08180
3551 - -1993    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.0822
3552 - -1993    Amending Official Land Use Plan
                33.08150,
3553 - -1993    33.08152,
                33.08153
3554 - -1993    12.3301—
                12.3304
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of CSA 79-R-1 service charge on tax rolls
12
3555 - -1993    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
                41.1901 ,
                41.1902 ,
                41.1909 ,
3556 - -1993    41.1915 ,
                41.2001 ,
                41.2003 ,
                41.2009 ,
                41.2012
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge and interest for CSA 70-R-33
13
3557 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3558 - -1993    13.0619
3559 - -1993    Compensation of Boards, Committees and Commissions (Assessment Appeals Board)
3560 - -1993    Repealed by Ord. 4314
3561 - -1993    Amending definition of a motel business
3562 - -1993    Amending justice court judges benefits
3563 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3564 - -1993    33.0870—
                33.0880
3565 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3566 - -1993    33.08181
3567 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3568 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3569 - -1993    Regional parks fees
3570 - -1993    Professional unit working conditions
3571 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3572 - -1993    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3573 - -1993    Massage clinics (Urgency ordinance)
3574 - -1993    Official Land Use Plan
3575 - -1994    Salaries of elected officials
SD-  - -1994    CSA 70-R-34 (Big Bear) collection of service charge on tax roll
94-1
SD-  - -1994    Crestline Sanitation District increasing sewer connection charge
94-2
3576 - -1994    12.0101
3577 - -1994    33.0943
3578 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 22 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-  - -1994    CSA 70-B AND C (Helendale) sewer and water connection fees
94-3
SD-  - -1994    Recreation and Park Districts activity fees
94-4
SD-  - -1994    CSA 20 (Joshua Tree) and CSA 70-M (Wonder Valley) recreation and park service
94-5            charges
SD-  - -1994    CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley) cemetery fees
94-6
                41.1909 ,
3579 - -1994    41.1918 ,
                41.1920
3580 - -1994    12.0101
3581 - -1994    Salary ordinance
SD-  - -1994    Collection of park service charges on tax roll
94-7
SD-  - -1994    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll, CSA 70-R-36
94-8
SD-  - -1994    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll, CSA 70-R-35
94-9
3582 - -1994    Land Use District Map
3583 - -1994    Land Use District Map
3584 - -1994    63.0802
                33.0112,
3585 - -1994    33.0113,
                33.0114
3586 - -1994    23.0301—
                23.0313
3587 - -1994    35.0101—
                35.0132
3588 - -        Pollutant Discharge
3589 - -1994    Repealed by Ord. 4191
3590 - -1994    Remove positions 09865 and 09869 (Senior Service Counselors I) from Unclassified
                Service
3591 - -1994    County organizational structure
3592 - -1994    Salaries of elected officials
3593 - -1994    Amending Official Land Use Plan (3rd Cycle 1994 GPA’s)
3594 - -1994    Imposing criminal justice administrative fee (booking fees)
3595 - -1995    12.3901—
                12.3905
SD-  - -1995    Appointing members to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District Board of
95-1            Directors
SD-  - -1995    Appointing members to East Valley Resource Conservation District Board of Directors
95-2
3596 - -1995    Repealing language relating to sign regulations (political signs)
3597 - -1995    Medical waste generators, haulers and treatment facilities
3598 - -1995    32.0901—
                32.0916
3599 - -1995    13.0502,
                13.0617b
3600 - -1995    Justice and Municipal Courts
3602 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3601 - -1995    Placing positions in the Unclassified Service
SD-  - -1995    Increasing sewer connection charge- Crestline Sanitation District
95-3
3602 - -1995    Revised fees
SD-  - -1995    Sewer and water connection charges/fees for CSA 70-B & C and repeal Ord. SD-94-3
95-4
SD-  - -1995    Fixing various recreation and park activity fees for various CSA’s and repealing
95-5            Ord. SD-94-4
SD-  - -1995    Repealing Ord. 94-10 and establishing ambulance fees for various CSA’s and FPD’s
95-6
SD-  - -1995    Repealing Ord. 93-8 and establishing and modifying sewer user fees and standby
95-7            charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1995    Establishing fire emergency response service fees for CSA 70
95-8
3603 - -1995    41.1912 ,
                41.2013
3604 - -1995    Superseded by Ord. 4240
3605 - -1995    Amending Official Land Use Plan
3606 - -1995    12.0101
3607 - -1995    Changing Municipal Court boundaries
3608 - -1995    33.0409
3609 - -1995    Compensation of exempt and other non-represented officers and employees
3610 - -1995    Uniform Fire Code amendment
SD-  - -1995    Establishment of rules relating to issuance of road permits for various CSA’s
95-9
SD-
95-  - -1995    CSA 70-R-22 (Twin Peaks) collection of service charge on tax roll
10
                33.0115,
3611 - -1995    33.0200,
                33.0301,
                33.0302
3612 - -        Readopted by Ord. 3587, Superseded by Ord. 4011
3613 - -        Land Use Plan
3614 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3654
3615 - -        Repealed
3616 - -        Superseded by Ord. 4011
3617 - -1995    Placing positions into Unclassified Service
SD-
95-  - -1995    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll (CSA 70-R-33)
11
3618 - -1995    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3619 - -1995    Placing position into Unclassified Service
3620 - -1995    Realign Flood Control Zone Boundaries 4, 5, and 6 in Victor Valley and Barstow
                areas
3621 - -1995    Placing various positions into Unclassified Service
3622 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3623 - -1995    Registered Nurses-Per Diem
3624 - -1995    33.0870—
                33.0880
3625 - -1995    Option to Purchase Agreement with Cousins/New Market Development Group, Inc./
                Hopkins Real Estate Group for sale of County land in Ontario
3626 - -1995    Business license tax on operators of solid waste disposal sites and calling
                election for 3/26/96
                63.0802,
3627 - -1995    63.0804,
                63.0805
                52.0505,
3628 - -        52.0506,
                52.0507
3629 - -1995    Amending Official Maps of Official Land Use Plan (Third Cycle 1995 General Plan
                Amendments/Rail-Cycle)
3630 - -1995    Ballot initiative Buffer Space Between Large Solid Waste Landfills and significant
                water resources
3631 - -1995    Approving and adopting Redevelopment Plan for San Sevaine Redevelopment Project
3632 - -1995    Urgency ordinance extending urgency Ord. 3628 re protection of water resources from
                contamination from improper storage of radioactive wastes; Repealed by Ord. 3640
3633 - -1995    Amending Official Maps of Official Land Use Plan (Fourth Cycle 1995 General Plan
                Amendments)
3634 - -1996    Placing position 10389 into Unclassified Service
3635 - -1996    Businesses providing massage services
3636 - -1996    Amending East Valley Corridor Specific Plan
3637 - -        Land Use District Map
3638 - -1996    Placing position 00460, Library Associate, in Unclassified Service
3639 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3640 - -        Repeals Ord. 3632
3641 - -1996    12.2400
SD-  - -1996    Authorizing collection of park service charges on tax roll for CSA’s 70-P-10 and 11
96-1
SD-  - -1996    Increasing sewer connection charges for CSA 70-B; increasing water connection fee
96-2            for CSA 70-C and repealing Ord. SD-95-4
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-5 and fixing recreation and park fees for CSA’s and
96-3            improvement zones and recreation and park districts
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-6 and establishing ambulance fees for CSA 29, 56, 82-SV-1,
96-4            Lake Arrowhead and Yucca Valley FPD’s & CSA 70- HL
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-7 and establishing and modifying sewer user fees & standby
96-5            charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-3 and increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline
96-6            Sanitation District
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-94-6 and fixing cemetery charges for CSA 29
96-7
3642 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3643 - -1996    Public lease back of solid waste facilities (expansion)
3644 - -        Public Lease Back of Regulations
3645 - -1996    Suits upon Claims
3646 - -1996    12.3406
3647 - -        Public leaseback
3648 - -        Water vehicle speed and wake restrictions on Lake Havasu
3649 - -        Compensation of exempt & non-represented employees
3650 - -        Compensation of exempt & non-represented employees - furloughs
3651 - -1996    33.0823
                33.0827,
3652 - -1996    33.0828,
                33.0829
SD-             Authorizing collection of service charge on tax roll for CSA 70-R-38 (Pinon Hills
96-  - -1996    road maintenance district)
10
                25.0201—25.0208,
3653 - -1996    26.0101,
                26.0102
3654 - -        Repealed by Ord. 3654, Superseded by Ord. 4011
3655 - -1996    12.2101
3656 - -1996    12.3301—
                12.3304
3657 - -1996    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3658 - -1996    Superseded by Ord. 4011
                33.0601—
3659 - -1996    33.0608,
                33.0610—
                33.0624
3660 - -1996    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3661 - -        Land Use District Map
                12.2400,
3662 - -1996    12.3201—
                12.3203, Amending Ord. 1904
3663 - -        Placing positions in Unclassified Service
SD-
96-  - -1996    Collection of service charge on tax roll for CSA 70-R-37, Hillview, Drive South
11
3664 - -1996    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
3665 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3666 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3667 - -1995    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
                12.2025,
                12.2026,
                12.2101,
3668 - -1996    12.2202,
                12.2203,
                12.2204,
                12.2205
                41.2201,
3669 - -1996    41.2202,
                41.2204—
                41.2211
3670 - -1996    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                33.0801—
                33.0811,
                33.0821—
                33.0835,
                33.0840—
                33.0848,
                33.0849,
3671 - -1996    33.0849A,
                33.0849B,
                33.0849C,
                33.0849D,
                33.0849E,
                33.0849F,
                33.0942—
                33.0945
3672 - -        33.0941—
                33.0945
3673 - -1996    Repealed
3674 - -1996    Superseded by Ord. 4011
SD-
96-  - -1996    Reduction or waiver of various recreation and park activities fees
12
3675 - -1996    Superseded by Ord. 4240
3676 - -        Land Use District Map
3677 - -1996    86.070401, 86.070440
3678 - -1996    Repealed by Ord. 4314
                12.3506,
3679 - -1996    13.0502,
                13.0634,
                13.0635
3680 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to East Valley Resource Conservation District in lieu of
97-1            election
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District in lieu of
97-2            election
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to Mojave Desert Resource Conservation District in lieu of
97-3            election
3681 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3682 - -1997    12.2803
                33.08155,
                33.08156,
                33.08157,
                33.08158,
3683 - -1997    33.08160,
                33.08161,
                33.08162,
                33.08163,
                33.08164
3684 - -1997    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3685 - -        Land Use District Map
3686 - -1997    52.0701—
                52.0706
3687 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3688 - -1997    Superseded by Ord. 4011
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ord. SD-96-3 and fixing recreation and park fees for CSA’s, improvement
97-4            zones and recreation and park districts
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ord. SD-96-4 and confirming and/or modifying ambulance fees for CSA’s 29,
97-5            56 and 82-SV-1, Lk. Arrowhead and Yucca Valley FPD’s and CSA 70-HL
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ord. SD-96-5 and confirming sewer user charges and standby charges for
97-6            Crestline Sanitation Dist.
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ord. SD-96-6 and increasing sewer connection charges for Crestline
97-7            Sanitation Dist.
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ord. SD-96-7 and confirming cemetery charges for CSA 29
97-8
SD-  - -1997    Confirming fire protection service fees and repealing Ord. SD-96-8 and SD-95-8
97-9
SD-             Increasing sewer connection charges for CSA 70-B (Helendale) and water connection
97-  - -1997    fee for CSA 70-C (Helendale) and repealing Ord. SD-96-2
10
3689 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3690 - -        Land Use District Map
3691 - -1997    12.3202
3692 - -1997    Repealed by Ord. 4184
3693 - -        Repealed
3694 - -1997    12.3202
3695 - -1997    12.1602
3696 - -1997    Repealed by Ord. 4191
3697 - -1997    Repealed by Ord. 4385
                12.4101,
                12.4105,
3698 - -1997    12.4110,
                12.4115,
                12.4120,
                12.4125
3699 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3700 - -1997    27.1201—
                27.1205
3701 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3702 - -1997    14.0701—
                14.0705
3703 - -        Urgency ordinance
3704 - -1997    41.2401—
                41.2413
3705 - -        Land Use District Map
3706 - -        Urgency ordinance
                13.0201—
3707 - -1998    13.0211,
                13.0213,
                13.0214
3708 - -        Compensation of exempt officers and employees
3709 - -1998    12.2801,
                12.2802
3710 - -1998    12.2400,
                12.3506
                33.08150,
3711 - -1998    33.08151,
                33.08152,
                33.08153
3712 - -1998    41.2301—
                41.2313
3713 - -        Urgency ordinance
3714 - -1998    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3715 - -        Repealed
3716 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3717 - -        Repealed
3718 - -1998    31.0820
3719 - -1998    25.0202
SD-  - -1998    Fixing various recreation and park activity fees
98-1
SD-  - -1998    Ambulance fees
98-2
SD-  - -1998    Sewer standby & user charges, Crestline Sanitation District
98-3
SD-  - -1998    Increasing sewer connection charges, Crestline Sanitation District
98-4
SD-  - -1998    Cemetery fees and charges
98-5
SD-  - -1998    Fire protection service fees
98-6
SD-  - -1998    Sewer and water connection fees, CSA 70-B and C, Helendale
98-7
3720 - -        Land Use District Map
3721 - -1998    Superceded by Ord. 4011
3722 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3723 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3724 - -        Amending compensation due election workers and poll owners
3725 - -        First Cycle General Plan Safety Element
3726 - -        Repealing Chapter 9 and Chapter 12 of Division 1 of Title 4,
                51.0101
3727 - -        Compensation of CMC Registered Nurse-Per Diem
3728 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3729 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3730 - -1998    41.0501—
                41.0512
3731 - -        Exempt group retirement benefits
3732 - -1998    12.3801
3733 - -        Child Support Compliance Program
3734 - -1998    14.0704
3735 - -        Land Use District Map
                Establishing salaries, benefits, promotions, salary increases and step advances for
3736 - -        Judicial Counsel I, II and III, Supervising Judicial Staff Counsel and Chief of
                Staff of Counsel Services
3737 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
                12.0608,
3738 - -1998    12.0701,
                12.0702
3739 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3740 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3741 - -        Urgency ordinance
3742 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3743 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3744 - -        Land Use District Map
3745 - -1999    12.2901—
                12.2907
3746 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3747 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3748 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
                13.0106,
                13.0502,
                13.0604,
3749 - -1999    13.0613,
                13.0616,
                13.0617d,
                13.0617e,
                13.0617g
3750 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3751 - -        Child Support Compliance Program
                14.0501,
                14.0502,
3752 - -1999    14.0503,
                14.0505,
                14.0506
3753 - -        Adopting the Kaiser Commerce Center Specific Plan
3754 - -        Land Use District Map
3755 - -        Duties of CAO
3756 - -        Compensation of Exempt Employees
3757 - -        Development Agreement
3758 - -1999    41.1906 —
                41.1908
3759 - -1999    Superceded by Ord. 4011
3760 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
SD-  - -1999    Fixing recreation and park activity fees
99-1
SD-  - -1999    Confirming and/or modifying ambulance fees
99-2
SD-  - -1999    Increasing sewer user fees and confirming standby charges
99-3
SD-  - -1999    Increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline Sanitation District
99-4
SD-  - -1999    Confirming cemetery charges for CSA 29
99-5
SD-  - -1999    Confirming and/or modifying fire protection service fees
99-6
3761 - -        Military leave benefits
                13.0502,
                13.0606,
                13.0607,
3762 - -        13.0608,
                13.0609,
                13.0610,
                13.0615
3763 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3764 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3765 - -        Juvenile Court Dependency Judge Pro Tem salary, etc.
3766 - -1999    52.0131,
                52.0132
3767 - -        Land Use District Map
3768 - -        Reinstated and repealed by Ord. 3768
3769 - -1999    14.0102,
                14.0113
SD-  - -1999    Confirming report of connection fees
99-7
3770 - -        Salary, benefits, salary increases and step advances for Juvenile Court Officer
                12.0205,
                12.0206, 12.2506 (Repealed by Ord. 4368),
3771 - -1999    12.3201,
                12.3202,
                12.3203,
                12.3506
3772 - -1999    14.0102
SD-  - -1999    Confirming report of connection fees for CSA’s & Improvement Zones
99-8
3773 - -1999    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                13.0205
3774 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3775 - -        Reimbursement of moving expenses
3776 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3777 - -        Cable Franchises
3778 - -        Land Use District Map
3779 - -1999    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3780 - -1999    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3781 - -        Sick leave usage - exempt group
3782 - -        Defined (401(a)) contribution plan for elected officials
3783 - -        Increase stipend for Regional Parks Commission
3784 - -        Retirement benefits for exempt employees
3785 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
                12.2400, 12.2506 (Repealed by Ord. 4368),
                12.3202,
3786 - -2000    12.3203,
                12.3506,
                13.0613
3787 - -        Amending Ord. 1904
3788 - -        Cable Franchises
3789 - -        Child Support Compliance Program
3790 - -        Purchasing Department
3791 - -        Land Use District Map
SD-  - -2000    Recreation and Park Activities Fees
00-1
SD-  - -2000    Ambulance Fees
00-2
SD-  - -2000    Cemetery Fees
00-3
SD-  - -2000    Fire Protection Service Fees
00-4
SD-  - -2000    Sewer User and Standby Fees
00-5
SD-  - -2000    Sewer Connection Charges
00-6
3792 - -2000    Placing Child Support Chief Attorney in Unclassified Services
3793 - -2000    Placing position 00761 Administrative Aide, in Unclassified Services
SD-  - -2000    Confirming report regarding connection fees with proposed increases and sewer and
00-7            water connection fees
3794 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3795 - -2000    Urgency ordinance temporarily prohibiting construction of wireless communications
                facilities countywide
3796 - -2000    General Plan Land Use District Amendments
3797 - -2000    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3798 - -2000    Removing positions from Unclassified Service
3799 - -2000    TV franchise
3800 - -2000    Urgency ordinance regarding wireless communications
3801 - -2000    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3802 - -2000    13.0702,
                13.0706
3803 - -2000    Duties of Purchasing agent and property surplus
                32.0101—
                32.0111,
3804 - -2000    32.0113—
                32.0121,
                32.1401—
                32.1408
3805 - -2000    13.0613
3806 - -2000    Countywide photocopy fee
3807 - -2000    Amend Kaiser Commerce Center Specific Plan
3808 - -2000    Land Use District Map
3809 - -2000    Benefits of exempt employees
3810 - -2000    Transferring Comcast Cablevision to Clear Cablevision
3811 - -2000    Fourth Cycle 2000 General Plan Amendments
3812 - -2001    Placing position of Public Health Programs Administrator in the Unclassified
                Service
3813 - -2001    Compensation of ARMC Registered Nurse Per diem
SD-  - -2001    Appointments in lieu of election for East Valley Resource Conservation District
01-1
SD-  - -2001    Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
01-2
SD-  - -2001    Mojave Resource Conservation District
01-3
3814 - -2001    Repealing Ord. 3629 (Rail Cycle)
3815 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3816 - -2001    13.0617a
3817 - -2001    Amending Ord. 1904 placing position 02271, Treasurer/Tax Collector Finance Officer
                into Unclassified Service
3818 - -2001    24.0606
3819 - -2001    13.0618
3820 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3821 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3822 - -2001    First Cycle 2001 General Plan Amendments
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-1 fixing various rec. and park activity fees for various CSA’s
01-4
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-2 confirming various ambulance fees for various CSA’s
01-5
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-3 confirming existing cemetery charges for CSA 29
01-6
SD-  - -2001    Amending Ord. SD-96-9 confirming cost recovery for fire suppression and emergency
01-7            response cost
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-4 confirming existing fire protection service fees
01-8
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-5 increasing sewer user fees and confirming standby charges
01-9            for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD-00-6 increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline Sanitation
01-  - -2001    District
10
3823 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD-00-7 confirming report of connection fees with proposed increases
01-  - -2001    for various CSA’s
11
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD-83-1 authorizing collection of water/sewer service charges and
01-  - -2001    standby charges on tax bill
12
3824 - -2001    Franchise
3825 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3826 - -2001    12.0102
3827 - -2001    13.0205
SD-             Appointments in Lieu of Election to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation
01-  - -2001    District
13
3828 - -2001    Preschool Services Department position from Classified to Unclassified
3829 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3830 - -2001    Amending Ord. 1904 removing Position 73080, Child Support Chief Attorney, from the
                Unclassified Service
3831 - -2001    Repealed by Ord. 4270
3832 - -2001    Official Land Use District Map (2nd Cycle 2001 GPA’s) - Majestic Realty
3833 - -2001    18.0101—
                18.0104
3834 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3835 - -2001    23.0510
3836 - -2001    Amending Official Land Use Plan - 3rd Cycle 2001 GPAs
3837 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3838 - -2001    12.2400,
                12.3202
3839 - -2001    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3840 - -2001    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees), Superseded by Ord. 4011
3841 - -2001    Amending Official Land Use Plan - 4th Cycle 2001 GPAs
3842 - -2002    12.4201—
                12.4214
3843 - -2002    Amending Ord. 1904, removing Position 17796, Redevelopment Project Manager, from
                the Unclassified Service
3844 - -2002    12.1604,
                12.1607
                13.0604,
3845 - -2002    13.0613,
                13.0614,
                13.0617f
                23.0401—
                23.0413,
                23.0501—
                23.0509,
                23.0601—
                23.0610,
                23.0710—
                23.0715,
                23.0720—
                23.0732,
3846 - -2002    23.0740,
                23.0750,
                23.0751,
                23.0760,
                23.0761,
                23.07210,
                23.07211,
                23.07212,
                23.07213,
                23.07214,
                33.1301—
                33.1306
3847 - -2002    Amending Kaiser Commerce Center Specific Plan
3848 - -2002    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees),
                33.0408
3849 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3850 - -2002    Amending Ord. 1904 by Placing Position #76498 in the Unclassified service
3851 - -2002    Amending County General Plan - 1st Cycle 2002 GPAs
3852 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3853 - -2002    13.0604
3854 - -2002    Amending Ord. 1904 removing Position 14998, Staff Analyst I, from Unclassified
                service
3855 - -2002    Amending Ord. 1904 placing Position 76624, Assistant Public Defender, in the
                Unclassified Service
3856 - -2002    14.0102,
                14.0109
3857 - -2002    Repealing Chapter 1 of Division 4 of Title 1, regarding the Child Support
                Compliance Program
3858 - -2002    53.1103
3859 - -2002    Amending Ord. 1904, placing various Museum staff positions into the Unclassified
                Service
3860 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3861 - -2002    14.0203
3862 - -2002    Amending Ord. 691, extending expiration date of Southern California Edison Natural
                Gas Pipeline Franchise for one year
SD              Repeals Ord. SD 01-04 and fixing various recreation and park activity fees for FY
02-  - -2002    2002-2003 for county service areas and improvement zones, and recreation and park
01              districts
SD              Repeals Ord. SD 01-05 and increases various ambulance fees for CSA 29 (Lucerne
02-  - -2002    Valley), CSA 56 (Wrightwood), CSA 82 SV-1 (Searles Valley), Lake Arrowhead Fire
02              Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire Protection District and CSA 70 HL (Havasu
                Lake)
SD
02-  - -2002    Repeals Ord. SD 01-06, confirms existing cemetery charges for CSA 29
03
SD              Repeals Ord. SD 01-09, increases sewer user fee and confirms standby charges with
02-  - -2002    no proposed increases for Crestline Sanitation District
04
SD              Repeals Ord. SD 01-10, increases sewer connection charge for Crestline Sanitation
02-  - -2002    District
05
SD              Repeals Ord. SD 01-11, increases water and sewer connection charges for named
02-  - -2002    County Service Areas and Improvement Zones
06
3863 - -2002    13.0404
SD              Appointing, in lieu of election, Sybrand Vander Dussen to the office of Director of
02-  - -2002    the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
07
3864 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3865 - -2002    14.0116
SD              Levying a Special Tax for the Fiscal Year 2002-2003 and Following Fiscal Years
02-  - -2002    Solely Within and Relating to Community Facilities District No 2002-1 (Kaiser
08              Commerce Center)
SD              Levying a Special Tax for the Fiscal Year 2002-2003 and Following Fiscal Years
02-  - -2002    Solely Within and Relating to Community Facilities District No. 2002-2 (Central
09              Valley FPD - Fire Protection Services)
3866 - -2002    Amending San Bernardino County Code by the Amendment of the Official Maps of the
                Official Land Use Plan - 2nd Cycle 2002 General Plan Amendments
                Amending Subsection 16.0203A(yy) of
3867 - -2002    Chapter 2 of Division 6 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code, Relating to
                Auditor/Controller-Recorder Fees
3868 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3869 - -2002    13.0604,
                13.0613
3870 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3871 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3872 - -2002    33.06557
3873 - -2002    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3874 - -2002    Amending County General Plan - 3rd Cycle 2002 GPAs
                13.0401,
3875 - -2002    13.0403,
                13.0404
3876 - -2002    Amending County General Plan - 4th Cycle 2002 GPAs
3877 - -2003    13.0205
3878 - -2003    Repealed by Ord. 4270
3879 - -2003    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position No. 77906 in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
3880 - -2003    Amending County General Plan - First Cycle 2003 GPAs
3881 - -2003    14.0501—
                14.0504
3882 - -2003    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3883 - -2003    13.0613
3884 - -2003    Repealed by Ord. 4270
3885 - -2003    12.0101
3886 - -2003    12.2400
3887 - -2003    13.0616
3888 - -2003    Repealed by Ord. 4291
3889 - -2003    Repealed by Ord. 4347
3890 - -2003    Amending the Official Maps of the Official Land Use Plan
3891 - -2003    Amending the Kaiser Commerce Center Specific Plan
3892 - -2003    12.3801
SD-             Fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing with fiscal year 2003-
03-  - -2003    2004 and repealing Ord. SD 02-01
05
SD
03-  - -2003    Fixing ambulance fees and charges and repealing Ord. SD 02-02
06
SD
03-  - -2003    Fixing cemetery fees and charges and repealing Ord. SD 02-03
07
SD
03-  - -2003    Fixing sewer standby and user charges and repealing Ord. SD 02-04
08
SD              Amending Ord. SD 85-4 to increase sewer connection charges and repealing Ord. SD
03-  - -2003    02-05
09
SD              Establishing and continuing sewer and water connection fees and repealing Ord. 02-
03-  - -2003    06
10
3893 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3894 - -2003    13.0617c
3895 - -2003    Adopting the Mission Boulevard Joint Redevelopment Project
                12.2803,
                41.2301—
3896 - -2003    41.2313,
                41.2401—
                41.2413
3897 - -2003    12.3301—
                12.3309
3898 - -2003    13.0611
3899 - -2003    Adoption of three percent at age 50 enhanced retirement formula for safety and
                safety exempt employees; approval of replacement benefits plan
3900 - -2003    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3901 - -2003    Amendment of the official maps of the official land use plan, Third Cycle Plan, GPA
                Amendments
3902 - -2003    Adopt ordinance to approve a boundary change between the counties of San Bernardino
                and Riverside
3903 - -2003    Adopt ordinance regarding catastrophic leave for exempt employees
                Amending Ord. 1904 by placing the classification of Eligibility Worker I
3904 - -2003    (Unclassified), Eligibility Worker II (Unclassified), and Eligibility Worker
                Trainee (Unclassified) in the Unclassified Service
3905 - -2003    Amending the San Bernardino County Code by the amendment of the official maps of
                the official land use plan
3906 - -2004    Related to building standards within the Del Rosa Area
3907 - -2004    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position no. 79193 in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
                12.2903,
                12.2904,
                12.3506,
                32.0101,
3908 - -2004    32.0301,
                32.0302,
                32.0303,
                32.1201,
                41.2001
3909 - -2004    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position no. 78761 in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
SD              Acting in it’s capacity as the governing body of CSA 70 S-7 (Lenwood) requiring
04-  - -2004    that all buildings or other structures containing plumbing or drainage fixtures be
01              connected to the sewer system, and providing for the payment of connection fees
3910 - -2004    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3911 - -2004    Related to building standards within the Del Rosa area extending urgency interim
                Ord. 3906
                Amending §
                14.0114 of
3912 - -2004    Chapter 1 of Division 4 of Title 1 of the San Bernardino County Code, pertaining to
                informal bidding procedures under the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting
                Act (§§ 22000 et seq. of the public contract code)
3913 - -2004    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position no. 79463 in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
3914 - -2004    31.0820
3915 - -2004    Amending certain time limitations with respect to the redevelopment plan for the
                San Sevaine Redevelopment Project
3916 - -2004    13.0205
3917 - -2004    Adopt ordinance relating to County Organizational Structure
3918 - -2004    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3919 - -2004    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan official fire hazard overlay maps
3920 - -2004    Amending the County General Plan official maps of the Official Land Use Plan
3921 - -2004    27.1304
3922 - -2004    Repealed by Ord. 4191
3923 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-05
02
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-06
03
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-07
04
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-08
05
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-09
06
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ord. SD 03-10
07
3930 - -2004    33.1401—
                33.1407
3931 - -2004    33.08150,
                33.08151
3932 - -2004    Repealed by Ord. 4212
SD              Appointing a member of the Board of Directors of the East Valley Resource
04-  - -2004    Conservation District
08
3933 - -2004    13.0613
3934 - -2004    Amending Ord. 1904
                Amending Section
3935 - -2004    41.0510 of
                Chapter 5 of Division 1 of Title 4 of the San Bernardino County Code, relating to
                hawking and vending
                12.0512,
                12.1202,
3936 - -2004    12.1203,
                12.1204,
                12.3506
3936 - -2000    12.2400
3937 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3938 - -2004    Amending the Redevelopment Plan for the San Sevaine Redevelopment Project.
3939 - -2004    Amending the official maps of the official land use plan
3940 - -2004    Approving and adopting the Cedar Glen disaster recovery plan for the Cedar Glen
                disaster recovery area
3941 - -2004    Amending the official maps of the official land use plan
3942 - -2004    12.3405
3943 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD   - -2005    Appointing a member of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
05-1            (Cheryl Karns-Avent)
SD   - -2005    Appointing a member of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
05-2            (Terrie Andrews)
SD   - -2005    Appointing members of the Board of Directors of the Mojave Desert Resource
05-3            Conservation District
3944 - -2005    12.0101
3945 - -2005    13.0205
3946 - -2005    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing additional positions (Positions Nos. 71101, 08260,
                80380) in the Unclassified Service pursuant to Charter provisions
                12.0205,
                12.0210,
                12.0213,
3947 - -2005    12.2400, 12.2506 (Repealed by Ord. 4368),
                12.3202,
                12.3203,
                12.3506
3948 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3949 - -2005    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3950 - -2005    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Official Maps of the official Land
                Use Plan
3951 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3952 - -2005    Superseded by Ord. 4011
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-02
05-4
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-03
05-5
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-04
05-6
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-05
05-7
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-06
05-8
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ord. SD 04-07
05-9
                12.0205,
                12.2400,
3953 - -2005    13.0604,
                13.0613,
                13.0614
3954 - -2005    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing additional positions in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
3955 - -2005    12.0402
3956 - -2005    Amending Ord. 1904
3957 - -2005    13.0619
3958 - -2005    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3959 - -        Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3960 - -2005    Amending the County General Plan (2nd Cycle 2005 General Plan Amendments)
3961 - -2005    Approving and adopting the amended and restated redevelopment plan (amendment 2 to
                the San Sevaine Redevelopment Plan) for the San Sevaine Redevelopment Project
3962 - -2005    Glen Helen Specific Plan
3963 - -2005    3rd Cycle 2005 General Plan Amendments - amends Official Land Use Maps
3964 - -2005    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3965 - -2005    31.0820
3966 - -2005    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3967 - -2005    Fourth Cycle General Plan Amendments
3968 - -2006    13.0613
3969 - -2006    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing additional positions in the Unclassified Service
                pursuant to Charter provisions
3970 - -2006    13.0613
SD   - -2006    Increasing ambulance fees and charges for various county services areas and fire
06-1            protection districts. (Repealed by SD-06-08)
                13.0613,
                13.0618,
3971 - -2006    13.0700,
                13.0709,
                13.0710
3972 - -2006    Repealed by Ord. 4385
3973 - -2006    28.0407
3974 - -2006    First Cycle 2006 General Plan Amendments
                71.0101—
                71.0105,
                71.0201—
                71.0210,
                71.0301—
3975 - -2006    71.0307,
                71.0401—
                71.0416,
                71.0501—
                71.0510,
                71.0601—
                71.0603
3976 - -        33.1403
3977 - -2006    52.0302
3978 - -2006    23.0108,
                23.0109
3979 - -2006    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
3980 - -2006    13.0205
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD 05-04 and fixing various recreation and park activity fees for FY
06-  - -2006    2006-07 for County Service Areas and Improvement Zones, and recreation and park
02              districts as shown on Exhibits I through XII
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD 05-06 and confirming cemetery charges for County Service Area 29,
06-  - -2006    as shown on Attachment B
03
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD 05-09 and setting the water and sewer connection charges for
06-  - -2006    named County Service Areas and Improvement Zones, as shown on Exhibits IC and IIC
04
                14.0102,
3982 - -2006    14.0103,
                14.0109,
                14.0115
SD
06-  - -2006    Public hearing to establish Fire Service Fees and Charges
05
SD              Repealing Ord. SD 05-07 setting sewer user fees and standby charges for Crestline
06-  - -2006    Sanitation District
06
SD              Repealing Ord. SD 06-08 and setting the sewer connection charge for Crestline
06-  - -2006    Sanitation District
07
3983 - -2006    13.0617a
                41.2201—
3984 - -2006    41.2207,
                41.2211
3985 - -2006    Proposing a Charter Amendment Number 37 to limit eminent domain and protect
                property rights
                Proposing County Charter Amendment Number 38: Calling an election thereon;
3986 - -2006    Consolidating said election with the consolidated election; proclaiming such
                election; giving notice of final dates for submission of arguments
3987 - -2006    Superseded by Ord. 4011
3988 - -2006    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing various positions into the Unclassified Services
3989 - -2006    13.0613,
                13.0618
3990 - -2006    Second Cycle 2006 General Plan Amendments
3991 - -2006    13.0201—
                13.0214
3992 - -2006    Repealed by Ord. 4291
                Repealing Ord. SD 06-01 and establishing increased ambulance service rates for
SD-             County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley), County Service Area 56 (Wrightwood),
06-  - -2006    County Service Area 82, Improvement Zone SV-1 (Searles Valley), Lake Arrowhead Fire
08              Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire Protection District and County Service Area
                70, Improvement Zone HL (Havasu Lake)
3993 - -2006    Repealed by Ord. 4374
3994 - -2006    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing various positions into the Unclassified Services
3995 - -2006    12.1907,
                12.1908
SD-             Authorizing CSA 70 and its’ Improvement Zones to regulate the use and construction
06-  - -2006    of public storm drain systems owned and maintained by the Special Districts
09              Department for unincorporated areas within the County
3996 - -2006    Amend Kaiser Commerce Center specific plan and revise a site development review;
                Applicant: Young Electric Sign Company; Community: Fontana
3997 - -2006    Regional Transportation Development Mitigation Plan
3998 - -2006    12.4203
3999 - -2006    14.0102,
                14.0110
4000 - -2006    Third Cycle 2006 General Plan Amendments/Amending County General Plan
4001 - -2007    28.0309
4002 - -2007    23.0101—
                23.0111
4003 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position of Auditor/Controller Division Chief in
                Unclassified Service
4004 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position No’s 82755, 82756, 82757, Laboratory
                Technologist Intern, in the Unclassified Service
4005 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing the list of positions into the Unclassified Service
4006 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position No. 04315, Assistant Chief Probation Officer
                in the Unclassified Service
4007 - -2007    Relating to recovering the cost of the Comprehensive Disposal Site Diversion
                Program
SD-             Appointing individuals, in lieu of election, to the position of director for the
07-  - -2007    Inland Empire Resource Conservation District
01
SD-             Appointing individuals, in lieu of election, to the position of director for the
07-  - -2007    Mojave Desert Resource Conservation District
02
4008 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position No. 83213, Assistant Director of Public
                Health, in the Unclassified Service
4009 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing the following positions #02210, #05561, #05666,
                #15846, Executive Secretary III - Classified into the Unclassified Service
SD-             Regulating the use and operation of skateboard/skating facilities within County
07-  - -2007    Service Areas, Improvement Zones, and Recreation and Park Districts in order to
03              ensure the orderly and safe use of facilities
4010 - -2007    Amending all of the San Bernardino County General Plan Maps
                Amending Section
4011 - -2007    11.0110 and Title 8 (Development Code), all of the County Code as part of the
                General Plan Update Program; Ch. 84.08 repealed by Ord. 4341;  Ch. 83.07 repealed
                by Ord. 4419
4012 - -2007    Establishing the East Valley Area Plan as part of the General Plan Update Program
4013 - -2007    16.0204
4014 - -        Repealed by Ord. 4367
4015 - -2007    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
4016 - -2007    Regarding the levy of special taxes to finance services and facilities within the
                Community Facilities District and it’s Improvement Areas
4017 - -2007    13.0617m
4018 - -2007    13.0613
4019 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904 by placing position No. 08070, Principal Appraiser, Exempt Group
                C in the Unclassified Service
4020 - -2007    82.22.020,
                82.22.030
4021 - -2007    Amending land use zoning district maps
4022 - -2007    23.0206
4023 - -2007    12.2903
4024 - -2007    13.0604,
                13.0613
                Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-01 and confirming ambulance service and
SD-             subscription fees for County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley), County Service Area
07-  - -2007    56 (Wrightwood), County Service Area 82, Improvement Zone SV-1 (Searles Valley),
04              Lake Arrowhead Fire Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire Protection District and
                County Service Area 70 HL (Havasu Lake), as shown on Exhibits I and II
SD-             Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-05 and confirming existing fees and fee
07-  - -2007    increases for the Office of the Fire Marshal as shown on Attachment A
05
4025 - -2007    Changed to SD-07-04
4026 - -2007    Changed to SD-07-05
4027 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904, Adding position
4028 - -2007    Eminent domain
4029 - -2007    Eminent domain
4030 - -2007    Eminent domain
SD              Adopt ordinance for CSAs and recreation and park districts in the County of San
07-  - -2007    Bernardino fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing with fiscal
06              year 2007-08 and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley) fixing cemetery fees and charges and
07-  - -2007    repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-03.
07
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Crestline Sanitation District of the county of San
07-  - -2007    Bernardino fixing sewer standby and user charges and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-
08              06
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, acting in its capacity as the
07-  - -2007    governing body of Crestline Sanitation District, fixing sewer connection charges
09              and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-07
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, acting in its capacity as the
07-  - -2007    governing body of the named CSAs and improvement zones, thereof, establishing and
10              continuing sewer and water connection fees, and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-04
4031 - -2007    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
4032 - -2007    16.0225
4033 - -2007    Repealing Local Area Transportation Plan
4034 - -2007    53.0602—
                53.0606
4035 - -2007    52.0302
4036 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904, Adding position
4038 - -2007    Amending Ord. 1904, Adding position
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to the 2007 California Fire Code for the Board-governed
07-  - -2007    County Service Areas and Improvement Zones amending Chapter 1 of Division 3 of
11              Title 2 of the San Bernardino Code and repealing Ordinance No. 4002
4039 - -2007    Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees)
SD-             Amending thee rate and method of apportionment and to increase the amount of bonded
07-  - -2007    indebtedness and rescinding Ord. SD-03-04
12
4040 - -2007    Amending the General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
4041 - -2008    33.1014—
                33.1017
4042 - -2008    16.0203A
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.04.060,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.030,
                82.06.040,
                82.06.050,
                82.13.060,
                82.13.070,
                82.13.080,
                83.02.070,
                83.02.080,
                83.06.040,
                83.06.070,
                83.08.020,
                83.08.040,
                83.10.060,
                83.10.080,
                83.11.040,
                83.11.070,
                83.11.080,
                83.13.050,
                83.13.090,
                83.15.010,
                83.15.020,
                83.15.030,
                83.15.040,
                83.15.050,
                83.15.060,
                83.15.070,
                84.01.050,
                84.04.050,
                84.04.060,
                84.04.070,
                84.04.090,
                84.05.030, 84.08.040,
                84.16.010,
                84.16.020,
                84.16.030,
                84.16.040,
                84.16.050,
                84.16.060,
                84.16.070,
                84.16.080,
4043 - -2008    84.17.080,
                84.18.030,
                84.19.080,
                84.21.030,
                84.24.030,
                84.25.010,
                84.25.070,
                84.27.060,
                85.06.080,
                85.09.010,
                85.09.020,
                85.09.030,
                85.10.070,
                85.17.040,
                86.06.060,
                86.09.010,
                86.09.020,
                86.09.030,
                86.09.040,
                86.09.050,
                86.09.060,
                86.09.070,
                86.09.080,
                86.09.090,
                86.09.100,
                86.09.110,
                86.09.120,
                86.09.130,
                86.09.140,
                86.09.150,
                86.09.160,
                86.09.170,
                86.09.180,
                86.09.190,
                86.09.200,
                86.09.210,
                86.15.050,
                88.01.050,
                88.02.040,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.050,
                810.01.070,
                810.01.150,
                810.01.200,
                810.01.210,
                810.01.240
                16.0206,
                41.2501—
4044 - -2008    41.2515,
                41.2601—
                41.2604 
4045 - -2008    16.0201—
                16.0231
4046 - -2008    Repealing and reenacting title 1 through 7 of the San Bernardino County Code
4047 - -2008    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
                41.0501 -
                41.0505,
4048 - -2008    41.0509,
                41.0511,
                41.0513,
                41.0514
4049 - -2008    16.0207A
4050 - -2008    Amending Ordinance 1904 by placing the following positions, #82656, 82657, 82660,
                82661 and 82730, Mental Health Specialist - into the Unclassified Service
4051 - -2008    Repeals 33.1020—33.1029
                Amending Section EV.0240 Relative to the Special Development Land Use Zoning
4052 - -2008    District, Subsections EV.0320(M)(1), (3) and (4) and Figure EV-12 Relative to
                Trails Systems and Subsection EV.0330(B)(7) Relative to Loading Dock Standards, All
                of the East Valley Area Plan
                Approving an Amendment to the Development Agreement for the Revised Citrus Plaza
4053 - -2008    Project and Mountain Grove at Citrus Plaza Project between the County and Redlands
                Joint Venture, LLC and Mountain Grove Partners, LLC
4054 - -2008    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
                Proposing Charter Amendment Number 39; Calling an election thereon; Consolidating
4055 - -2008    said election with the presidential general election; proclaiming such election;
                giving notice of final dates for submission of arguments
                13.0602,
4056 - -2008    13.0604,
                13.0613
                82.01.030,
                82.03.040,
                82.03.060,
                82.04.040,
                82.04.060,
                82.05.060,
                82.06.040,
                82.06.060,
                82.10.030,
                82.13.050,
                82.13.090, 82.24.010 - 82.24.030,
                83.02.070,
                83.02.080,
4057 - -2008    83.11.080,
                84.01.030 -
                84.01.050, 84.08.030, 84.08.040,
                84.14.030,
                84.21.030,
                85.12.020,
                86.09.030,
                86.09.090,
                86.09.110,
                86.15.050,
                88.01.080,
                810.01.060,
                810.01.140,
                810.01.200
                23.0301,
4058 - -2008    23.0304,
                23.0307,
                23.0308
4059 - -2008    23.0801
4060 - -2008    16.0215B, 16.0228B
4061 - -2008    Placing additional positions in the classified service
4062 - -2008    16.0226
4063 - -2008    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
                23.0301,
                23.0304,
4064 - -2008    23.0307,
                23.0308,
                23.0310
4065 - -2008    83.01.040,
                810.01.060
4066 - -2009    Repealed by Ord. 4347
4068 - -2009    12.0306
                13.0604,
4069 - -2009    13.0613,
                13.0614
4070 - -2009    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
                12.1604,
4071 - -2009    12.4105,
                12.4110
4072 - -2009    16.0203B
                12.2400,
4073 - -2009    12.3502,
                16.0220B
4074 - -2009    13.0613
4075 - -2009    Repeals 16.0226(x)(11)
4076 - -2009    16.0201 -
                16.0231
4077 - -2009    13.0604
4078 - -2009    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
4079 - -2009    29.0201 -
                29.0207
4080 - -2009  13.0614
4081 - -2009  Repealed by Ord. 4385
4082 - -2009    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4083 - -2009    Establishing a temporary moratorium on the issuance of permits for medical
                marijuana dispensaries
4084 - -2009    16.0213A
                82.01.020,
                82.02.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.05.060,
                82.06.030,
                82.07.040,
                82.13.060,
                82.13.080,
                83.02.060,
                83.02.080,
                83.11.100,
                83.15.070,
                84.01.020, 84.08.040,
4085 7-21-2009  84.14.030,
                84.14.050,
                84.21.030,
                84.25.040,
                84.25.070,
                85.03.020,
                85.11.010 -
                85.11.030,
                85.17.040,
                86.06.020,
                86.06.040,
                86.09.050,
                86.09.090,
                86.09.100,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.180
4086 - -2009    An interim Ordinance adopted pursuant to Government Code § 65858, establishing a
                temporary moratorium on the issuance of permits for medical marijuana dispensaries
4087 - -2009    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
4088 - -2009    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4089 - -2009    Third Cycle 2009 General Plan Amendments/Amending County General Plan Land Use
                Zoning District Maps
4090 - -2009    Repealed by Ord. 4090
4091 - -2009    23.0313-
                23.0319
4092 - -2009    32.0119 -
                32.0126, repeals 32.0224, 32.0703-32.0705, 32.0917 and 32.1409
                33.0103,
                33.0104,
4093 - -2009    33.0106,
                33.0109 -
                33.0113
4094 - -2009    16.0203A
4095 - -2009    Amending the San Bernardino County General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
4096 - -2009    13.0402
                12.0301,
4097 - -2010    12.0512,
                12.2400,
                12.4401, repeals 12.2804
                82.01.030,
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                82.06.050,
                82.13.040,
                82.14.020,
                83.02.040,
                84.01.030,
                84.01.040,
                84.12.040,
                84.16.050,
                84.19.040,
4098 - -2010    84.23.030,
                84.25.040,
                84.25.070,
                Ch. 84.26 (title),
                84.26.030,
                84.27.060,
                86.09.050,
                84.29.010 -
                84.29.050,
                84.29.070,
                Ch. 85.18 (title),
                85.18.020,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.090,
                810.01.170, repeals 83.05.070
4099 - -2010    First Cycle 2010 General Plan Amendments/Amending County General Plan Land Use
                Zoning District Maps
4100 - -2010    13.0604,
                13.0613
4101 - -2010    16.0201 -
                16.0231
                32.0119,
4102 - -2010    33.0110,
                33.0113, 37.0205, 37.0207 - 37.0209
                28.0404,
4103 - -2010    28.0407 -
                28.0409
4104 - -2010    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4105 - -2010    13.0604
4106 - -2010    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4107 - -2010    16.0207A
4108 - -2010    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4109 - -2010    13.0604
4110 - -2010    An interim Ordinance adopted pursuant to Government Code § 65858, extending a
                temporary moratorium on the issuance of permits for medical marijuana dispensaries
4111 - -2010    25.0301 -
                25.0312
                16.0204,
                16.0206,
                16.0215A,
                16.0215B,
4112 - -2010    16.0215C,
                16.0222,
                16.0222A,
                16.0222B,
                16.0228,
                16.0228B
4113 - -2010    14.0102,
                14.0114
                32.0124,
4114 - -2010    32.0220,
                32.1501
4115 - -2010    41.1920 ,
                41.2018
                16.0215B,
4116 - -2010    87.07.020,
                87.07.040
4117 - -2010    22.0101 -
                22.0116
4118 - -2010    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4119 - -2010    16.0203A
4120 - -2010    12.0513
4121 - -2010    82.040.060
4122 - -2010    Second Cycle 2010 General Plan Amendments/Amending County General Plan Land Use
                Zoning District Maps
                14.0102,
4123 - -2010  14.0106,
                14.0109,
                14.0115
4124 - -2010  11.0601
4125 - -2010  19.0101 -
                19.0109
4126 - -2010  16.0226
4127 - -2010  Authorizing the levy of special taxes within the Communities Facilities District
                No. 2010-1 (East Valley)
                12.0103,
                12.0201,
                12.0206,
4128 - -2010  12.0207,
                12.0209,
                12.0211,
                12.0212
4129 - -2010  Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4130 - -2010  Repealed by Ord. 4314
4131 - -2010  13.0613
4133 - -2011    16.0222
                52.0201,
                52.0202,
4135 - -2011    52.0204,
                52.0205,
                52.0210
                83.10.010,
                83.10.020,
                83.10.040,
                83.10.060,
                83.10.080,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.040,
                810.01.050,
                810.01.070,
                810.01.080,
4136 - -2011    810.01.100,
                810.01.110,
                810.01.140,
                810.01.150,
                810.01.170,
                810.01.180,
                810.01.200,
                810.01.210,
                810.01.220,
                810.01.250,
                810.01.260
4137 - -2011    33.1401 -
                33.1407
4138 - -2011    Authorizing the levy of special taxes within the Improvement Area No. 2 of
                Communities Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4139 - -2011    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by placing additional positions in the unclassified
                service pursuant to charter provisions
4140 --2011     16.0215C,
                810.01.150
4141 - -2011    16.0201-
                16.0231
4142 - -2011    13.0613
4143 - -2011    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by removing positions in the unclassified service
                pursuant to charter provisions
4144 - -2011    Repealed by Ord. 4374
4145 - -2011    13.0613
4146 - -2011    16.0222
4147 - -2011    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by removing positions from and adding a position to the
                unclassified service pursuant to charter provisions
4148 - -2011    12.3801
4149 - -2011    12.4501 -
                12.4509
4150 - -2011    32.1502 -
                32.1504
                An ordinance determining compliance with Voluntary Alternative Redevelopment
4151 - -2011    Program in order to permit the continued existence and operation of the County
                Redevelopment Agency
4152 - -2011    12.0102
4153 - -2011  Repeals 12.3601—12.3606
4154 - -2011    23.0732
4155 - -2011    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by removing positions from and adding positions for the
                unclassified service pursuant to charter provisions
                84.29.030,
                84.29.040,
                84.29.060,
4156 - -2011    84.29.070,
                84.30.010 -
                84.30.030,
                85.03.040
4157 - -2012    13.0614
                33.0401—
4158 - -2012    33.0404,
                33.0408,
                33.0409
4159 - -2012    Amending Ordinance 1904 by removing certain positions from the unclassified service
                pursuant to charter provisions
4160 - -2012    41.2407
4161 - -2012    83.11.040,
                84.17.090
                82.04.040,
4162 - -2012    84.03.030,
                810.01.050
                82.14.010 -
                82.14.070,
                85.07.010 -
                85.07.030,
                85.11.020,
4163 - -2012    86.04.010,
                86.09.030,
                88.03.060,
                810.01.060,
                810.01.080,
                810.01.250
4166 - -2012  33.08102; repealing 33.08109 and 33.08110
4168 - -2012    An urgency ordinance, extending urgency interim Ordinance No. 4164 for 10 months
                and 15 days prohibiting establishment of certain alcohol and drug treatment centers
                84.31.010—
                84.31.060,
4169 - -2012    86.08.010,
                810.01.060,
                810.01.080,
                810.01.200
4170 - -2012  85.19.010—85.19.150,
                810.01.080
4171 - -2012    Granting franchise to Southern California Edison Company for construction, use of
                property, and transmitting electricity
                33.0402,
4172 - -2012    33.0408,
                33.1401—
                33.1407
4173 - -2012    16.0201—
                16.0231
4174 - -2012  16.0207A
4175 - -2012  86.09.100,
                86.09.110
                16.0225,
                35.0102,
                35.0103,
                35.0109,
4176 - -2012  35.0110—
                35.0113,
                35.0118—
                35.0121,
                35.0125,
                35.0127
4177 - -2012  16.0225
4178 - -2012    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding certain positions to the unclassified service
                pursuant to charter provisions
4179 - -2012  Repealed by Ord. 4374
4180 - -2012    83.05.060,
                83.12.030
                83.05.020,
4181 - -2012    83.09.020,
                84.16.020,
                84.21.020
4182 - -2012    12.4601—
                12.4610
                Proposing Charter Amendment Number 40; Calling an election thereon; Consolidating
4183 - -2012    said election with the general election; proclaiming such election; giving notice
                of final dates for submission of arguments
4184 - -2012    12.4301—
                12.4318
4185 - -2012    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding certain positions to the unclassified service
                pursuant to charter provisions
4186 - -2012    16.0213B
4187 - -2012    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by removing positions from and adding positions to the
                unclassified service pursuant to charter provisions
                82.06.040,
                84.26.010—
4188 - -2012    84.26.030,
                85.18.020,
                85.18.030,
                810.01.250
                82.22.010—
                82.22.220,
                810.01.050,
                810.01.060,
4189 - -2012    810.01.100,
                810.01.150,
                810.01.160,
                810.01.200,
                810.01.280
4190 - -2012  Amending the Land Use Element of the General Plan as the first Cycle 2012 Land Use
                Element General Plan Amendments
4191 - -2012    21.0101—
                21.0110
4192 - -2013    Authorizing the levy of special taxes within the Improvement Area No. 3 of
                Communities Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4193 - -2013    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding and/or removing positions from the
                unclassified service pursuant to charter provisions
                An interim ordinance, extending urgency interim Ordinances No. 4164 and 4168 for an
4194 - -2013    addition 12 months prohibiting the establishment of certain alcohol and drug
                treatment centers
                Repealing
4195 - -2013    33.08160—
                33.08.164
4196 - -2013    33.0401—
                33.0410
4197 - -2013    16.0201—
                16.0231
                An interim urgency ordinance establishing a temporary moratorium on the approval of
4198 - -2013    solar energy generation projects for which applications have not been accepted as
                complete
4199 - -2013    16.0207A
4200 - -2013    33.0501—
                33.0508
4201 - -2013    First Cycle 2013 General Plan Amendments/Amending County General Plan Land Use
                Zoning District Maps
4202 - -2013    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by moving positions from the unclassified to the
                classified service pursuant to the County Charter
4203 - -2013    Repealed by Ord. 4385
4204 - -2013    82.36.010—
                82.36.050
                84.18.020—
4205 - -2013    84.18.040,
                85.10.030
4206 - -2013    12.0509
                An interim urgency ordinance extending interim urgency Ordinance No. 4198
4207 - -2013    establishing a temporary moratorium on the approval of solar energy generation
                projects for which applications have not been accepted as complete
4208 - -2013    Granting franchise to Calnev Pipe Line LLC to construct and operate pipelines along
                and under the public streets within the County
4209 - -2013  Repealing 31.0701—31.0723
4210 - -2013  13.0201—
                13.0214
4211 - -2013  Second Cycle 2013 General Plan Land Use Element Amendments/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4212 - -2013  Repealing 31.0215; 31.0301—31.0310
                84.29.020,
4213 - -2013  84.29.035,
                84.29.040,
                810.01.050
4214 - -2013  Granting to Terrace Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use and repair
                water pipelines along, across, upon and under the public streets within the County
                Granting to Sky Forest Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use, and
4215 - -2013  repair water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets within
                the County
                Granting to Jubilee Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use, and repair
4216 - -2013  water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets within the
                County
                Granting to Crystal Lakes Property Owners Association a franchise to construct,
4217 - -2013    use, and repair water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public
                streets within the County
                Granting to Baseline Gardens Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use,
4218 - -2013  and repair water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets
                within the County
                Granting to Alpine Water Users Association a franchise to construct, use, and
4219 - -2013  repair water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets within
                the County
                Granting to Bar-H Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use, and repair
4220 - -2013  water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets within the
                County
                Granting to Center Mutual Water Company a franchise to construct, use, and repair
4221 - -2013    water pipelines in, along, across, upon and under the public streets within the
                County
4222 - -2014  Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding and/or removing positions from the
                unclassified service pursuant to the County Charter
4223 - -2014  Repealing 16.0123C
4224 - -2014  16.0203
4225 - -2014    23.0801
4226 - -2014    12.4301—
                12.4318
4227 - -2014  First Cycle 2014 General Plan Land Use Amendments/Amending County General Plan Land
                Use Zoning District Maps
4228 - -2014    Adopting the Hacienda at Fairview Valley Specific Plan
4229 - -2014    86.14.090
                16.0215A,
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                82.22.040,
                83.11.040,
                84.05.050,
                Ch. 84.23 (title),
                84.23.010—
                84.23.030,
                84.28.020,
                84.28.060,
4230 - -2014  84.31.010—
                84.31.090,
                84.32.010—
                84.32.040,
                85.20.010—
                85.20.030,
                810.01.040,
                810.01.050,
                810.01.070,
                810.01.090,
                810.01.100,
                810.01.180,
                810.01.200,
                810.01.220
                16.0205,
                16.0215A,
                41.2701,
                41.2801—
                41.2810,
                41.2901—
                41.2910,
4239 - -2014    82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                84.02.010—
                84.02.050,
                85.01.030,
                85.21.010—
                85.21.100,
                810.01.030, repealing Ch. 41.13
4240 - -2014  41.1701—
                41.1713
4241 - -2014  14.0204
                83.05.070,
4242 - -2014  83.09.030—
                83.09.050
4243 - -2014  87.07.040
4244 - -2014  85.03.120
                82.02.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                82.13.060,
                82.19.040,
                82.21.030,
                82.23.030,
                83.01.080,
                83.01.110,
                83.02.040,
4245 - -2014  83.02.080,
                83.07.040,
                83.10.010,
                83.11.040,
                83.13.110,
                84.01.050,
                84.12.050,
                85.12.010—
                85.12.030,
                86.09.050,
                810.01.150,
                810.01.210
4246 - -2014  Repealed by Ord. 4366
4247 - -2014  16.0201—
                16.0231
4248 - -2014  Authorizing the levy of special taxes within the Improvement Area No. 4 of
                Communities Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4249 - -2014  Second Cycle 2014 General Plan Land Use Element Amendments/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4250 - -2014  Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding a position to the unclassified service
                pursuant to the County Charter
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
4251 - -2014  82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                84.33.010—
                84.33.030
4253 - -2014    27.1501—
                27.1512
4254 - -2014    82.14.030,
                82.14.050
4255 - -2014    Repealed by Ord. 4314
4256 - -2014    Franchise
4257 - -2014    52.0204
4258 - -2014    85.19.020 ,
                810.01.080
4259 - -2014    14.0801 —
                14.0805
4260 - -2014    31.0304
4261 - -2014    Third Cycle 2014 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan Land
                Use Zoning District Maps
4262 - -2014    Repealed by Ord. 4385
                41.1901 —
4263 - -2014    41.1920 ,
                41.2001 —
                41.2018
4264 - -2014    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding a position to the unclassified service
                pursuant to the County Charter
4265 - -2014    12.0406
4266 - -2014    Amending the Glen Helen Specific Plan
4267 - -2015  52.0120
4268 - -2015  82.19.040
4269 - -2015    Repealed by Ord. 4374
                13.0602,
                13.0604—
                13.0613,
                13.0615,
                13.0616,
4270 - -2015    13.0617c,
                13.0617f,
                13.0617m,
                13.0628,
                13.0629,
                13.0660
4271 - -2015  13.0618
4273 - -2015    16.0223
4274 - -2015  Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding three positions to the unclassified service
4275 - -2015    Granting to Praxair, Inc. a franchise to construct, use and repair industrial gas
                pipelines along, across, upon and under the public streets
4276 - -2015    First Cycle 2015 General Plan Land Use Element Amendments/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4277 - -2015    16.0201—
                16.0231
                Establishing a temporary moratorium on the establishment of new commercial uses
4278 - -2015    that may conflict with the Valley Boulevard Corridor Specific Plan, to allow time
                for completion and implementation of the Specific Plan
4279 - -2015    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding three positions to the classified and
                unclassified service
                16.0215A,
                85.19.010,
4280 - -2015    85.19.020,
                810.01.080,
                810.01.210
                Extending Interim Urgency Ordinance No. 4278 establishing a temporary moratorium on
4281 - -2015    the establishment of new commercial uses that may conflict with the Valley
                Boulevard Corridor Specific Plan, to allow time for completion and implementation
                of the Specific Plan
4282 - -2015    Repealed by Ord. 4308
4283 - -2015    33.0402,
                33.0408
4284 - -2015  Repealing 16.0205(a)(1); 41.0201—41.0209
                63.0801—
4285 - -2015    63.0810,
                63.1601—
                63.1606
4286 - -2015  Franchise
4287 - -2015  Franchise
4288 - -2015  Franchise
4289 - -2015  Franchise
4290 - -2015  13.0201—
                13.0214
4291 - -2015  Repealing 12.0801—12.0807
4292 - -2015  Terminating franchise
4293 - -2015    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding four positions to the classified and
                unclassified service
                13.0602,
4294 - -2016    13.0604,
                13.0613
4295 - -2016    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding a position to the unclassified service
4296 - -2016    First Cycle 2016 General Plan Land Use Element Amendments/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4297 - -2016    31.1102,
                31.1106
                16.0204,
4298 - -2016    16.0215A,
                83.13.030—
                83.13.090
4299 - -2016    Franchise
4300 - -2016    Second Cycle 2016 General Plan Land Use Element Amendments/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
                16.0102,
4301 - -2016  16.0201—
                16.0231
4302 - -2016    Authorizing the levy of special taxes within Improvement Area No. 5 of County of
                San Bernardino Community Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4303 - -2016    Third Cycle 2016 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan Land
                Use Zoning District Maps
                Title 1, Division 6, Chapter 2 (Schedule of Fees) index (
                16.0208,
                16.0211B),
4304 - -2016    16.0204,
                16.0215A,
                82.04.040,
                82.14.050,
                810.01.080
4305 - -2016    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding a position to the unclassified service
                Repealing 12.3906 and 12.4006, amending
4306 - -2016    13.0602,
                13.0604,
                13.0613
4307 - -2016    14.0102,
                14.0111
                Repealing and replacing
4308 - -2016    41.3001—
                41.3008
                84.34.010—
4309 - -2016  84.34.070,
                810.01.150; repealing 82.02.070
4310 - -2016    63.1701—
                63.1705
4311 - -2016    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 adding positions to the unclassified service
4314 - -2016    Repealed by Ord. 4375
4315 - -2017    Repealing 13.06171
                Adding
                110.0101—
                110.0106,
                110.0201—
                110.0207,
                110.0301—
                110.0305,
4316 - -2017    110.0401—
                110.0403,
                110.0501—
                110.0504,
                110.0601,
                110.0602,
                110.0701—
                110.0704
4317 - -2017    First Cycle 2017 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amendi ng General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4318 - -2017    Adopting the Valley Corridor Specific Plan, implementing land use regulations for
                an area in Bloomington as defined by the Plan
4319 - -2017    82.23.030,
                86.14.090
4320 - -2017    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding two positions to the unclassified service
4321 - -2017    Levying special taxes within certain territory annexed to County of San Bernardino
                Community Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4322 - -2017  16.0201—
                16.0231
4323 - -2017    Second Cycle 2017 General Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan Land Use
                Zoning District Maps
4324 - -2017    Amending the Glen Helen Specific Plan
4325 - -2017    Amending Table 2.F of Subsection KC2.0115(h)(2) of the Kaiser Commerce Center
                Specific Plan
                Levying special taxes within certain territory annexed to County of San Bernardino
4326 - -2017    Community Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North) (Repealed by Ord.
                4348)
4327 - -2017    41.2101—
                41.2120
4328 - -2017    41.2501—
                41.2515
4329 - -2017    84.34.050—
                84.34.070
4330 - -2017    33.0890—
                33.0897
                82.04.040,
                83.11.040,
                84.28.010—
4331 - -2017    84.28.100,
                85.14.020,
                86.08.010,
                810.01.180,
                810.01.210
4332 - -2017    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding two positions to the unclassified service
                82.14.020,
                82.14.040,
                82.14.050,
4333 - -2017    85.07.010,
                85.07.030,
                85.11.010—
                85.11.030
                82.13.010—
                82.13.050,
                82.13.090,
4334 - -2017    83.08.040,
                84.16.040,
                84.18.030,
                84.21.030
4335 - -2017    Third Cycle 2017 General Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan Land Use
                Zoning District Maps
4336 - -2017    12.4306
4337 - -2017    Fourth Cycle 2017 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4338 - -2017    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding three positions to the unclassified service
                13.0602,
                13.0604,
                13.0613,
                13.0614,
4339 - -2018  13.0616,
                13.0617a,
                13.0617c,
                13.0617f,
                13.0617m
4340 - -2018    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by removing two positions from the unclassified service
                16.0101,
4341 - -2018    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
                83.11.040,
                84.01.010—
                84.01.050,
                84.04.090,
4342 - -2018  84.12.070,
                84.21.030,
                84.22.020,
                85.14.020,
                85.14.060,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.060,
                810.01.100; adding
                84.01.060; repealing Ch. 84.08
4343 - -2018    Levying special taxes within certain territory annexed to County of San Bernardino
                Community Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4344 - -2018    13.0619
4345 - -2018  Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
4346 - -2018  First Cycle 2018 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan Land
                Use Zoning District Maps
4347 - -2018    Repealing 13.0617h
4348 - -2018  Repealing Ord. 4326
4349 - -2018    Levying special taxes within Improvement Area No. 6 of County of San Bernardino
                Community Facilities District No. 2006-1 (Lytle Creek North)
4350 - -2018    12.4304; adding
                12.4318
4351 - -2018    Second Cycle 2018 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4352 - -2018    13.0619
4353 - -2018    13.0619
4354 - -2018  Amending General Plan Land Use Zoning District Maps
                14.0102,
4355 - -2019  14.0103,
                14.0109,
                14.0115
4356 - -2019  12.1908
4357 - -2019  13.0601—
                13.0660
4358 - -2019  21.0104,
                21.0106
                16.0101,
4359 - -2019  16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
                82.14.050,
                84.16.040,
                84.21.030,
4360 - -2019  84.34.030,
                84.34.050,
                85.03.020,
                85.03.090,
                85.03.120
4361 - -2019  24.0701—
                24.0710
4362 - -2019    33.0501—
                33.0508
4363 - -2019    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service.
4364 - -2019    35.0116,
                35.0121
4365 - -2019    13.0618
4366 - -2019    Repealing 12.4701—12.4712
4367 - -2019    28.0801—
                28.0809; repealing 37.0201, 37.0202, 37.0203, 37.0204, 37.0205, 37.0206, 37.0207
                12.0201—
                12.0213,
                12.3401—
4368 - -2019    12.3406,
                12.3501—
                12.3506,
                12.2400; repealing 12.2501—12.2506
4369 - -2019    23.0801
4370 - -2019  12.4302,
                12.4311
                84.01.060,
4371 - -2019    84.28.010—
                84.28.110
4372 - -2019  Adding
                13.0617
4373 - -2019  First Cycle 2019 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan Land
                Use Zoning District Maps
4374 - -2020    Repealing 27.1401—27.1404
4375 - -2020    Repealed by Ord. 4452
4376 - -2020    13.0613,
                13.0614
4377 - -2020    First Cycle 2020 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan Land
                Use Zoning District Maps
4378 - -2020    41.2901—
                41.2910
4379 - -2020    41.2801—
                41.2810
4380 - -2020    41.1701—
                41.1713
4381 - -2020    41.1901—
                41.1920
4382 - -2020    63.2201
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                82.06.040,
4383 - -2020    83.02.080,
                83.11.040,
                84.01.010—
                84.01.060,
                810.01.030,
                810.01.120
                16.0101,
4384 - -2020    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
4385 - -2020    Repealing and replacing Title 4, Division 6
4386 - -2020    13.0613,
                13.0614
4387 - -2020    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding positions to the unclassified service
4388 - -2020    16.0226
4391 - -2020    Second Cycle 2020 General Plan Land Use Element Amendment/Amending General Plan
                Land Use Zoning District Maps
4392 - -2020    13.0613
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
                82.04.060,
                82.06.040,
                82.14.040,
                82.14.050,
4393 - -2020    83.10.070,
                83.13.050,
                84.01.020,
                84.21.030,
                84.25.070,
                84.28.020,
                87.07.040,
                810.01.200
4394 - -2020    16.0215B
4395 - -2020    12.0104
4399 - -2021    12.4801—
                12.4810
                82.01.030,
                82.04.040,
                82.05.040,
                83.08.030,
                83.10.010—
                83.10.080,
4400 - -2021    84.01.050,
                84.01.060,
                84.28.020—
                84.28.070,
                810.01.040,
                810.01.060,
                810.01.070
4401 - -2021    33.1201—
                33.1298
4402 - -2021    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map CJ29
                16.0101,
4403 - -2021    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
4404 - -2021    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29
4405 - -2021    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29
4406 - -2021    16.0223
4407 - -2021    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding positions to the unclassified service
4408 - -2021    Repealed by Ord. 4424
                13.0613,
4409 - -2021    13.0614,
                13.0617
4410 - -2021    Amending Land Use Zoning District Maps DJ04, FH29 and FH28.
4411 - -2021    Repealed by Ord. 4424
4412 - -2021    Repealed by Ord. 4424
4413 - -2021    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH23
4414 - -2021    Amending Ordinance No. 1904 by adding positions to the unclassified service
                82.04.060,
4415 - -2021    83.03.010—
                83.03.130
4416 - -2021    13.0613,
                13.0614
4417 - -2021    Amending the Agua Mansa Industrial Corridor Specific Plan
4418 - -2021    Amending the Agua Mansa Industrial Corridor Specific Plan
4419 - -2021    83.07.010—
                83.07.090
4420 - -2021    12.4001—
                12.4004
4421 - -2021    12.0102
4422 - -2021    12.1908
4423 - -2021    84.34.080
4424 - -2021    11.0201—
                11.0214
4425 - -2022    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
4426 - -2022    Amending the San Bernardino County Land Use Zoning District Map FH29
                16.0101,
4427 - -2022    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
4428 - -2022    Adopting a Military Equipment Use Policy for the San Bernardino County District
                Attorney’s Office
4429 - -2022    Adopting a Military Equipment Use Policy for the San Bernardino County Probation
                Department
4430 - -2022    Adopting a Military Equipment Use Policy for the San Bernardino County Sheriff’s
                Department
4431 - -2022    Amending Land Use Zoning District Maps FH29A and FH24A
4432 - -2022    11.0206
                13.0613,
                13.0614,
                13.0617c,
4433 - -2022    13.0617f,
                13.0628,
                13.0629,
                13.0660
                14.0117,
                33.1501—
                33.1508,
                46.0101,
                46.0102,
                46.0201,
                46.0301—
                46.0304,
                46.0401—
                46.0404,
                46.0501—
                46.0509,
                46.0601—
                46.0605,
                46.0801—
4434 - -2022    46.0803,
                46.0901—
                46.0906,
                46.1001—
                46.1004,
                46.1101,
                46.1102,
                46.1201—
                46.1203,
                46.1301,
                46.1302,
                46.1401—
                46.1405,
                46.1501,
                46.1601,
                46.1701
4435 - -2022    11.0206
4436 - -2022    Placing a temporary pause on approval of new short-term residential rental unit
                permits
4437 - -2022    13.0628
4438 - -2022    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
                16.0215C,
4439 - -2022    84.28.010—
                84.28.110
4440 - -2022    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map EH06A
4441 - -2022    Proposed Charter amendment for taxpayer protection and government reform, to submit
                to the qualified electors at the November 8, 2022 election
4442 - -2022    Proposed Measure on pursuing the County’s fair share of State and Federal
                resources, to submit to the qualified electors at the November 8, 2022 election
4443 - -2022    27.1601—
                27.1604
                82.03.040,
                82.04.040,
4444 - -2022    82.06.040,
                84.35.010—
                84.35.120
4445 - -2022    33.1601—
                33.1613
                16.0209,
4446 - -2022    52.0130,
                53.0603 -
                53.0608
4447 - -2022    Amending Land Use Zoning District Maps FH29A and FH27A
4448 - -2022    82.23.030,
                86.14.090
4449 - -2022    Amending Land Use Zoning District Maps FH28A and FH29A
4450 - -2022    82.23.030,
                86.14.090
4451 - -2022    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29A
                63.0101—
                63.0105,
                63.0151,
                63.0152,
                63.0201,
                63.0202,
                63.0301—
                63.0305,
                63.0401,
                63.0402,
4452 - -2022    63.0501,
                63.1301,
                63.1302,
                63.1401,
                63.1402,
                63.1501,
                63.1801,
                63.1901,
                63.2001,
                63.2101,
                63.2102
4453 - -2023    12.0307—
                12.0310
                13.0613,
4454 - -2023    13.0614,
                13.0617m,
                13.0660
4455 - -2023    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
                13.0613,
4456 - -2023    13.0614,
                13.0617m,
                13.0660
                16.0101,
4457 - -2023    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
4459 - -2023    Repealing Title 2, Division 3, Chapter 1
4458 - -2023    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29A
                46.0101,
                46.0102,
                46.0201,
                46.0301,
                46.0302,
4460 - -2023    46.0401,
                46.0402,
                46.1001,
                46.1002,
                46.1402,
                46.1403,
                46.1405
4461 - -2023    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
4462 - -2023    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29A
4463 - -2023    33.1017
4464 - -2023    13.0619
4465 - -2024    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
                13.0613,
4466 - -2024    13.0617a,
                13.0617m
4467 - -2024    12.1303
4468 - -2024    Amending Ord. No. 1904 by adding positions to the classified and unclassified
                service
                82.14.010—
4469 - -2024    82.14.070,
                86.04.010,
                810.01.080
                16.0101,
4470 - -2024    16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0231
4471 - -2024    Amending the Glen Helen Specific Plan
4472 - -2024    Amending Ord. No. 1904 relating to the classified and unclassified service
                32.0101,
                32.0103,
                32.0107,
4473 - -2024    32.0108,
                32.0208,
                32.1201,
                32.1203
4475 - -2024    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29A
                13.0613,
                13.0614,
4476 - -2024    13.0617c,
                13.0617f,
                13.0660
4477 - -2024    Proposed Charter amendment for law enforcement staffing and community protection,
                to submit to the qualified electors at the November 5, 2024 election
4478 - -2024    31.0820
4479 - -2024    12.4301—
                12.4319
4480 - -2024    16.0215B
4481 - -2024    33.06558—
                33.06562
4482 - -2025    Amending Ord. No. 1904 relating to the classified and unclassified service
                16.0101,
                16.0102,
                16.0201—
                16.0207D,
                16.0208A—
                16.0210A,
                16.0213A,
                16.0213B,
                16.0215A—
4483 - -2025    16.0216,
                16.0218,
                16.0220,
                16.0220B,
                16.0220C,
                16.0222—
                16.0226,
                16.0228,
                16.0228B,
                16.0231
4484 - -2025    21.0101—
                21.0110
                46.0506,
4485 - -2025    46.0508,
                46.0604,
                46.1003
4486 - -2025    Levying special taxes within Community Facilities District No. 2025-1 (Commerce
                Center II)
4487 - -2025    41.1801—
                41.1815
4488 - -2025    84.26.030
4489 - -2025    Designating the fire hazard severity zones
4490 - -2025    Amending Ord. No. 1904 relating to the classified and unclassified service
4491 - -2025    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH04A
4492 - -2025    12.0206
4493 - -2025    13.0617
4494 - -2025    28.0901—
                28.0905
4495 - -2025    Amending the Glen Helen Specific Plan
4496 - -2025    Amending Land Use Zoning District Map FH29A and CHDHA
4498 - -2025    12.1907,
                12.3405
4499 - -2025    16.0215B
               
 
 
REFERENCES TO SPECIAL DISTRICTS ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section/Disposition
Ord. Date       Code Section/Disposition
No.  Passed
SD-             Collection of road maintenance service charges on tax roll, CSA 70-R-23 (Mile
91-  - -1991    High Park), Crestline
10
SD-
91-  - -1991    Collection of street and highway sweeping charges on tax roll, CSA 70-CH
11
SD-             Collection of service charge on tax roll for road maintenance, CSA 70-R-31
91-  - -1991    (Lytle Creek)
12
SD-             Collection of road maintenance service charge on tax roll, CSA 70-R-29 (Yucca
91-  - -1991    Mesa)
13
SD-
91-  - -1991    Collection of water service charges on tax roll, CSA 53-C (Fawnskin)
14
SD-
91-  - -1991    Establishing Facilities Benefit Assessment, Chino Hills Specific Plan
15
SD-
91-  - -1991    Increasing Facilities Development Fee, Chino Hills Specific Plan
16
SD-
91-  - -1991    Levy of Special Tax, CFD #9 (Rincon Village)
18
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #1
19
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #2
20
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #4
21
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #5
22
SD-
91-  - -1991    Authorizes levy of Special Tax A, CFD #6
23
SD-  - -1992    Recreation and Park fees for CSAs, Improvement Zones and Park Districts
92-2
SD-  - -1992    Sewer User fees and Standby charges for Crestline Sanitation District
92-3
SD-  - -1992    Ambulance fees for CSAs, Improvement Zones and Fire Protection Districts
92-4
SD-  - -1992    Cemetery charges for CSA 29
92-5
SD-  - -1992    Increasing sewer connection charge for CSA 70-B and increasing water
92-6            connection fee for CSA 70-C and repealing Ordinance SD-91-8
SD-  - -1992    Collection of service charge and interest on tax rolls, CSA 70-R-32, Phelan
92-7
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election to Inland
93-1            Empire West Resource Conservation District
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election to Mojave
93-2            Desert Resource Conservation District
SD-  - -1993    Appointing individuals to board of directors in lieu of election, East Valley
93-3            Resource Conservation District
SD-  - -1993    Repealing Ordinance SD-92-4 and establishing various ambulance fees for CSAs
93-4            29, 56 and 82-SV-1 and Lake Arrowhead and Yucca Vly. FPDs
SD-  - -1993    Repealing Ordinance SD-92-1 and amending Ordinance SD-85-4 increasing sewer
93-5            connection charge for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1993    Sewer and water connection fees, CSA 70 B and C
93-6
SD-  - -1993    Various recreation and park activity fees for named CSAs and recreation and
93-7            park districts
SD-  - -1993    Sewer standby and user charges for Crestline Sanitation District
93-8
SD-  - -1993    Cemetery fees and charges CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley)
93-9
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge for park maintenance CSA 20 (Joshua Tree)
10
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge for park maintenance CSA 70-M (Wonder Valley)
11
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of CSA 79-R-1 service charge on tax rolls
12
SD-
93-  - -1993    Collection of service charge and interest for CSA 70-R-33
13
SD-  - -1994    CSA 70-R-34 (Big Bear) collection of service charge on tax roll
94-1
SD-  - -1994    Crestline Sanitation District increasing sewer connection charge
94-2
SD-  - -1994    CSA 70-B and C (Helendale) sewer and water connection fees
94-3
SD-  - -1994    Recreation and Park Districts activity fees
94-4
SD-  - -1994    CSA 20 (Joshua Tree) and CSA 70-M (Wonder Valley) recreation and park service
94-5            charges
SD-  - -1994    CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley) cemetery fees
94-6
SD-  - -1994    Collection of park service charges on tax roll
94-7
SD-  - -1994    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll, CSA 70-R-36
94-8
SD-  - -1994    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll, CSA 70-R-35
94-9
SD-
94-  - -1994    Repealing Ordinance SD-93-4 and establishing various ambulance fees
10
SD-  - -1995    Appointing members to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District Board
95-1            of Directors
SD-  - -1995    Appointing members to East Valley Resource Conservation District Board of
95-2            Directors
SD-  - -1995    Increasing sewer connection charge - Crestline Sanitation District
95-3
SD-  - -1995    Sewer and water connection charges/fees for CSA 70-B and C and repealing
95-4            Ordinance SD-94-3
SD-  - -1995    Fixing various recreation and park activity fees for various CSAs and
95-5            repealing Ordinance SD-94-4
SD-  - -1995    Repealing Ordinance 94-10 and establishing ambulance fees for various CSAs
95-6            and FPDs
SD-  - -1995    Repealing Ordinance 93-8 and establishing and modifying sewer user fees and
95-7            standby charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1995    Establishing fire emergency response service fees for CSA 70
95-8
SD-  - -1995    Establishment of rules relating to issuance of road permits for various CSAs
95-9
SD-
95-  - -1995    CSA 70-R-22 (Twin Peaks) collection of service charge on tax roll
10
SD-
95-  - -1995    Collection of service charge and interest on tax roll (CSA 70-R-33)
11
SD-  - -1996    Authorizing collection of park service charges on tax roll for CSAs 70-P-10
96-1            and 11
SD-  - -1996    Increasing sewer connection charges for CSA 70-B; increasing water connection
96-2            fee for CSA 70-C and repealing Ord. SD-95-4
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-5 and fixing recreation and park fees for CSAs and
96-3            improvement zones and recreation and park districts
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-6 and establishing ambulance fees for CSA 29, 56, 82-SV-
96-4            1, Lake Arrowhead and Yucca Valley FPDs and CSA 70- HL
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-7 and establishing and modifying sewer user fees and
96-5            standby charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-95-3 and increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline
96-6            Sanitation District
SD-  - -1996    Repealing Ord. SD-94-6 and fixing cemetery charges for CSA 29
96-7
SD-  - -1996    Modifying emergency response charges (fire)
96-8
SD-  - -1996    Establishing cost recovery program for fire suppression and emergency
96-9            response costs
SD-             Authorizing collection of service charge on tax roll for CSA 70-R-38 (Pinon
96-  - -1996    Hills road maintenance district)
10
SD-             Collection of service charge on tax roll for CSA 70-R-37, Hillview, Drive
96-  - -1996    South
11
SD-
96-  - -1996    Reduction or waiver of various recreation and park activities fees
12
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to East Valley Resource Conservation District in lieu of
97-1            election
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District in
97-2            lieu of election
SD-  - -1997    Appointing members to Mojave Desert Resource Conservation District in lieu of
97-3            election
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ordinance SD-96-3 and fixing recreation and park fees for CSAs,
97-4            improvement zones and recreation and park districts
SD-             Repealing Ordinance SD-96-4 and confirming and/or modifying ambulance fees
97-5 - -1997    for CSAs 29, 56 and 82-SV-1, Lk. Arrowhead and Yucca Valley FPDs and CSA 70-
                HL
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ordinance SD-96-5 and confirming sewer user charges and standby
97-6            charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ordinance SD-96-6 and increasing sewer connection charges for
97-7            Crestline Sanitation District
SD-  - -1997    Repealing Ordinance SD-96-7 and confirming cemetery charges for CSA 29
97-8
SD-  - -1997    Confirming fire protection service fees and repealing Ordinance SD-96-8 and
97-9            SD-95-8
SD-             Increasing sewer connection charges for CSA 70-B (Helendale) and water
97-  - -1997    connection fee for CSA 70-C (Helendale) and repealing Ordinance SD-96-2
10
SD-  - -1998    Fixing various recreation and park activity fees
98-1
SD-  - -1998    Ambulance fees
98-2
SD-  - -1998    Sewer standby and user charges, Crestline Sanitation District
98-3
SD-  - -1998    Increasing sewer connection charges, Crestline Sanitation District
98-4
SD-  - -1998    Fire protection service fees
98-6
SD-  - -1998    Sewer and water connection fees, CSA 70-B and C, Helendale
98-7
SD-  - -1999    Fixing recreation and park activity fees
99-1
SD-  - -1999    Confirming and/or modifying ambulance fees
99-2
SD-  - -1999    Increasing sewer user fees and confirming standby charges
99-3
SD-  - -1999    Increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline Sanitation District
99-4
SD-  - -1999    Confirming cemetery charges for CSA 29
99-5
SD-  - -1999    Confirming and/or modifying fire protection service fees
99-6
SD-  - -1999    Confirming report of connection fees
99-7
SD-  - -1999    Confirming report of connection fees for CSAs and Improvement Zones
99-8
SD-  - -2000    Recreation and Park Activities Fees
00-1
SD-  - -2000    Ambulance Fees
00-2
SD-  - -2000    Cemetery Fees
00-3
SD-  - -2000    Fire Protection Service Fees
00-4
SD-  - -2000    Sewer User and Standby Fees
00-5
SD-  - -2000    Sewer Connection Charges
00-6
SD-  - -2000    Confirming report regarding connection fees with proposed increases and sewer
00-7            and water connection fees
SD-  - -2001    Appointments in lieu of election for East Valley Resource Conservation
01-1            District
SD-  - -2001    Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
01-2
SD-  - -2001    Mojave Resource Conservation District
01-3
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-1 fixing various rec. and park activity fees for various
01-4            CSAs
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-2 confirming various ambulance fees for various CSAs
01-5
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-3 confirming existing cemetery charges for CSA 29
01-6
SD-  - -2001    Amending Ord. SD-96-9 confirming cost recovery for fire suppression and
01-7            emergency response cost
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-4 confirming existing fire protection service fees
01-8
SD-  - -2001    Repealing Ord. SD-00-5 increasing sewer user fees and confirming standby
01-9            charges for Crestline Sanitation District
SD-             Repealing Ord. SD-00-6 increasing sewer connection charge for Crestline
01-  - -2001    Sanitation District
10
SD-             Repealing Ordinance SD-00-7 confirming report of connection fees with
01-  - -2001    proposed increases for various CSAs
11
SD-             Repealing Ordinance SD-83-1 authorizing collection of water/sewer service
01-  - -2001    charges and standby charges on tax bill
12
SD-             Appointments in Lieu of Election to Inland Empire West Resource Conservation
01-  - -2001    District
13
SD-             Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-04 and fixing various recreation and park
02-  - -2002    activity fees for FY 2002-2003 for county service areas and improvement
01              zones, and recreation and park districts
SD              Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-05 and increases various ambulance fees for CSA
02-  - -2002    29 (Lucerne Valley), CSA 56 (Wrightwood), CSA 82 SV-1 (Searles Valley), Lake
02              Arrowhead Fire Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire Protection District and
                CSA 70 HL (Havasu Lake)
SD
02-  - -2002    Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-06, confirms existing cemetery charges for CSA 29
03
SD              Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-09, increases sewer user fee and confirms standby
02-  - -2002    charges with no proposed increases for Crestline Sanitation District
04
SD              Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-10, increases sewer connection charge for
02-  - -2002    Crestline Sanitation District
05
SD              Repeals Ordinance No. SD 01-11, increases water and sewer connection charges
02-  - -2002    for named County Service Areas and Improvement Zones
06
SD              Appointing, In Lieu of Election, Sybrand Vander Dussen to the office of
02-  - -2002    Director of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
07
SD              Levying a Special Tax for the Fiscal Year 2002-2003 and Following Fiscal
02-  - -2002    Years Solely Within and Relating to Community Facilities District No 2002-1
08              (Kaiser Commerce Center)
SD              Levying a Special Tax for the Fiscal Year 2002-2003 and Following Fiscal
02-  - -2002    Years Solely Within and Relating to Community Facilities District No. 2002-2
09              (Central Valley FPD - Fire Protection Services)
SD-             Ordinance of named County Service Areas and Recreation and Park Districts in
03-  - -2003    the County of San Bernardino, State of California, fixing various recreation
05              and park activity fees commencing with fiscal year 2003-2004 and repealing
                Ordinance No. SD 02-01
SD              Ordinance of named County Service Areas and Fire Protection Districts in the
03-  - -2003    County of San Bernardino, State of California fixing ambulance fees and
06              charges and repealing Ordinance No. SD 02-02
SD              Ordinance of County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley) County of San
03-  - -2003    Bernardino, State of California, fixing cemetery fees and charges and
07              repealing Ordinance No. SD 02-03
SD              Ordinance of the Crestline Sanitation District of the County of San
03-  - -2003    Bernardino, State of California, fixing sewer standby and user charges and
08              repealing Ordinance No. SD 02-04
SD              Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino, State
03-  - -2003    of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of Crestline
09              Sanitation District amending Ordinance No. SD 85-4 to increase sewer
                connection charges and repealing Ordinance No. SD 02-05
SD              Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino, State
03-  - -2003    of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of the named
10              County Service Areas and improvement zones thereof, establishing and
                continuing sewer and water connection fees and repealing Ordinance No. 02-06
SD              Acting in its capacity as the governing body of CSA 70 S-7 (Lenwood)
04-  - -2003    requiring that all buildings or other structures containing plumbing or
01              drainage fixtures be connected to the sewer system, and providing for the
                payment of connection fees
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-05
02
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-06
03
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-07
04
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-08
05
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-09
06
SD
04-  - -2004    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 03-10
07
SD              Appointing a member of the Board of Directors of the East Valley Resource
04-  - -2004    Conservation District
08
SD   - -2005    Appointing a member of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
05-1            (Cheryl Karns-Avent)
SD   - -2005    Appointing a member of the Inland Empire West Resource Conservation District
05-2            (Terrie Andrews)
SD   - -2005    Appointing members of the Board of Directors of the Mojave Desert Resource
05-3            Conservation District
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-02
05-4
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-03
05-5
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-04
05-6
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-05
05-7
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-06
05-8
SD-  - -2005    Repealing Ordinance No. SD 04-07
05-9
SD   - -2006    Increasing Ambulance Fees and Charges for various county services areas and
06-1            fire protection districts. (Repealed by SD-06-08)
SD-             Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 05-04 and fixing various recreation and
06-  - -2006    park activity fees for FY 2006-07 for County Service Areas and Improvement
02              Zones, and recreation and park districts as shown on Exhibits I through XII
SD-             Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 05-06 and confirming cemetery charges
06-  - -2006    for County Service Area 29, as shown on Attachment B
03
SD-             Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 05-09 and setting the water and sewer
06-  - -2006    connection charges for named County Service Areas and Improvement Zones, as
04              shown on Exhibits IC and IIC
SD
06-  - -2006    Public Hearing to establish Fire Service Fees and Charges
05
SD              Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 05-07 setting sewer user fees and
06-  - -2006    standby charges for Crestline Sanitation District
06
SD              Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-08 and setting the sewer connection
06-  - -2006    charge for Crestline Sanitation District
07
                Repealing ordinance SD 06-01 and establishing increased ambulance service
SD-             rates for County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley), County Service Area 56
06-  - -2006    (Wrightwood), County Service Area 82, Improvement Zone SV-1 (Searles Valley),
08              Lake Arrowhead Fire Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire Protection
                District and County Service Area 70, Improvement Zone HL (Havasu Lake)
SD-             Ordinance authorizing CSA 70 and its Improvement Zones to regulate the use
06-  - -2006    and construction of Public Storm Drain Systems owned and maintained by the
09              Special Districts Department for unincorporated areas within the County
SD-             Ordinance appointing individuals, in lieu of election, to the position of
07-  - -2007    director for the Inland Empire Resource Conservation District
01
SD-             Ordinance appointing individuals, in lieu of election, to the position of
07-  - -2007    director for the Mojave Desert Resource Conservation District
02
SD-             Ordinance regulating the use and operation of skateboard/skating facilities
07-  - -2007    within County Service Areas, Improvement Zones, and Recreation and Park
03              Districts in order to ensure the orderly and safe use of facilities
                Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-01 and confirming ambulance service
SD-             and subscription fees for County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley), County
07-  - -2007    Service Area 56 (Wrightwood), County Service Area 82, Improvement Zone SV-1
04              (Searles Valley), Lake Arrowhead Fire Protection District, Yucca Valley Fire
                Protection District and County Service Area 70 HL (Havasu Lake), as shown on
                Exhibits I and II.
SD-             Ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-05 and confirming existing fees and
07-  - -2007    fee increases for the Office of the Fire Marshal as shown on Attachment A
05
SD              Adopt ordinance for CSAs and recreation and park districts in the County of
07-  - -2007    San Bernardino fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing
06              with fiscal year 2007-08 and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of CSA 29 (Lucerne Valley) fixing cemetery fees and charges
07-  - -2007    and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-03.
07
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Crestline Sanitation District of the county of San
07-  - -2007    Bernardino fixing sewer standby and user charges and repealing Ordinance No.
08              SD 06-06
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, acting in its capacity as the
07-  - -2007    governing body of Crestline Sanitation District, fixing sewer connection
09              charges and repealing Ordinance No. SD 06-07
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors, acting in its capacity as the
07-  - -2007    governing body of the named CSAs and improvement zones, thereof, establishing
10              and continuing sewer and water connection fees, and repealing Ordinance No.
                SD 06-04
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to the 2007 California Fire Code for the Board-
07-  - -2007    governed County Service Areas and Improvement Zones amending Chapter 1 of
11              Division 3 of Title 2 of the San Bernardino Code and repealing Ordinance No.
                4002
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to amending the Rate and Method of Apportionment and
07-  - -2007    to increase the amount of Bonded indebtedness and rescinding of Ordinance No.
12              SD 03-04 Community Facilities District 2003-1 (Citrus Plaza/Mountain Grove)
SD              An Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
08-  - -2008    State of California, Amending Ordinance No. SD 05-3, Relating To The Terms Of
01              Office Of Existing Members of the Board of Directors of the Mojave Desert
                Resource Conservation District
SD              Adopt Ordinance to Continue Certain Fees and Charges for County Service Area
08-  - -2008    70, Improvement Zone CG (Cedar Glen)
02
SD              An Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
08-  - -2008    State of California, Acting in its Capacity as the Governing Body of County
03              Service Area 60 - Apple Valley Airport, Establishing Fees for Apple Valley
                Airport Use
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-06 and fixing various
08-  - -2008    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2008-09 for County Service Areas and
04              Improvement Zones as shown on Exhibits I through VIII
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-07 and confirming cemetery
08-  - -2008    charges for County Service Area 29, as shown on Attachment B
05
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-10 and setting the water and
08-  - -2008    sewer connection fees for named County Service Areas and Improvement Zones,
06              as shown on Exhibits I-C and II-C
SD              Adopt ordinance setting fees and charges for all County Service Areas and
08-  - -2008    their Improvement Zones
07
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-08 setting sewer user fees and
08-  - -2008    standby charges and other various fees and charges for Crestline Sanitation
08              District as shown in Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-09 and setting the sewer
08-  - -2008    connection charge for Crestline Sanitation District
09
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD-4025 and establishing ambulance
08-  - -2008    service and subscription fees, as shown on Exhibits I and II
10
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD-4026 and establishing fire service
08-  - -2008    fees for the Office of the Fire Marshal as shown on Attachment A
11
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance Nos. SD-95-8 and SD-96-9 and establishing
08-  - -2008    fees for fire protection service and cost recovery for fire suppression and
12              emergency response costs as shown on Attachment B
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-06 and fixing various
08-  - -2008    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2008-09 for Big Bear Valley
13              Recreation and Park District as shown on Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 07-06 and fixing various
08-  - -2008    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2008-09 for Bloomington Recreation
14              and Park District as shown on Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing existing Exhibit II to Ordinance No. SD 09-04 and
10-  - -2010    adding new Exhibit II to establish ambulance service fees
01
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing existing Exhibit II to Ordinance No. SD 09-04 and
10-  - -2010    adding new Exhibit II to establish ambulance service fees
01
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-07 and fixing various
10-  - -2010    recreation and park activity fees commencing with FY 2010-11 for named County
02              Service Areas and Improvement Zones as shown on Exhibits I through VIII
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-08 and fixing cemetery fees and
10-  - -2010    charges for County Service Area 29 (Lucerne Valley) as shown on Attachment A
03
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-09 and establishing and
10-  - -2010    continuing sewer and water connection fees for named County Service Areas and
04              Improvement Zones as shown on Exhibits I-C and II-C
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-10 and fixing certain fees and
10-  - -2010    charges for all County Service Areas and their Improvement Zones as shown on
05              Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-12 and fixing various
10-  - -2010    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2010-11 for Bloomington Recreation
06              and Park District as shown on Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-11 and fixing various
10-  - -2010    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2010-11 for Bloomington Recreation
07              and Park District as shown on Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-13 and establishing sewer
10-  - -2010    standby and user charges and other various fees for Crestline Sanitation
08              District as shown on Exhibit I
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-14 and fixing sewer connection
10-  - -2010    charges for Crestline Sanitation District
09
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-04 and establishing ambulance
10-  - -2010    fees and charges for San Bernardino County Fire Protection District as shown
10              on Exhibits I and II
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-05 and fixing fire service fees
10-  - -2010    for San Bernardino County Fire Protection District as shown on Attachment A
11
SD              Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 09-06 and establishing fire
10-  - -2010    protection service and cost recovery fees for San Bernardino County Fire
12              Protection District as shown on Attachment B
FPD             Adopt ordinance repealing Ordinance No. SD 10-11 and fixing fire service fees
11-  - -2011    for San Bernardino County Fire Protection District as shown on Attachment A
01
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the Bloomington Recreation and
11-  - -2011    Park District fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing
01              with FY 2011-2012 and repealing SD Ordinance No.10-07
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
11-  - -2011    various recreation and park activity fees commencing with FY 2011-2012 and
02              repealing Ordinance No. SD 10-06
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the San Bernardino Fire
11-  - -2011    Protection District establishing fire protection service and cost recovery
02              fees and repealing Ordinance No. SD 10-12
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the San Bernardino Fire
11-  - -2011    Protection District establishing ambulance fees and charges and repealing
03              Ordinance No. SD 10-10
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
12-  - -2012    fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost recovery
01              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees and repealing Ordinance Nos.
                FPD 11-01, FPD 11-02 and FPD 11-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
12-  - -2012    State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of named
01              County service areas and zones, fixing various recreation and park activity
                fees commencing with FY 2012-13 and repealing Ord. No. SD 11-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
12-  - -2012  State of California, acting as the governing body of County Service Area 29
02              (Lucerne Valley), fixing cemetery fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD
                11-04
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
12-  - -2012  State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of the
03              named County service areas and zones, establishing and continuing sewer and
                water connection fees, and repealing Ord. No. SD 11-05
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
12-  - -2012  as the governing body of all Board-governed County service areas and their
04              zones, fixing certain fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD 11-06
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
12-  - -2012  various recreation and park activity fees commencing with FY 2012-13 and
05              repealing Ord. No. SD 11-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the Bloomington Recreation and
12-  - -2012  Park District fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing
06              with FY 2012-13 and repealing Ord. No. SD 11-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
13-  - -2013    various recreation and park activity fees commencing with FY 2013-14 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 12-05
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the Bloomington Recreation and
13-  - -2013    Park District fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing
02              with FY 2013-14 and repealing Ord. No. SD 12-06
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
13-  - -2013    State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of named
03              County service areas and zones, fixing various recreation and park activity
                fees commencing with fiscal year 2013-14 and repealing Ord. No. SD 12-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
13-  - -2013    State of California, acting as the governing body of County Service Area 29
04              (Lucerne Valley), fixing cemetery fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD
                12-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
13-  - -2013    State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of the
05              named County Service Areas and Zones, establishing and continuing sewer and
                water connection fees, and repealing Ord. No. SD 12-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
13-  - -2013    as the governing body of all Board-governed County Service Areas and their
06              Zones, fixing certain fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD 12-04
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
13-  - -2013    as the governing body of County Service Area 120 (North Etiwanda Preserve)
07              and fixing certain fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD 09-01
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
14-  - -2014  fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost recovery
01              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees and repealing Ordinance No. FPD
                12-01 A-1
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
14-  - -2014    fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost recovery
02              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees and repealing Ord. No. FPD 14-
                01
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
14-  - -2014    various recreation and park activity fees commencing with FY 2014-15 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 13-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Directors of the Bloomington Recreation and
14-  - -2014    Park District fixing various recreation and park activity fees commencing
02              with FY 2014-15 and repealing Ord. No. SD 13-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
14-  - -2014    State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of named
03              County service areas and zones, fixing various recreation and park activity
                fees commencing with fiscal year 2014-15 and repealing Ord. No. SD 13-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
14-  - -2014    State of California, acting as the governing body of County Service Area 29
04              (Lucerne Valley), fixing cemetery fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD
                13-04
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Board of Supervisors of the County of San Bernardino,
14-  - -2014    State of California, acting in its capacity as the governing body of the
05              named County Service Areas and Zones, establishing and continuing sewer and
                water connection fees, and repealing Ord. No. SD 13-05
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
14-  - -2014    as the governing body of all Board-governed County Service Areas and their
06              Zones, fixing certain fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD 13-06
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
14-  - -2014    as the governing body of County Service Area 120 (North Etiwanda Preserve)
07              and fixing certain fees and charges and repealing Ord. No. SD 13-07
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
14-  - -2014    various recreation and park activity fees and repealing Ord. No. SD 14-01
08
                Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District,
FPD             adopting the San Bernardino County Fire Code (referencing the 2013 edition of
14-  - -2014    the California Fire Code and 2013 edition of the California Residential Code)
03              along with certain changes, modifications, amendments, additions, deletions,
                and exceptions, relating to fire regulations.
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
15-  - -2015    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2015-16 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 14-08
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing
15-  - -2015    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2015-16 and
02              repealing Ord. No. 14-02
                Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
SD              as the governing body of all Board-governed County service areas and their
15-  - -2015    zones relating to fees and charges for fiscal year 2015-16, and repealing
03              Ord. Nos. SD 14-03, SD 14-04, SD 14-05, SD 14-06, SD 14-07 and Res. Nos.
                2014-81, 2014-83 and 2014-85
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
15-  - -2015    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees and repealing Ord. No.
                FPD 14-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
15-  - -2015    as the governing body of named County Service Areas and Zones thereof,
04              establishing a Water Conservation Program to comply with the Statewide
                drought regulations and repealing Ord. No. SD 90-11
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
16-  - -2016    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2016-17 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 15-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing
16-  - -2016    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2016-17 and
02              repealing Ord. No. SD 15-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
16-  - -2016    as the governing body of all Board-governed County service areas and their
03              zones relating to fees and charges for fiscal year 2016-17, and repealing
                Ord. No. SD 15-03
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
16-  - -2016    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees and repealing Ord. No.
                FPD 15-01
FPD             Adding section 1(a)(10), amending section 1(e), and amending section 2 of the
16-  - -2016    San Bernardino County Fire Protection District Code (Ord. No. 14-03),
02              relating to fire regulations
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to repealing Ord. No. SD 15-03 and establishing
16-  - -2016    various fees and charges.
03
                Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District adopting the
FPD             San Bernardino County Fire Code (referencing the 2016 edition of the
17-  - -2017    California Fire Code and 2016 edition of the California Residential Code),
01              along with certain changes, modifications, amendments, addition, deletions,
                and exceptions, relating to fire regulations, and repealing Ord. No. FPD No.
                14-03
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
17-  - -2017    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression emergency response and cost
02              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord.
                No. FPD 16-01
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to the 2017-18 fees and charges for Big Bear Valley
17-  - -2017    Recreation & Park District, and repealing Ord. No. SD 16-01
03
SD              Adopt ordinance relating to the 2017-18 fees and charges for Bloomington
17-  - -2017    Recreation and Park District, and repealing Ord. No. SD 16-02
04
SD              Adopt ordinance acting as the governing body of Board Governed County Service
17-  - -2017    Area 70 CG (Cedar Glen) providing water services & establishing various fees
05              and charges for a five-year period
SD              Adopt ordinance amending Ord. No. SD 17-02 to establish new fees and sewer
17-  - -2017    connections in County Service Area 70 Zone BL (Bloomington) for 2017-18
02-A
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
18-  - -2017    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord.
                No. FPD 17-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
18-  - -2018    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2018-19 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 17-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing
18-  - -2018    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2018-19 and
02              repealing Ord. No. SD 17-04
SD              Adopt ordinance of the County of San Bernardino, State of California, acting
18-  - -2018    as the governing body of all Board-governed County Service Areas and their
03              zones relating to fees and charges for fiscal year 2018-19, and repealing
                Ord. No. SD 17-02
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
19-  - -2019    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2019-2020 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 18-03
SD              Adopt ordinance of the Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing
19-  - -2019    various recreation and park activity fees for fiscal year 2019-2020 and
02              repealing Ord. No. SD 18-04
SD              Adopt ordinance as the governing body of all board-governed County Service
19-  - -2019    areas and their zones relating to fees and charges for fiscal year 2019-2020
03              and repealing Ord. No. SD 18-02
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
19-  - -2019    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord.
                No. FPD 18-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
19-  - -2019    County Service Area 70, adopting to the employee election worker program
04
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
19-  - -2019    adopting the employee election worker program
02
                Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District adopting the
FPD             San Bernardino County Fire Code (referencing the 2019 edition of the
20-  - -2020    California Fire Code), along with certain changes, modifications, amendments,
01              addition, deletions, and exceptions, relating to fire regulations, and
                repealing Ord. No. FPD No. 17-01
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District repealing
20-  - -2020    Ord. Nos. 75-6 and 79-1 and adopting new provisions
01
SD-             Adopt ordinance of Board of Supervisors of Sand Bernardino County, acting as
20-  - -2020    the governing body of County Service Areas and Zones, repealing Ord. Nos. 75-
02              6 and 79-1 and adopting new provisions
SD              Adopt ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District repealing Ord.
20-  - -2020    Nos. 75-6 and 79-1 and adopting new provisions
03
SD              Adopt ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District fixing
20-  - -2020    various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2020-21 and repealing Ord.
04              No. SD 19-03 (Repealed by SD 22-02)
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing various
20-  - -2020    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2020-21 and repealing Ord. No. SD
05              19-04 (Repealed by SD 22-03)
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
20-  - -2020    fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost recovery
02              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord. No. FPD 19-
                01
SD              Adopt ordinance of Board of Supervisors of San Bernardino County, acting as
20-  - -2020    the governing body of County Service Areas and their zones relating to fees
06              and charges for Fiscal Year 2020-21, and repealing Ord. No. SD19-02
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
21-  - -2021    fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost recovery
01              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord. No. FPD 20-
                02 (Repealed by SD 22-01)
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing various
22-  - -2022    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2022-23 and repealing Ord. No. SD
02              20-05
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing various
22-  - -2022    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2022-23 and repealing Ord. No. SD
03              20-05
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
22-  - -2022    fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost recovery
01              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord. No. FPD 21-
                01
                Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District adopting the
FPD             San Bernardino County Fire Code (referencing the 2022 edition of the
23-  - -2023    California Fire Code), along with certain changes, modifications, amendments,
01              addition, deletions, and exceptions, relating to fire regulations, and
                repealing Ord. No. FPD No. 20-01
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District establishing
23-  - -2023    fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost recovery
02              fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord. No. FPD 22-
                01
FPD             Adopt ordinance of the San Bernardino Fire Protection District to amend Ord.
23-  - -2023    No. FPD 23-02 and establishing fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency
03              response and cost recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, to repeal Ord No. SD 17-01 and
23-  - -2023    SD 17-05, and establishing sanitation and water service rates
01
SD              Adopting ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District
23-  - -2023    establishing various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2023-24 and
02              repealing Ord. No. SD 22-02
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing various
23-  - -2023    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2023-24 and repealing Ord. No. SD
03              22-03
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
23-  - -2023    all board-governed County Service Areas and their Zones to repeal Ord. No. SD
04              22-01 and to adopt fees and charges for FY 2023-24
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
23-  - -2023    all board-governed County Service Areas and their Zones to amend Ord. No. SD
05              23-01, relating to sanitation and water fees and charges for County Service
                Area 53, Zone B, and County Service Area 70, Zone CG
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District fixing various
23-  - -2023    recreation and park activity fees for FY 2023-24 and repealing Ord. No. SD
06              23-03
SD              Adopting ordinance of the Bloomington Recreation and Park District to adopt
23-  - -2023    by reference §§ 52.0130, 53.0603, 53.0604, 53.0605, 53.0606, and 53.0607 of
07              the San Bernardino County Code and add new regulations relating to electric
                vehicle charging and station fees and time limits for District parking lots
FPD             Adopting ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
24-  - -2024    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord.
                No. FPD 23-02 and Ord. No. FPD 23-03
SD              Adopting ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District
24-  - -2024    establishing various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2024-25 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 23-02
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District to establish
24-  - -2024    various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2024-25 and repealing Ord.
02              No. SD 23-06
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
24-  - -2024    all board-governed County Service Areas and their Zones to repeal Ord. No. SD
03              23- 04 and to adopt fees and charges for FY 2024-25
FPD             Adopting ordinance of the San Bernardino County Fire Protection District
25-  - -2025    establishing fire service fees, fire suppression, emergency response and cost
01              recovery fees, ambulance service and subscription fees, and repealing Ord.
                No. FPD 24-01
FPD
25-  - -2025    Adopting the Employee Poll Worker Program
02
SD              Adopting ordinance of Big Bear Valley Recreation and Park District
25-  - -2025    establishing various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2025-26 and
01              repealing Ord. No. SD 24-01
SD              Adopting ordinance of Bloomington Recreation and Park District to establish
25-  - -2025    various recreation and park activity fees for FY 2025-26 and repealing Ord.
02              No. SD 24-02
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
25-  - -2025    all board-governed County Service Areas and their Zones to repeal Ord. No. SD
03              24- 03 and to adopt fees and charges for FY 2025-26
SD
25-  - -2025    County Service Area 70 adopts the Employee Poll Worker Program
04
SD              Adopting ordinance of San Bernardino County, acting as the governing body of
25-  - -2025    all board-governed County Service Areas and their Zones to amend Ord. No. SD
05              25-03
               
 
REFERENCES TO FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section/Disposition
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section/Disposition
                      An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino Flood
FCD 08-01 - -2008     Control District, State of California, Relating to the
                      Adoption of Service Fees
                      An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino Flood
FCD 10-01 - -2010     Control District, State of California, Repealing Ord. No.
                      FCD 08-01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and
                      Services
                      An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino Flood
FCD 11-01 - -2011     Control District, State of California, Repealing Ord. No.
                      FCD 10-01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and
                      Services
                      An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino Flood
FCD 12-01 - -2012     Control District, State of California, Repealing Ord. No.
                      FCD 11-01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and
                      Services
                      An Ordinance of the County of San Bernardino Flood
                      Control District, State of California, Relating to Public
FCD 12-02 - -2012     Safety; the Protection and Preservation of District
                      Property, Resources, and Infrastructure; Prohibition of
                      Trespass; Enforcement
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 12-03 - -2012     District, County of San Bernardino, State of California,
                      Relating to the Prohibition of Parking on All District
                      Property
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 13-01 - -2013     District, State of California, repealed Ord. No. FCD 12-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 14-01 - -2014     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 13-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 15-01 - -2015     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 14-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 16-01 - -2016     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 15-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 17-01 - -2017     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 16-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 18-01 - -2018     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 17-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 19-01 - -2019     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 18-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 22-01 - -2022     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 20-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
                      District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 12-
FCD 22-02 - -2022     02 and to add an uncodified ordinance relating to public
                      safety; the protection and preservation of district
                      property, resources, and infrastructure; prohibition of
                      trespass; and enforcement
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 23-01 - -2023     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 22-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 24-01 - -2024     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 23-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                      An Ordinance of the San Bernardino County Flood Control
FCD 25-01 - -2025     District, State of California, repealing Ord. No. FCD 24-
                      01 and Establishing Fees Related to Products and Services
                     
 
REFERENCES TO INLAND COUNTIES EMERGENCY MEDICAL AGENCY ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No.    Date Passed Code Section/Disposition
                        An Ordinance of the Inland Counties Emergency Medical
ICEMA 08-01 - -2008     Agency, State of California, Relating to the Adoption
                        of Fees for Emergency Medical Services
ICEMA 09-01 - -2009     Adopt ordinance relating to 2009-10 Inland Counties
                        Emergency Medical Agency Fees
ICEMA 11-01 - -2011     31.1101 -
                        31.1106
                        Ordinance of the Board of Directors of the Inland
ICEMA 17-01 - -2017     Counties Emergency Medical Agency, Pertaining to the
                        Medical Control of EMS Aircraft Services and Providers
                        within Inyo, Mono, and San Bernardino Counties
                       
 
