San Gabriel, California
Municipal Code
2025 S-59 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 721, passed 9-16-25
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 473-C.S.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN GABRIEL ENACTING AN UPDATED
SAN GABRIEL MUNICIPAL CODE, WHICH REVISES, AMENDS, RESTATES, CODIFIES AND
COMPILES THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY
   THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SAN GABRIEL DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
   Section 1. The City Council finds and declares:
   (a)   The present general ordinances of the City of San Gabriel are
incomplete and inadequate in the manner of arrangement, classification and
indexing thereof is insufficient to meet the immediate needs of the City, its
residents and business persons; and
   (b)   California State law authorizes the City Council to revise, amend,
restate, codify and compile any existing ordinance or ordinances and all new
ordinances not heretofore published and to incorporate said ordinances into one
Municipal Code book; and
   (c)   Pursuant to Council direction, the City Clerk has contracted with a
firm to publish a revised San Gabriel Municipal Code.
   Section 2. The San Gabriel Municipal Code recodification project has been
determined to be exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act pursuant
to State Guidelines § 15061 (b)(3) as a project that has no potential for
causing a significant effect on the environment.
   Section 3. The general ordinances of the City of San Gabriel as herein
revised, amended, restated, codified and compiled in book form, are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the San Gabriel Municipal Code, bearing a
copyright date of 1996.
   Section 4. Said San Gabriel Municipal Code as adopted in Section 1 shall
consist of the following titles, to wit:
      Title I      General Provisions
      Title III   Administration
      Title V      Public Works
      Title VII   Traffic Code
      Title IX   General Regulations
      Title XI   Business Regulations
      Title XIII   General Offenses
      Title XV   Land Usage
      Parallel References
      Index
   Section 5. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects in said San
Gabriel Municipal Code shall be deemed suspended and of no effect during the
time that the revised San Gabriel Municipal Code is effective. Such suspension
of prior ordinance shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred
or any right established prior to the effective date of the revised San Gabriel
Municipal Code, nor shall such suspension affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
naming or vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other public
places, nor to any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained therein.
   Section 6. Said San Gabriel Municipal Code shall be deemed published as of
the day of its adoption and approval by the City Council and the City Clerk is
hereby authorized and ordered to file and make available a copy of said Code in
the Office of the City Clerk.
   Section 7. Said Code shall be in full force 30 days from the date of its
adoption and filing thereof in the Office of the City Clerk. The San Gabriel
Municipal Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinances and all provisions, sections, penalties, and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
   Section 8. The City Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this Ordinance.
* * * * * * * * * * *
   PASSED, APPROVED and ADOPTED this 5th day of November, 1996
    Mary Cammarano /s/
   Mary Cammarano, Mayor
   City of San Gabriel
ATTEST:
Cynthia Bookter /s/
Cynthia Bookter, CMC
City Clerk
   I, Cynthia Bookter, City Clerk of the City of San Gabriel, California, do
hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance was duly passed and adopted by the
City Council of the City of San Gabriel at a regular meeting held thereof on
the 5th day of November, 1996, by the following vote to wit:
   Ayes:      Baldwin, Cammarano, Castaneda, Cici, Polimeni
   Noes:      None
   Abstain:   None
   Absent:   None
Cynthia Bookter /s/          
Cynthia Bookter, City Clerk
City of San Gabriel, California
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Rules of Construction
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Notice; proof of service
   
10.20   Maintenance of code
   
10.21   Violations; imposition and determination of penalty
   
10.22   Place of confinement
Citation Procedure
   
10.30   Notice to appear; form
   
10.31   Violation of promise to appear
   
10.32   Warrant for arrest
   
10.99   General penalty
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of San Gabriel shall be
designated as the San Gabriel Municipal Code and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Specific definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   CALENDAR YEAR. From January 1 through December 31 of any given year. ('65
Code, § 1-3.13(a))
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of San Gabriel,
California.
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of San Gabriel. ('65 Code, § 1-3.13
(c))
   COUNTY. Los Angeles County, California.
   DAY. A calendar day unless otherwise expressed.
   FISCAL YEAR. From July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the following
year. ('65 Code, § 1-3.13(e))
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such
building or land. ('65 Code, § 1-3.13(m))
   PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. This term shall include money, goods, chattels, things in
action, and evidences of debt. ('65 Code, § 1-3.13(o))
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Both real and personal property. ('65 Code, § 1-3.13(p))
   QUARTERLY. When used to designate a period of time, shall mean the first
three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three
calendar months. ('65 Code, § 1-3.13(q))
   REAL PROPERTY. This term shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
('65 Code, § 1-3.13(r))
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of California.
   STREET. This term shall include all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards,
alleys, courts, places, squares, or other public ways in the city which have
been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public
property so designated in any law of this state. ('65 Code, § 1-3.13(u))
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, the terms shall include
any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others. ('65 Code, § 1-3.13(v))
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following
rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   Ordinances take effect 30 days after their final passage. An ordinance takes
effect immediately, if it is an ordinance:
   (A)   Relating to an election;
   (B)   For immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety,
containing a declaration of the facts constituting the urgency, and is passed
by a four-fifths vote of the City Council;
   (C)   Relating to street improvement proceedings;
   (D)   Relating to taxes for the usual and current expenses of the city; or
   (E)   Covered by particular provisions of law prescribing the manner of its
passage and adoption.
(Cal. Gov't Code § 36937)
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the ordinance repealing or
modifying it becomes effective, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (Cal. Penal Code § 1212) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
       For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see Cal.
Govt. Code §§ 6250.1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1965 and subsequently amended, the 1965
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “('65 Code, §      ).”
§ 10.19 NOTICE; PROOF OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless
different provisions are otherwise specifically made in the code, such notice
may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified
or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence
address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records
pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail
shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the Postal
Service. ('65 Code, § 1-3.10)
   (B)   Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any
officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person over the age of
18 years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this code or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. ('65 Code, § 1-
3.11)
§ 10.20 MAINTENANCE OF CODE.
   (A)   Not less than three copies of this code shall be filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. At least three
additional copies, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be maintained on
file in his office as the official copies of the code. Additional copies of the
code shall be distributed to the departments and divisions of the city as shall
be prescribed by the City Manager.
   (B)   Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this code, or upon
the repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify thereto and
shall make an appropriate notation in the official volumes of this code of the
taking of such action, noting the number and date of the ordinance pursuant to
which such action is taken.
   (C)   Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the code
shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly
indexed for ready reference.
   (D)   At least quarterly the City Clerk shall cause the loose leaf pages of
this code in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including the
notation as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is
adopted, and distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of the code,
prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the city
and the general public, may be brought up-to-date.
('65 Code, § 1-1.08)
§ 10.21 VIOLATIONS; IMPOSITION AND DETERMINATION OF PENALTY.
   (A)   Prohibited acts. Whenever in this code any act or omission is made
unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or
concealing the fact of such act or omission. ('65 Code, § 1-2.02)
   (B)   Imposition of penalty. The provisions of this code which declare
certain crimes to be punishable as therein mentioned devolve a duty upon the
court authorized to pass sentence to determine and impose the punishment
described. ('65 Code, § 1-2.03)
   (C)   Determination of punishment. Whenever in this code the punishment for
a crime is left undetermined between certain limits, the punishment to be
inflicted in a particular case shall be determined by the court authorized to
pass sentence, within such limits as may be prescribed by this code. ('65 Code,
§ 1-2.04)
§ 10.22 PLACE OF CONFINEMENT.
   (A)   Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
code and sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the City Jail or
County Jail, or other authorized facility.
   (B)   That portion of the San Gabriel Police Facility and Jail, located at
625 South Del Mar Avenue, San Gabriel, California, which is designated as
quarters and accommodations for prisoners, and which portion of the building
has, since February 9, 1962, been used as a City Jail in and for the city,
shall be and the same is hereby named, designated, fixed, and established as
the City Jail of, in, and for the city and is hereby declared to have been the
City Jail of the city since February 9, 1962.
   (C)   All designations, previous references to, and prior use, if any, of
such portion of the building described as the City Jail of, in, and for the
city are hereby approved, ratified, and confirmed by the Council as being in
fact true and correct.
('65 Code, § 1-2.05) (Ord. 866, passed - - )
CITATION PROCEDURE
§ 10.30 NOTICE TO APPEAR; FORM.
   If any person shall be arrested for the violation of any provision of this
code or any other law of the city, and such person is not immediately taken
before a magistrate as prescribed in the California Penal Code, the arresting
officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court,
containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the
time and place where and when such person shall appear in court.
('65 Code, § 1-5.01) (Ord. 774, passed - - )
§ 10.31 VIOLATION OF PROMISE TO APPEAR.
   Any person wilfully violating his written promise to appear in court shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon
which he was originally arrested.
('65 Code, § 1-5.02) (Ord. 774, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 10.32 WARRANT FOR ARREST.
   When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place
specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided
in the Cal. Penal Code § 853.6, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered
for execution a warrant for such person's arrest within 20 days after his
failure to appear as promised, or, if such person promises to appear before an
officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on
or before the date which he promised to appear, then, within 20 days after the
delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate
having jurisdiction over the offense.
('65 Code, § 1-5.03) (Ord. 774, passed - - )
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code or the provisions of
any code adopted by reference by this code. Any person violating any of such
provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this code shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor unless by the provisions of this code a violation is
declared to be an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any
provisions of this code or of a city ordinance is committed, continued, or
permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code, any person
convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the City Jail or County
Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, when a person under
the age of 18 years is charged with a violation of this code, and a peace
officer issues a notice to appear in Superior Court to that minor, the charge
shall be deemed an infraction unless the minor requests that a petition be
filed under Cal. Welfare & Institutions Code. The amount of the fine imposed
shall be set by the court.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the prosecutor, in
his or her sound discretion, may prosecute a violation of this code as an
infraction, rather than a misdemeanor. The prosecutor may also reduce or agree
to the reduction of a previously filed misdemeanor to an infraction. Every
person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation convicted of an
infraction for violation of any provision of this code, other than local
building and safety codes and those provided for in division (C) herein, shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation, a fine not
exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same section within one year, and
a fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same section
within one year. Every person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation
convicted of an infraction for violation of any San Gabriel building and safety
code provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 for a first
violation, a fine not exceeding $500 for a second violation of the same section
within one year, and a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional violation
of the same section within one year.
('65 Code, § 1-2.01) (Ord. 334-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 453-C.S., passed 8-
1-95; Am. Ord. 606-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
Statutory reference:
   Penalties for misdemeanor violations, see Cal. Penal Code § 19
   Penalties for infractions, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36900 through 26901
   Imprisonment, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36903 through 36904
CHAPTER 11: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Section
   
11.01   Legislative findings and statement of purpose
   
11.02   Definitions
   
11.03   Authority and fines
   
11.04   Service procedures
   
11.05   Contents of notice
   
11.06   Satisfaction of administrative citation
   
11.07   Appeal of administrative citation
   
11.08   Hearing Officer
   
11.09   Hearing procedure
   
11.10   Hearing Officer’s decision and administrative order
   
11.11   Failure to pay fines
   
11.12   Failure to comply with administrative order
   
11.13   Lien procedure
   
11.14   Public hearing and protests
   
11.15   Recording of lien
   
11.16   Satisfaction of lien
   
11.17   Foreclosure of real property lien
   
11.18   Redemption of lien
   
11.19   Interest
   
11.20   Right to judicial review
   
11.21   Notices
§ 11.01 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council hereby finds that there is a need for an alternative
method of enforcement for violators of the Municipal Code. The City Council
further finds that an appropriate method for enforcement for violation is an
Administrative Citation Program as authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4 that
will reduce the burden on the judicial system while providing full due process
for those cited.
   (B)   The procedures established in this chapter are in addition to
criminal, civil or other legal remedies that may be available to the city to
enforce violations of the Municipal Code.
   (C)   The City Council finds and determines that enforcement of the
provisions of the San Gabriel Municipal Code are municipal affairs as well as
matters of purely local concern to the citizens of San Gabriel.
   (D)   The City Council finds that the adoption and implementation of this
Administrative Citation Program is within the power and authority of the City
of San Gabriel and will achieve the following goals:
      (1)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City of San Gabriel;
      (2)   To help ensure compliance with the Municipal Code, ordinances and
regulations in a timely and efficient manner;
      (3)   To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition
of administrative citations and fines that will fully comport with due process
and provide those cited with the right to a fair hearing at minimal expense;
      (4)   To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or
refuse to comply with the provisions of the Municipal Code in the city;
      (5)   To reduce the burden on the judicial system and minimize the time
and expense of defending the citation on the part of the person cited.
   (E)   Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  Any individual who is the owner or occupant of real
property, owner or authorized agent of any business, company, trust or entity,
or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of 18 years,
any corporation, association, organization, estate, trust, group, combination
acting as a group, or any officer, agent, trustee or employee of any of the
foregoing, that causes, permits or maintains a violation of the San Gabriel
Municipal Code.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any officer or individual employed or otherwise charged
by the city to enforce codes, ordinances, mandates, regulations, resolutions,
rules or other laws adopted by the city.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.03 AUTHORITY AND FINES.
   (A)   Any person or entity violating any provision of the San Gabriel
Municipal Code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement
officer as provided in this chapter. A violation of this Code includes, but is
not limited to, all violations of the Municipal Code and any codes adopted by
reference by the City Council, including State Codes, County Codes and Uniform
Codes.
   (B)   Every violation of a provision of this code shall be subject to a
civil fine. The provisions of this section are in addition to all other legal
remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city. Violations of
this chapter alone may not be prosecuted as criminal violations.
   (C)   In general, administrative citations will be issued after non-
compliance with a notice of violation or to a repeat offender of the same
offense within a 12-month period.
      (1)   If there is a continuing violation of a building, plumbing,
electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issue that does not create an
immediate danger to health or safety, a notice of violation shall first be
issued providing a minimum of five days to remedy the violation.
      (2)   Except as specified in division (C)(1) above, the Enforcement
Officer is not required to first issue a notice of violation.
   (D)   Each and every day a violation of the Code exists constitutes a
separate and distinct offense.
   (E)   A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation
issued by the Enforcement Officer and shall be payable directly to the city or
designated agent.
   (F)   Except in the case of administrative citations issued for violations
of the local building and safety codes or ordinances contained in §§
51.60 through
51.68 of Title V, Public Works, fines shall be assessed in the amounts
specified by resolution of the City Council, or where no amount is specified:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same
ordinance within one year from the date of the first violation;
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same
ordinance within one year from the date of the first violation.
   (G)   In the case of administrative citations issued for violations of local
building and safety codes or ordinances contained in §§
51.60 through
51.68 of Title V, Public Works, fines shall be assessed in the amounts:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $500 for a second violation of the same
ordinance within one year from the date of the first violation;
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $1,000 for each additional violation of the
same ordinance within one year of the first violation.
   (H)   Administrative costs may be assessed when a violation has occurred and
compliance has not been achieved within the time specified in the compliance
order. The administrative costs include any and all costs incurred by the city
as well as, but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred
in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, attorney fees and
costs for all re-inspections necessary to enforce the compliance order.
   (I)   Failure to pay the assessed civil fines and administrative costs may
be enforced as a lien upon the real property if the violation is in connection
with real property. The lien shall remain in effect until all of the
administrative penalties, interest and administrative costs are paid in full.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07; Am. Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-13; Am. Ord.
612-C.S., passed 2-17-15)
§ 11.04 SERVICE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   An administrative citation may be issued by an enforcement officer to
the responsible person for violation(s) of the Municipal Code and any code
adopted by reference by the City Council in the following manner, except where
real property is involved and a lien is being placed against the property in
accordance with §
11.13:
      (1)   Personal service.  In any case where an administrative citation is
issued:
         (a)   The Enforcement Officer shall attempt to locate and personally
serve the responsible person and attempt to obtain the signature of the
responsible person on the administrative citation.
         (b)   If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the
administrative citation, the failure to refusal to sign shall not affect the
validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings.
      (2)   Service of citation by mail. If the Enforcement Officer is unable
to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed
to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested
return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail.
If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service
shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation
sent by first class mail is not returned.
      (3)   Service by citation by posting notice.  If the Enforcement Officer
does not succeed in personally serving the responsible person, or by certified
mail or regular mail, the Enforcement Officer shall post the administrative
citation on any real property within the city in which the city has knowledge
that the responsible person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be
deemed effective service.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.05 CONTENTS OF NOTICE.
   (A)   Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Date, approximate time of the violation(s);
      (2)   Address or definite description of the location where the violation
(s) was observed;
      (3)   Name and current residential address and mailing address, if known,
of person or entity alleged to have committed the violation(s);
      (4)   The Code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a brief
description of the violation(s);
      (5)   The amount of the fine for the violation(s);
      (6)   An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by
which it shall be paid;
      (7)   An order to the responsible person to correct the violations within
the time specified, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to
correct the violation(s);
      (8)   Identification of rights of appeal pursuant to §
11.07 of this chapter, including the time within which the administrative
citation may be contested and the place to obtain a Request for Hearing form to
contest the citation; and
      (9)   The name and signature of the Enforcement Officer and, if possible,
the signature of the responsible person.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.06 SATISFACTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must do the
following:
      (1)   Pay the fine within 15 days from the date the administrative
citation is issued. Responsible person(s) shall pay all fines assessed as
instructed on the administrative citation. Payment of a fine shall not excuse
or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further
enforcement action by the city.
      (2)   Remedy the violation(s), if the violation(s) is of such a nature
that it can be remedied. If the violation(s) is corrected before the date
provided on the citation, no fine shall be imposed.
      (3)   If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s)
subsequent to the administrative citation, the city may issue further citations
for the same violation(s) or the city may choose to utilize another means of
enforcement. The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation(s) for
each additional occurrence shall increase at a rate specified in this chapter
or by ordinance.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.07 APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a
violation of the San Gabriel Municipal Code or that he or she is the
responsible person by completing a Request for Hearing form and returning it to
the address stated on the form within 15 calendar days from the issue date of
the administrative citation, together with an advanced deposit of the full
amount of the fine. Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited
shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person or
entity charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the
violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative
citation.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.08 HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The City Manager shall appoint a person or contract an agency to
provide a person who shall preside at the hearing and hear all facts and
testimony presented and deemed appropriated (“hearing officer”).
   (B)   The hearing officer shall not be a San Gabriel City employee. The
employment, performance, evaluation, compensation, and benefits of the Hearing
Officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned on or in any
way related to the results or prior decisions issued by said Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.09 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing
officer shall be held unless and until a Request for Hearing form has been
completed and timely submitted, and the fine for the citation has been
deposited in advance.
   (B)   A hearing before the Hearing Officer shall be set for a date that is
not less than 15 calendar days but not more than 90 calendar days from the date
that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The responsible person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the
time and place set for the hearing at least ten calendar days prior to the date
of the hearing.
   (C)   The Hearing Officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to
whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the recipient of the
administrative citation has caused or maintained the violation(s) of the
Municipal Code, or any code adopted by references by the City Council, on the
date(s) specified in the administration citation.
   (D)   The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be
given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning
the administrative citation.
   (E)   The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by
the Enforcement Officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective
facts contained in those documents.
   (F)   If the Enforcement Officer submits an additional written report
concerning the administrative citation to the Hearing Officer for consideration
at the hearing, then a copy of this report shall also be served by mail on the
responsible person requesting the hearing at least ten calendar days prior to
the date of the hearing.
   (G)   At least ten calendar days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an
administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports
and other documents submitted or relied upon by the Enforcement Officer.
Personal information regarding a reporting party, if any, shall not be
disclosed. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of the California
Evidence Code and discovery shall not apply.
   (H)   The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional
information from the Enforcement Officer or the recipient of the administrative
citation prior to issuing a written decision.
   (I)   The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear
at the administration citation hearing shall constitute an admission of the
violation and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and shall result in
forfeiture of the deposited fines.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.10 HEARING OFFICER’S DECISION AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.
   (A)   Within ten working days of the hearing’s conclusion, the Hearing
Officer shall provide the responsible person with a decision in writing
(“administrative order”). The Hearing Officer shall provide the responsible
person with the administrative order by personal service or registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the responsible person's last
known address.
   (B)   The administrative order shall contain the Hearing Officer’s findings
of fact and conclusions and a statement regarding the procedure described in §
11.19 for seeking judicial review. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be
final except as provided for in §
11.19.
   (C)   A decision in favor of the responsible person shall constitute a
dismissal of the administrative citation. If the administrative order renders a
decision in favor of the responsible person, the city shall refund the amount
of the deposited fines.
   (D)   If the Hearing Officer renders a decision in favor of the city, the
responsible person must comply with the administrative order, or seek judicial
review of the administrative order pursuant to §
11.19.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.11 FAILURE TO PAY FINES.
   The failure of any person or entity to pay the civil fines assessed by an
administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in
the city pursuing any and all legal remedies to collect the civil fines. The
city will be entitled to recover its collection costs, including reasonable
attorney’s fees, according to proof. The city may place a lien upon the subject
property for all fines and collections costs in accordance with §§
11.13 through
11.18.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.12 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.
   Failure to pay the assessed civil fines and administrative costs specified
in the administrative order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced as:
   (A)   A personal obligation of the violator, and/or
   (B)   If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the
real property. The lien shall remain in effect until all of the administrative
penalties, interest and administrative costs are paid in full.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.13 LIEN PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any administrative penalty and/or
administrative cost imposed by the hearing officer pursuant to this subchapter
in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full within 90 days
and/or has not been successfully challenged by a timely writ of mandate, this
obligation may constitute a lien against the real property on which the
violation occurred.
   (B)   The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded
with the County Recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have
the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions
of the Cal. Civil Code § 697.340 and may be extended as provided in Cal. Civil
Code §§ 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive.
   (C)   Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the lien remaining
unsatisfied pursuant to the law applicable to civil money judgments.
   (D)   Prior to recording any such lien, the Director of Finance, or his or
her designee, shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report stating the
amounts due and owing.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall fix a time, date and place for hearing such
report and any protests or objections thereto by the City Council.
   (F)   The Director of Community Development, or his or her designee, shall
cause written notice to be served on the property owner not less than ten days
prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall be served as provided
in division (G).
   (G)   Where real property is involved, written notice shall be mailed to the
property owner at the address as shown on the last equalized county assessment
roll, and a copy of the order shall be conspicuously posted at the property
which is the subject of the order.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.14 PUBLIC HEARING AND PROTESTS.
   (A)   Any person whose real property is subject to a lien pursuant to §
11.13 may file a written protest with the City Clerk and/or may protest orally
at the City Council meeting.
   (B)   Each written protest or objection must contain a description of the
property in which the protesting party is interested and the grounds of such
protest or objection.
   (C)   The City Council shall set the matter for hearing no sooner than 15
days and no later than 60 days after the receipt of the protest.
   (D)   The City Council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution
confirming, discharging or modifying the amount of the lien.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.15 RECORDING OF LIEN.
   Thirty days following the adoption of a resolution by the City Council
imposing a lien the City Clerk shall file the same as a judgment lien in the
office of the County Recorder of Los Angeles County, California. The lien may
carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by resolution of the
City Council.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.16 SATISFACTION OF LIEN.
   Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding penalties and
costs, the Director of Finance shall either record a notice of satisfaction or
provide the property owner, or financial institution, with a notice of
satisfaction so they may record the notice with the office of the County
Recorder. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the city’s lien.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.17 FORECLOSURE OF REAL PROPERTY LIEN.
   The lien may be foreclosed and the real property sold, by the filing of a
complaint for foreclosure in a court of competent jurisdiction, and the
issuance of a judgment to foreclose. There shall be no right to trial by jury.
The city shall be entitled to its attorney’s fees and costs.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.18 REDEMPTION OF LIEN.
   The lien may be redeemed by the payment in full of all amounts secured by
the lien within six months after the lien is recorded and notice is given to
the property owner.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.19 INTEREST.
   Interest shall accrue on all amounts declared due by the Hearing Officer,
and unpaid, from the date of the administrative order to the date paid pursuant
to the laws applicable to civil money judgements.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.20 RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person or entity aggrieved by an administrative order of a hearing
officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative
order by filing a Petition for Review with the Alhambra Superior Court, County
of Los Angeles, in accordance with the statutes of limitations and provisions
set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
§ 11.21 NOTICES.
   (A)   The administrative citation and all notices to be given pursuant to
this chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter shall not
affect the validity of any proceeding conducted hereunder.
(Ord. 569-C.S., passed 7-17-07)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   DEPARTMENTS
      
33.   COMMISSIONS
      
34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
35.   TAXATION
      
36.   EMERGENCY ORGANIZATIONS
      
37.   CITY POLICIES
      
38.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
39.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
      
40.   ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS AND STATEMENTS OF
ECONOMIC INTERESTS
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Meetings; time and place
   
30.02   Compensation
Appeals to Council
   
30.10   Findings
   
30.11   Filing
   
30.12   Stay of action
   
30.13   Referral to Council
   
30.14   Notice of hearing
   
30.15   Decision of the Council following hearing
   
30.16   Exclusions from provisions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 MEETINGS; TIME AND PLACE.
   (A)   Time. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held on a time and
date established by written resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Place. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the City Hall,
Council Chamber, located at 425 South Mission Drive, San Gabriel, California.
   (C)   Public places for posting notices. The following are officially
designated as public places for the posting of all ordinances, resolutions or
notices adopted or issued by the city in all cases when posting is required by
law:
      (1)   San Gabriel City Hall
         425 S. Mission Drive
         San Gabriel, CA 91770
      (2)   County of Los Angeles Public Library
         500 S. Del Mar Avenue
         San Gabriel, CA 91770
      (3)   US Postal Office
         120 S. Del Mar
         San Gabriel, CA 91770
('65 Code, §§ 2-1.01 and 2-1.02) (Ord. 943, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 471-C.S.,
passed 8-20-96; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16; Am. Ord. 628-C.S., passed 9-
6-16; Am. Ord. 643-C.S., passed 4-3-18)
§ 30.02 COMPENSATION.
   Effective March 15, 2005 each member of the City Council shall be paid a
salary of $812.45 per month. Effective March 17, 2009 each member of the City
Council shall be paid a salary of $893.70 per month.
('65 Code, § 2-1.03) (Ord. 190-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 216-C.S., passed - -
; Am. Ord. 488-C.S., passed 2-3-98; Am. Ord. 505-C.S., passed 7-18-00; Am. Ord.
537-C.S., passed 10-7-03; Am. Ord. 558-C.S., passed 9-20-05; Am. Ord. 573-C.S.,
passed 7-17-07)
APPEALS TO COUNCIL
§ 30.10 FINDINGS.
   The Council has found that in some provisions of this code there is no
definite procedure set out for an appeal to the Council from the findings,
decision, or action of an administrative officer, employee, board, or
commission created or appointed by the Council and that the wording of some
code provisions can be construed as leaving the final decision of a matter in
the hands of some subordinate person, board, body, or commission without appeal
to the Council. From such finding the Council believes there should always be a
means of relief for a person aggrieved by an arbitrary finding, decision, or
action of such appointive person, body, or commission, without resort to the
overcrowded courts of law.
('65 Code, § 1-4.01) (Ord. 843, passed - - )
§ 30.11 FILING.
   Where no specific provision is made or procedure is set out in this code or
by ordinance applicable to the subject matter for an appeal to the Council, any
person aggrieved by the findings, decision, or action of any subordinate
officer, employee, board, body, or commission may, within ten days from the
date of notice of such findings, decision, or action, file his written notice
of appeal therefrom with the City Clerk, giving his name and mailing address.
Where there is a specific appellate procedure applicable to the subject matter,
that procedure shall govern and these general appellate procedures shall be
inapplicable.
('65 Code, § 1-4.02) (Ord. 843, passed - - )
§ 30.12 STAY OF ACTION.
   The City Clerk shall forthwith notify the officer, employee, board, body or
commission of the filing of such notice of appeal, and all action pertaining to
the subject matter of the appeal shall be suspended until final action of the
Council therefrom unless delay of action of the matter directly endangers
public health and safety.
('65 Code, § 1-4.03) (Ord. 843, passed - - )
§ 30.13 REFERRAL TO COUNCIL.
   The City Clerk shall refer the filing of the notice of appeal to the Council
at its first regular meeting after receipt thereof, or at a special meeting
called for such purpose and shall, at the Council's direction, set the appeal
for hearing.
('65 Code, § 1-4.04) (Ord. 843, passed - - )
§ 30.14 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   The City Clerk shall notify the appellant of such date by mail and so notify
any other person requesting notice thereof.
('65 Code, § 1-4.07) (Ord. 843, passed - - )
§ 30.15 DECISION OF THE COUNCIL FOLLOWING HEARING.
   At the date and hour set for the public hearing, the appellant shall be
heard, and the Council shall hear such relevant and material testimony and
argument as shall be presented by the appellant or his counsel and the
testimony and argument, if any, by the respondent person or body, commission or
other person affected in the premises as in other appeals provided by this
code, by ordinance, or by state law.
('65 Code, § 1-4.08) (Ord. 843, passed - - )
§ 30.16 EXCLUSIONS FROM PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be available where the subject
matter of the appeal involves the enforcement or the violation of any state law
or where the state legislature has by its act entirely occupied the field.
('65 Code, § 1-4.09) (Ord. 843, passed - - )
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
City Manager
   
31.01   Appointment; qualifications; compensation
   
31.02   Removal
   
31.03   Powers and duties of the City Manager
   
31.04   Appointment of Assistant City Manager
City Clerk
   
31.10   Duties
   
31.11   Compensation
   
31.12   Expenses
City Treasurer
   
31.30   City Treasurer; compensation
Cross-reference:
   
Finance Director; appointment; powers and duties, see § 32.24
   
Official bonds, see §§ 34.65 through 34.67
CITY MANAGER
§ 31.01 APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; COMPENSATION.
   The City Council, by a majority vote of its total membership shall appoint a
City Manager for an indefinite term and fix the City Manager's compensation.
The City Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications.
§ 31.02 REMOVAL.
   The City Manager may be suspended by a resolution approved by the majority
of the total membership of the City Council which shall set forth the reasons
for suspension and proposed removal. A copy of such resolution shall be served
immediately upon the City Manager. The City Manager shall have 15 days in which
to reply thereto in writing, and upon request, shall be afforded a public
hearing, which shall occur not earlier than 10 days nor later 15 days after
such hearing is requested. After the public hearing, if one be requested, and
after full consideration, the City Council by a majority vote of its total
membership may adopt a final resolution of removal. The City Manager shall
continue to receive full salary until the effective date of a final resolution
of removal.
§ 31.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
city, responsible to the Council for the administration of all city affairs
placed in the Manager's charge,
   (B)   The City Manager shall:
      (1)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or
remove any city employees and appointive administrative officers, except as
otherwise provided by law or personnel policies;
      (2)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by law;
      (3)   Attend all City Council meetings. The City Manager shall have the
right to take part in discussion but shall not vote;
      (4)   See that all laws and acts of the City Council subject to
enforcement by the City Manager or by officers subject to the Manager's
direction and supervision, are faithfully executed;
      (5)   Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the
City Council;
      (6)   Submit to the City Council and make available to the public a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of
the end of each fiscal year;
      (7)   Make such other reports as the City Council may require concerning
the operations of the city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the
City Manager's direction and supervision;
      (8)   Keep the City Council fully advised as to the financial condition
and future needs of the city;
      (9)   Make recommendations in the City Council concerning the affairs of
the city;
      (10)   Provide staff support services for the Mayor and Council members;
and
      (11)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the City Council.
(Am. Ord. 647 C.S., passed 9-18-18)
§ 31.04 APPOINTMENT OF ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   Appointment of Assistant City Manager. The City Manager may appoint an
Assistant City Manager. The Assistant City Manager shall undertake such powers
and responsibilities as directed by the City Manager. The Assistant City
Manager may also serve as a department head.
   (B)   Acting City Manager. Except as otherwise designated by the City
Manager, the Assistant City Manager shall serve as the Acting City Manager
during the City Manager’s temporary absence or disability and shall exercise
the power and perform the duties of the City Manager.
   (C)   By letter filed with the City Clerk, the City Manager may designate a
department head other than the Assistant City Manager to exercise the powers
and perform the duties of the City Manager during the Manager’s temporary
absence or disability. The City Council may revoke such designation at any time
and appoint another department head to serve until the City Manager returns.
(Ord. 647 C.S., passed 9-18-18)
CITY CLERK
§ 31.10 DUTIES.
   The duties of the City Clerk shall be those established by applicable law,
and such other duties, consistent therewith, as may be assigned to those
positions by the City Council.
Statutory references:
   City Clerk, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 40801 et seq.
§ 31.11 COMPENSATION.
   The City Council shall, by resolution, from time to time, establish the
compensation for the position of City Clerk.
§ 31.12 EXPENSES.
   Subject to the approval of the City Council, the City Clerk shall be
entitled to advances and/or reimbursement for expenditures actually made or
incurred, or, required to be made, in the respective performance of official
duties.
CITY TREASURER
§ 31.30 CITY TREASURER; COMPENSATION.
   The salary of $250 per month is hereby fixed for the office of City
Treasurer, such salary to attach to the office upon the qualification for the
office of the person elected thereto, or his successor in office whether
elected or appointed thereto by the Council hereafter.
('65 Code, § 2-3.301) (Ord. 815, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 34-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 72-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 78-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Execution of bond by City Treasurer, see § 34.65
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS
Section
Administration Department
   
32.01   Creation; appointment of department head
City Clerk Department
   
32.05   Creation
   
32.06   City Clerk
   
32.07   Chief City Clerk
Community Development Department
   
32.10   Creation; appointment of Community Development Director
Finance Department
   
32.20   Created
   
32.21   Powers and duties
   
32.22   Duties required by the Council
   
32.23   Reports
   
32.24   Finance Director; appointment; powers and duties
Fire Department
   
32.30   Creation; appointment of Fire Chief
Community Services Department
   
32.40   Creation; appointment of department head
Police Department
   
32.50   Police Reserve Organization
   
32.51   Training of law enforcement officers
   
32.52   Disposition of unclaimed property
   
32.53   Use of military-style equipment
Human Resources Department
   
32.60   Creation; appointment of Director of Human Resources/Risk Management
Mission Playhouse Department
   
32.70   Creation; appointment of Mission Playhouse Director
ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT
§ 32.01 CREATION; APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT HEAD.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby established an Administration Department
which shall have the powers and the duties as prescribed by the City Council.
   (B)   Appointment of department head. The department head of the
Administration Department shall be the City Manager.
CITY CLERK DEPARTMENT
§ 32.05 CREATION.
   Creation. There is hereby established a City Clerk Department which shall
have the following powers and duties:
      (A)   Keep and maintain an accurate record of the proceedings and actions
of the City Council;
      (B)   Serve as the custodian of the city seal, city ordinances,
resolutions, contracts and official records of the city;
      (C)   Conduct the municipal elections as prescribed by law;
      (D)   Serve as the filing officer for the Fair Political Practices
Commission;
      (E)   Ensure all legal notices are published and/or distributed as
required by law;
      (F)   Serve as the custodian of records for the city; and
      (G)   Serve as the records manager for citywide records.
(Ord. 628-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
§ 32.06 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The City Clerk is an elected position for a four-year term.
   (B)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   Certify the approval of the minutes, adoption of ordinances and
resolutions and ensure the vote of the Council has been accurately recorded.
      (2)   Administer oaths of office for all elected officials and appointed
commissioners. Administer formal oaths of office to all public safety
employees. Upon commencement of a new term of office of the City Clerk, the
Chief City Clerk shall administer the oath of office.
      (3)   Certify the results of the general municipal election.
      (4)   Work collaboratively with the Chief City Clerk in developing
general policy direction.
      (5)   Serve as a liaison between the electorate and city government.
(Ord. 628-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
§ 32.07 CHIEF CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The position of Chief City Clerk is established as a department head
of the City Clerk Department and shall be appointed by the City Manager.
   (B)   Responsibilities. The administration of the City Clerk Department
shall be the full and direct responsibility of the Chief City Clerk including
but not limited to contract management, records management, public records
requests, FPPC filings, commission/advisory board appointment process
administration and additional duties which may be assigned by the City Manager
and/or City Council.
   (C)   In addition, the Chief City Clerk shall:
      (1)   Serve as the election's official for the purposes of conducting all
municipal elections;
      (2)   Serve as the San Gabriel filing officer for Fair Political
Practices Commission filings;
      (3)   Administer the oath of office to the City Clerk upon commencement
of a new term of office; and
      (4)   Shall work collaboratively with the City Clerk in the development
of general policy.
(Ord. 628-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
§ 32.10 CREATION; APPOINTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby established a Community Development
Department which shall have the powers and the duties as prescribed by the City
Council.
   (B)   Appointment of Community Development Director. The Community
Development Director shall be appointed by the City Manager.
(Am. Ord. 647 C.S., passed 9-18-18)
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.20 CREATED.
   In order to establish a central area for the uniform processing and
development of all fiscal and budgetary functions, there is hereby established
a Finance Department.
('65 Code, § 3-3.101) (Ord. 728, passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   Finance and revenue, see
Ch. 34
§ 32.21 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Finance Department shall be vested and charged with the following powers
and duties:
   (A)   To maintain and operate the general accounting system of the city and
of each of the respective divisions and services thereof;
   (B)   To perform such accounting functions and duties in accordance with the
latest and most modern accounting methods as the science of accounting
progresses;
   (C)   To keep and maintain, or to prescribe and require the keeping and
maintenance of, inventory records of municipal properties necessary in
accordance with modern municipal accounting practices;
   (D)   To assume, maintain and perform all functions and duties relating to
the administration of taxes and license and permit fees levied or charged by
the city, and the collection thereof;
   (E)   To assume and perform all municipal functions and duties relating to
the preparation, auditing, presenting and disbursement of claims and demands
against the city, including payrolls;
   (F)   To assist in the purchase of all supplies, goods, wares, merchandise,
equipment and material which may be required by the city; and
   (G)   To assist in the preparation of the annual budget and in the
administration thereof.
('65 Code, § 3-3.102) (Ord. 728, passed - - )
§ 32.22 DUTIES REQUIRED BY THE COUNCIL.
   The Finance Department shall perform such additional duties and functions as
may be prescribed or required by the Council.
('65 Code, § 3-3.103) (Ord. 728, passed - - )
§ 32.23 REPORTS.
   The Finance Department shall prepare and present to the Council, in
sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city, the
following reports:
   (A)   A quarterly, or more frequently as may be desired, statement of all
receipts, disbursements and balances of the city;
   (B)   An annual statement of report of the financial condition of the city;
and
   (C)   Such other financial reports as may be required.
('65 Code, § 3-3.104) (Ord. 728, passed - - )
§ 32.24 FINANCE DIRECTOR; APPOINTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Appointment; deputies. The City Manager may appoint a Finance Director
and one or more Deputy Directors of Finance, who, during the absence of the
Finance Director, shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the
Finance Director. ('65 Code, § 3-3.201)
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Finance Director shall have the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   To supervise the Finance Department; and
      (2)   To cooperate with the City Treasurer and other officials of the
city in establishing and maintaining sufficient and satisfactory procedures and
controls over municipal revenues and expenditures in all departments, divisions
and services of the city in accordance with modern municipal accounting
practices. ('65 Code, § 3-3.202)
   (C)   Financial and accounting duties. In accordance with the provisions of
Cal. Gov't Code §§ 40805.5 and 37209, the financial and accounting duties
imposed upon the City Clerk pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§
40802 through 40805 are hereby transferred to the Finance Director. ('65 Code,
§
(Ord. 728, passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   City officials, see
Ch. 31
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.30 CREATION; APPOINTMENT OF FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby established a Fire Department which shall
have the powers and the duties as prescribed by the City Council.
   (B)   Appointment of Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the
City Manager.
COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
§ 32.40 CREATION; APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT HEAD.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby established a Community Services Department
which shall have the powers and the duties as prescribed by the City Council.
   (B)   Appointment of department head. The department head shall be appointed
by the City Manager.
Cross-reference:
   Community Services Commission, see §§
33.01 through
33.03
(Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.50 POLICE RESERVE ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Created.
      (1)   A Police Reserve Organization for the city is hereby created which
shall be a voluntary organization and which is hereby specifically excluded
from the civil service or the personnel system of the city.
      (2)   The organization shall be known as the San Gabriel Police Reserve
Organization. ('65 Code, § 2-6.01)
   (B)   Members; compensation. The compensation, if any, for members of the
Police Reserve Organization shall be fixed by the Council by resolution. ('65
Code, § 2-6.02)
   (C)   Members; appointment, registration and qualifications.
      (1)   The members of the Police Reserve Organization shall be appointed
by the Police Chief.
      (2)   No person shall be deemed a member of the Police Reserve
Organization until that member has been registered as such in a roster to be
kept by the Police Chief, and until that person has taken his oath that he will
observe and obey the Constitution of the United States of America, the
Constitution of the State, and the laws of the United States, the state, and
the city, and that he is not now nor at any time has been a member of any
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States by force or violence, and that he will carry out the duties of a member
of the Police Reserve Organization to the best of his ability. ('65 Code, § 2-
6.03)
   (D)   Duties of Police Chief. The Police Chief shall have complete
authority, control and command, subject to the provisions of this chapter and
subject to the approval of the City Manager and the Council, over the Police
Reserve Organization. He shall provide for the training of candidates for
membership and for the further training of members. ('65 Code, § 2-6.04)
   (E)   Duties of members. The duties of the Police Reserve Organization shall
be to assist the Police Chief and the regular members of the Police Department
of the city in the enforcement of the law and maintenance of peace and order
and to perform such other duties as may be provided by city ordinances or such
duties as may be prescribed by the Police Chief at any time for the general
welfare of the Police Department and the city. ('65 Code, § 2-6.05)
   (F)   Identification cards and insignia of members. An identification card
and such other insignia or evidence of identity as may be prescribed by the
rules and regulations or by city ordinance to govern the Police Reserve
Organization shall be issued to each member, who shall carry the card and other
identification at all times while on duty, and who shall surrender them upon
the termination of his membership. ('65 Code, § 2-6.06)
   (G)   Termination of membership. The membership of any person may be
terminated by the Police Chief at any time, and any member may resign from the
Police Reserve Organization at any time, but it shall be his duty to notify the
Police Chief of his resignation. Upon the termination of membership, whether
voluntary or not, it shall be the duty of the member to return any and all
equipment, paraphernalia, identification or badge. ('65 Code, § 2-6.07)
   (H)   Grounds for summary expulsion of members. In addition to the penalties
provided by law, any violation of law under color of the performance of his
duties as a member of the Police Reserve Organization or any breach of the
rules and regulations established by the Police Chief shall subject any members
to summary expulsion. ('65 Code, § 2-6.08)
   (I)   Wearing or carrying of insignia or cards by nonmembers
prohibited. No person shall wear, carry or display any Police Reserve
Organization identification card or insignia, or otherwise represent himself to
be connected with the Police Reserve Organization, unless he in fact is a
member thereof. ('65 Code, § 2-6.09)
(Ord. 85-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.51 TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   (A)   Declaration of qualification. The city declares that it desires to
qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of the Cal. Penal
Code § 13522, Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4. ('65 Code, § 2-4.01) (Ord. 832,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 340-C.S., passed - - )
   (B)   Declaration of adherence to standards. Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code §
13510(c), Chapter 1, the city will adhere to standards for recruitment and
training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards
and Training (POST). ('65 Code, § 2-4.02) (Ord. 832, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 340-
C.S., passed - - )
   (C)   Ascertainment of adherence to standards. Pursuant to the Cal. Penal
Code § 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its representatives may make such
inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the city
public safety and dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and
training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training.
('65 Code, § 2-4.03) (Ord. 340-C.S., passed - - )
§ 32.52 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this subchapter, UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
shall mean any and all property in possession of the Police Department for
which no claim or demand has been made and property for which no owner has been
found. ('65 Code, § 2-5.01)
   (B)   Sale; notice. The Police Department is hereby authorized to sell at
public auction to the highest bidder all unclaimed property which has been in
the possession of the Police Department for a period of more than six months
upon notice of such sale, given by the Police Chief at least five days before
the time fixed therefor, by publication once in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the county. ('65 Code, § 2-5.02)
   (C)   Destruction. Any unclaimed property which is not so sold, or which is
in so dilapidated or deteriorated condition that it could not be so sold, after
being so offered for sale may be summarily destroyed by the Police Department
after the public auction sale. ('65 Code, § 2-5.03)
(Ord. 653, passed - - )
§ 32.53 USE OF MILITARY-STYLE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Police Department Lexipol Policy, Section 707, Military Equipment,
Acquisition, Use, and Reporting, incorporated herein by reference, is hereby
adopted as the official policy of the Police Department regarding the use of
military-style equipment, pursuant to AB 481.
   (B)   This policy shall remain in effect until changed by ordinance or
statute.
   (C)   This policy shall be reviewed annually to ensure all legal
requirements are met.
(Ord. 684, passed 9-6-22; Am. Ord. 703, passed 3-19-24)
HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
§ 32.60 CREATION; APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES/RISK MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby established a Human Resources Department,
which shall have the powers and the duties as prescribed by the City Council.
   (B)   Appointment of Director of Human Resources/Risk Management. The
Director of Human Resources/Risk Management shall be appointed by the City
Manager.
(Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16; Am. Ord. 647 C.S., passed 9-18-18)
MISSION PLAYHOUSE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.70 CREATION; APPOINTMENT OF MISSION PLAYHOUSE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby established a Mission Playhouse Department
which shall have the powers and the duties as prescribed by the City Council.
   (B)   Appointment of Mission Playhouse Director. The Mission Playhouse
Director shall be appointed by the City Manager.
(Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
CHAPTER 33: COMMISSIONS
Section
Community Services Commission
   
33.01   Created
   
33.02   Membership; terms of office
   
33.03   Meetings
   
33.04   Powers and duties
Planning Commission
   
33.30   Created
   
33.31   Membership; qualifications and terms of office
   
33.32   Meetings
   
33.33   Special meetings; notices
   
33.34   Quorum
   
33.35   Appointment of Chairperson
   
33.36   Appointment of Secretary
   
33.37   Absence of Chairperson and Secretary at meetings
   
33.38   Record of meeting proceedings
   
33.39   Expenditures; authorization by Council
   
33.40   Powers and duties
   
33.41   Planning Commission staff
Cross-reference:
   
Civil Service Commission, see §§ 38.01 and 38.02
   
Design Review Commission, see § 153.351
COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION
§ 33.01 CREATED.
   There is hereby created a Community Services Commission, consisting of five
members, to be known as Community Services Commissioners, who shall serve
without compensation.
('65 Code, § 10-1.01) (Ord. 557, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 644, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 420-C.S., passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
Cross-reference:
   Parks and Recreation Department, see §
32.40
   Parks and playgrounds, see
Ch. 99
§ 33.02 MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Five members of the Community Services Commission shall be appointed
by the Council, and when so appointed shall hold office for a period of two
years and may be appointed for additional two year terms. Following expiration
of his or her term of office an appointive member shall continue to serve until
a successor is appointed and takes office; however, if no successor is
appointed and takes office within 30 days, the extended period shall terminate
and the office shall be deemed vacant.
   (B)   The appointive members shall be residents of the city during their
respective terms. In the event that an appointive member ceases to be a
resident of the city, his or her term shall terminate 30 days from the date
residency is terminated, or at the conclusion of his or her term, whichever is
sooner.
   (C)   From time to time the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council,
may appoint School Board members as non-voting liaison representatives to the
Community Services Commission.
   (D)   The City Council may appoint a City Council member as a non-voting
liaison representative to the Community Services Commission.
('65 Code, § 10-1.02) (Ord. 557, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 164-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 365-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 420-C.S., passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 513-
C.S., passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 602-C.S., passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 627-C.S.,
passed 9-6-16)
§ 33.03 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Time. All regular meetings of the Community Services Commission shall
be held on a time and date established by written resolution of the City
Council.
   (B)   Place. Regular meetings of the Community Services Commission shall be
held in the Council Chamber in the City Hall, located at 425 South Mission
Drive.
(Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16; Am. Ord. 643-C.S., passed 4-3-18)
§ 33.04 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Subject to the approval of the Council, the Community Services Commission
shall have the power and duty to do and perform all acts required of it by the
laws of the city and of the state pertaining to the Community Services
Commission.
('65 Code, § 10-1.03) (Ord. 557, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 644, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 420-C.S., passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 33.30 CREATED.
   There is hereby established a Planning Commission of the city pursuant to
the provisions of the Planning and Zoning Law, Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65100 et seq.
('65 Code, § 9-1.01) (Ord. 238, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 315, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 631, passed - - )
§ 33.31 MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The Planning Commission shall consist of five appointive members, appointed
by the City Council, and when so appointed shall hold office for a period of
two years and may be appointed for additional two-year terms. All members of
the Planning Commission shall be residents of the city. Following expiration of
his or her term of office an appointive member shall continue to serve until a
successor is appointed and takes office; however, if no successor is appointed
and takes office within 30 days, the extended period shall terminate and the
office shall be deemed vacant. In the event that an appointive member ceases to
be a resident of the city, his or her term shall terminate 30 days from the
date residency is terminated, or at the conclusion of his or her term,
whichever is sooner.
('65 Code, § 9-1.02) (Ord. 238, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 84-C.S., passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 164-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 365-C.S., passed - - Am. Ord. 449-C.S.,
passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 513-C.S., passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 602-C.S., passed 7-
2-13)
§ 33.32 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Time. All regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held on
a time and date established by written resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   Place. The Planning Commission shall hold its regular meetings in the
Council Chamber at the City Hall, located at 425 South Mission Drive.
('65 Code, § 9-1.03) (Ord. 238, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 631, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 549-C.S., passed 12-7-04; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16; Am. Ord. 643-
C.S., passed 4-3-18)
§ 33.33 SPECIAL MEETINGS; NOTICES.
   Special meetings of the Planning Commission may be called at any time by the
Chairperson. Notice of the special meeting, which contains the time and place
for the meeting, with a statement of the business to be transacted and an
opportunity for the public to address the Planning Commission on such business
items, must be posted in accordance with state law (Cal. Gov't Code § 54956).
The notice must also be delivered personally or by mail to all members of the
Planning Commission (unless waived in writing before the meeting) and to any
newspaper, radio, or television station or person that has requested notice in
writing.
§ 33.34 QUORUM.
   A majority of the appointive members of the Planning Commission shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
('65 Code, § 9-1.05) (Ord. 238, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 631, passed - - )
§ 33.35 APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRPERSON.
   The members of the Planning Commission shall select one of the appointive
members as Chairperson to serve for a one year term.
('65 Code, § 9-1.06) (Ord. 238, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 631, passed - - )
§ 33.36 APPOINTMENT OF SECRETARY.
   The Council may appoint a city employee as Secretary of the Planning
Commission.
('65 Code, § 9-1.07) (Ord. 238, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 631, passed - - )
§ 33.37 ABSENCE OF CHAIRPERSON AND SECRETARY AT MEETINGS.
   In the event of the absence of the Chairperson or the Secretary or both, the
appointive members of the Planning Commission shall select a Chairperson and/or
Secretary Pro Tempore, as the case may be.
('65 Code, § 9-1.08) (Ord. 238, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 631, passed - - )
§ 33.38 RECORD OF MEETING PROCEEDINGS.
   The Planning Commission shall cause a proper record to be kept of its
proceedings.
('65 Code, § 9-1.09) (Ord. 238, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 631, passed - - )
§ 33.39 EXPENDITURES; AUTHORIZATION BY COUNCIL.
   No expense of any kind shall be incurred by the Planning Commission unless
first authorized and approved by the Council.
('65 Code, § 9-1.10) (Ord. 238, passed - - )
§ 33.40 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall have the powers and shall perform the duties
provided in the Planning and Zoning Law of the state (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65100
et seq.) and the following additional powers and duties:
   (A)   To recommend to the proper officers of the city plans for the
regulation of the future growth, development and beautification of the city in
respect to its private buildings and works, streets, and vacant lots;
   (B)   To recommend to the proper officers of the city plans consistent with
the future growth and development of the city in order to secure to the city
and its inhabitants sanitation, proper service of all public utilities,
shipping and transportation facilities;
   (C)   To make recommendations to any public authority or any corporation or
individual of the city with reference to the location of any proposed building,
structure or works;
   (D)   To recommend to the proper officers of the city the approval or
disapproval of maps or plats of the subdivision of lands. Every such map or
plat shall, prior to its final approval or disapproval by the proper officers
of the city, be submitted to the Commission for its recommendations thereon to
such body or officers;
   (E)   To do and perform any and all acts and things necessary and proper to
carry out the provisions of the Conservation and Planning Law of the state;
   (F)   To make, or cause to be made, at the direction of the Council, a map
or maps of the city, or any portion thereof, including adjacent territory lying
outside the corporate boundaries thereof, showing the streets, highways and
other natural or artificial features therein; the location or relocation
proposed for any new public buildings, civic center, streets, parkways,
boulevards, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds or improvements; and any
proposed widening, extension, closing or relocating of any street or highway or
any change in the plan of the city that it may deem advisable;
   (G)   To make suggestions or recommendations to the Council from time to
time concerning any of the matters set forth in this section for action by the
Council thereon, having due regard for the present conditions and future needs
and growth of the city, including the distribution and relative location of all
public buildings, grounds and open spaces devoted to public use; the planning
and laying out for urban uses of all private grounds brought into the market
from time to time; and the division of the city into zones or districts for the
purpose of conserving and protecting the public health, comfort and safety; and
('65 Code, § 9-1.12) (Ord. 238, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 315, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 631, passed - - )
§ 33.41 PLANNING COMMISSION STAFF.
   (A)   The City Manager shall assign, through the Community Development
Director, such staff support, including a city planner, to the Planning
Commission as may be required for the Commission to fulfill its obligations.
   (B)   The staff shall serve as support and advisory personnel to the
Planning Commission. They shall have the duty to advise, but not the right to
vote.
   (C)   The staff shall prepare, in consultation with the Chair, an agenda for
each of the Commission's meetings.
   (D)   The staff shall prepare a staff report on each individual project
application appearing on the Commission agenda. Staff may provide a staff
recommendation on any item if the staff deems it appropriate to make such a
recommendation. A staff recommendation, when made, is not binding on the
Commission.
   (E)   The staff shall prepare and recommend new ordinances and ordinance
revisions as necessary and as requested by the Planning Commission. The
Commission may exercise its discretion in determining whether or not to
recommend any such ordinances, or portions thereof, to the City Council.
   (F)   The staff shall prepare minutes of the Commission meetings for
adoption by the Planning Commission.
   (G)   The staff shall maintain records of all Commission actions with
reference to specific projects. Staff shall verify compliance with all
conditions imposed as part of the project review by the Design Review
Commission, Planning Commission and City Council.
   (H)   The Planning Commission shall request staff to prepare reports as
needed.
('65 Code, § 9-1.13) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Claims and Demands
   
34.01   Definitions
   
34.02   Presentation by city officers
   
34.03   Itemization
   
34.04   Filing
   
34.05   Approval by department heads
   
34.06   Approval by Finance Director; preparation of check register
   
34.07   Ratification by Council
   
34.08   Opposition to demands
   
34.09   Check signatures
   
34.10   Check register
   
34.11   Demands between departments
   
34.12   Payment of bonded indebtedness
Purchasing Procedure
   
34.25   Adoption of purchasing procedures
   
34.26   Purchasing Officer
   
34.27   Duties and responsibilities of the Purchasing Officer
   
34.28   Purchasing procedures
   
34.29   Specifications
   
34.30   Purchase order processing
   
34.31   Formal contract procedure
   
34.32   Open market procedures
   
34.33   Professional and specialized services
   
34.34   Local business preference
   
34.35   Exclusions
   
34.36   Purchase of used equipment
   
34.37   Emergency purchases
   
34.38   Award of contract
   
34.39   Purchase orders
   
34.40   Splitting purchases prohibited
   
34.41   Receipt of goods
   
34.42   Central stores
   
34.43   Approval of expenditures subject to purchasing procedures
   
34.44   Estimates of requirements
   
34.45   Disposition of obsolete or surplus property
   
34.46   Gratuities
   
34.47   Changes in policy and procedure
Funds
   
34.50   Capital Outlays Fund
   
34.51   Special funds
Official Bonds
   
34.65   Finance Director and City Treasurer
   
34.66   Other officers and employees
   
34.67   Form; payment of premiums
Public Projects Bidding Procedures
   
34.75   Informal bid procedures
   
34.76   Contractors’ list
   
34.77   Notice inviting formal bids
   
34.78   Award of contracts
Recovered Organic Waste
   
34.80   Recovered organic waste product procurement policy
Cross-reference:
   
Department of Finance, see §§ 32.20 through 32.24
CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
§ 34.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEMAND. A demand, claim, or account.
   PERSON. A person, public officer, firm, corporation, company, or
association.
('65 Code, § 3-2.01) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
§ 34.02 PRESENTATION BY CITY OFFICERS.
   No city officer shall present any demand for allowance against the city
except for his own service or expenses incurred by him or her on behalf of the
city; nor shall any city officer in any way, except in the discharge of his or
her official duty, advocate the relief asked in any demand made by any other
person.
('65 Code, § 3-2.02) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
§ 34.03 ITEMIZATION.
   (A)   The Council shall not ratify, hear, consider, credit, audit, or allow
any demand in favor of any person against the city unless the same is itemized
giving the check number, date of check, vendor name, a brief description of
services rendered or materials furnished, and price to be paid therefor and
unless the demand is presented to and filed with the Finance Director within
one year after the last item of the demand occurred.
   (B)   If the Council does not ratify a demand for the reason that it is not
so itemized, the Council shall cause notice of that fact to be given to the
claimant or his or her attorney and shall allow time to have the same itemized.
('65 Code, § 3-2.03) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
§ 34.04 FILING.
   No demand shall be audited, passed upon, or ratified by the Council unless
it is in the form set forth in this chapter and presented to and filed with the
Finance Director 10 days prior to the meeting of the Council at which the
demand is to be presented.
('65 Code, § 3-2.04) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
§ 34.05 APPROVAL BY DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   (A)   All demands authorized by any department of the city, or chargeable to
any such department shall be presented to the head of such department before
filing the same with the Finance Director. The department head or his designee
shall note thereon the date received, promptly check and verify the same, and,
if found authorized, correct, and legal, endorse approval thereon over his or
her signature or initials along with the date of such approval. The department
head shall forthwith forward the same to the Finance Director.
   (B)   All demands which heads of departments decline to approve, and all
demands arising out of matters not contracted for by any department of the
city, shall be presented to and filed with the Finance Director.
('65 Code, § 3-2.05) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
§ 34.06 APPROVAL BY FINANCE DIRECTOR; PREPARATION OF CHECK REGISTER.
   (A)   Verification. Upon presentation of any demand, the Finance Director
shall cause the same to be stamped, showing the date and time of filing, and
shall examine and verify it as to its validity, accuracy, certification, and
required previous approval and shall prepare for signature and ratification, a
check for such demand.
   (B)   Form of check. Such check shall specify in whose favor it is drawn,
the purpose for which it is drawn, the amount thereof, and the bank out which
it is payable when executed and approved.
   (C)   Check register. The Finance Director shall note such demands and
checks upon a register, which may be in the form of a computer printout,
setting forth the number of the check, in whose favor the check is drawn, and
the amount thereof, and of the bank out of which the check is payable, and
shall certify thereon by his or her signature that the demands are correct as
to computations and required previous approvals.
('65 Code, § 3-2.06) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
§ 34.07 RATIFICATION BY COUNCIL.
   All demands so presented shall be reviewed by the Council and, if found
authorized, correct, and legal, shall be ratified by the Council. Such action
of the Council shall be evidenced by a motion entered in its minutes, which
motion may be embodied in a motion to approve the Council's consent calendar.
('65 Code, § 3-2.07) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
§ 34.08 OPPOSITION TO DEMANDS.
   Any person may appear before the Council and oppose the allowance of any
demand made against the city.
('65 Code, § 3-2.08) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
§ 34.09 CHECK SIGNATURES.
   The City Manager shall promulgate administrative regulations which prescribe
a method of drawing checks in payment of demands allowed and ordered paid;
provided, however, such method shall require the manual, mechanical, or
electronic signature of at least one officer who has executed an official bond
to the city covering the faithful performance by such officer of the duties of
his or her office as provided in Cal. Gov't Code § 37203.
('65 Code, § 3-2.09) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-
19)
§ 34.10 CHECK REGISTER.
   The check register for the current period shall be included in the City
Council agenda packets.
('65 Code, § 3-2.10) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
§ 34.11 DEMANDS BETWEEN DEPARTMENTS.
   All demands for services rendered or materials supplied by any city
department, the expenses of which are payable out of a separate fund, shall be
presented in the name of, and the check drawn or journal entry payable to, the
City of San Gabriel, designating the department to which the demand shall be
payable.
('65 Code, § 3-2.11) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
§ 34.12 PAYMENT OF BONDED INDEBTEDNESS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed as preventing the
payment by the City Treasurer of the bonded indebtedness of the city, and the
interest coupons thereof, or the payment of bonded indebtedness and coupons in
accordance with the laws authorizing the issuance of bonds.
('65 Code, § 3-2.12) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
PURCHASING PROCEDURE
§ 34.25 ADOPTION OF PURCHASING PROCEDURES.
   The provisions of this chapter are adopted in accordance with the provisions
of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 54201 through 54205. This chapter is not intended to
cover the expenditures of funds for public projects which are covered by the
provisions of Cal. Pub. Con. Code §§ 20160 et seq., except the bid opening
procedures for such projects shall conform to the provisions of §
34.31.
('65 Code, § 2-7.01) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-
19)
§ 34.26 PURCHASING OFFICER.
   The responsibility and authority for the purchasing of supplies, equipment
and services is vested in the City Manager, or such other person as the City
Manager may designate, who shall be the Purchasing Officer of the city.
('65 Code, § 2-7.02) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-
19)
§ 34.27 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PURCHASING OFFICER.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Purchasing Officer shall be to:
   (A)   Purchase or contract for all supplies, equipment, and contractual
personal services, excluding professional services, needed by any using city
department or agency which derives its support wholly or in part from the city,
in accordance with the purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter,
relevant administrative regulations, and such rules and regulations as the
Purchasing Officer may adopt;
   (B)   Negotiate and recommend the execution of contracts for the purchase of
supplies and equipment;
   (C)   Act to procure for the city acceptable quality in supplies and
equipment at the least expense to the city;
   (D)   Discourage uniform bidding and induce full competition on all
purchases;
   (E)   Adopt administrative regulations, from time to time, governing the
purchase of supplies and equipment for the city;
   (F)   Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing,
prices, market conditions, and new products;
   (G)   Prescribe, design, and issue forms needed for the operation of this
chapter and other applicable rules and regulations;
   (H)   Regulate the transfer of surplus property between departments as
needed or sell or otherwise dispose of such surplus property;
   (I)   Maintain a bidders' list, vendors' catalog file, or other records as
the Purchasing Officer deems necessary; and
   (J)   Assure that every bidder complies with all applicable municipal, state
and federal regulations.
('65 Code, § 2-7.03) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-
19)
§ 34.28 PURCHASING PROCEDURES.
   The Purchasing Officer shall develop administrative regulations and
procedures that cover the following steps:
   (A)   Determinations of requirements by the Purchasing Officer and using
agency;
   (B)   Negotiations for procurements;
   (C)   Referral of bids to the using department or agency for analysis and
recommendation;
   (D)   Award of purchase orders or contracts;
   (E)   Supervision of receipt and acceptance procedures; and
   (F)   Approval of invoices for payment.
('65 Code, § 2-7.04) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-
19)
§ 34.29 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   As needed, the Purchasing Officer, in conjunction with the using
department or agency, shall develop standard specifications for repetitively
procured items and service.
   (B)   Every specification shall be prepared to assure the broadest possible
bidder participation consistent with the needs of the using agency.
   (C)   Alternate specification provisions for any particular bid invitation
may be established by concurrence of the Purchasing Officer and the
requisitioning department or agency.
('65 Code, § 2-7.05) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-
19)
§ 34.30 PURCHASE ORDER PROCESSING.
   The Purchasing Officer shall approve purchase orders only in consequence of
having received a prepared purchase order from the requisitioning department or
agency. The Purchasing Officer shall supply purchase order forms and administer
their usage in accordance with applicable regulations.
('65 Code, § 2-7.06) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-
19)
§ 34.31 FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases of supplies, general services
and equipment of an estimated value greater than $25,000 shall be by formal
sealed written competitive bids. Awards for such expenditures shall be made by
the Council to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the following
provisions:
   (A)   Lowest responsible bidder. As used in this chapter, LOWEST RESPONSIBLE
BIDDER shall mean that bidder whose bid best serves the interests of the city
in the opinion of the Council and the Purchasing Officer based upon
considerations of price, quality, service, fitness, ability of the bidder to
deliver, ability of the bidder to deliver on time and within budget,
availability of parts and/or service, prior experience with the bidder, and any
other factors relating to the particular needs of the city for the supplies or
equipment to be purchased.
   (B)   Notices inviting bids. Notices inviting bids shall be posted at least
ten days before the date of opening of the bids on the city's website and shall
be posted in at least one public place in the city that has been designated for
the posting of public notices. The notice shall include a general description
of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid forms and specifications
may be secured, and give the time and place for receipt and opening of the
bids. All such bids shall be filed with the City Clerk and opened by the City
Clerk at the time and place specified in the notices inviting bids. Any bidder
may be present during such bid opening and may inspect any bids received. The
Purchasing Officer shall evaluate all bids and present his/her recommendation
as to the lowest responsible bidder to the Council, together with a summary of
all bids received.
   (C)   Bidders list. When the Purchasing Officer elects to establish a
bidders list, he or she shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible
prospective suppliers whose names are on the "bidders list," or who have made
written requests that their names be added thereto, except those removed from
the list for cause.
   (D)   Bidder's security. When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Officer,
bidder's security may be prescribed in the notices inviting bids. Bidders shall
be entitled to the return of bid securities, provided, however, a successful
bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute
the contract within the time designated in the bid specifications. The Council,
on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, may
award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the Council awards
the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's
security shall be applied by the city to the contract price differential
between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any,
shall be returned to the lowest bidder.
   (E)   Waivers. In the event the Council finds that it is in the public
interest and necessity to purchase supplies, services, or equipment without
compliance with the formal contract procedures set forth in this section, the
Council may waive such procedures.
(Ord. 656, passed 9-17-19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19; Am. Ord. 713, passed
9-17-24)
§ 34.32 OPEN MARKET PROCEDURES.
   Subject to other applicable provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Open market purchases for goods, supplies, equipment and services not
exceeding $25,000 may be made by the Purchasing Officer pursuant to the
procedures set forth in this section without observing the procedures set forth
in §
34.31.
   (B)   Purchase of goods, supplies, equipment, and general services for
amounts greater than $5,000 but no more than $25,000 shall be based on informal
written bids and shall be awarded by the Purchasing Officer to the lowest
responsible bidder.
   (C)   Procurement of professional or specialized services for amounts over
$5,000 but not more than $25,000 shall be based on at least three informal
written bids and awarded by the Purchasing Officer in accordance with §
34.33.
   (D)   Purchases of supplies, equipment, and services having a total purchase
price of $5,000 or less may be purchased on the open market free of bidding
requirements.
   (E)   Exclusions as provided in §
34.35 may be applied to open market purchases as best benefits the city.
(Ord. 656, passed 9-17-19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19; Am. Ord. 713, passed
9-17-24)
§ 34.33 PROFESSIONAL AND SPECIALIZED SERVICES.
   Services of a professional nature or specialized services including, but not
limited to, services rendered by artists, performers, architects, attorneys,
accountants, auditors, engineers and other professional consultants shall be
selected on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional
qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services
required, negotiated between parties rather than on the basis of cost alone.
Therefore, the purchasing officer or the City Council is not limited to
awarding professional services contracts to the lowest responsible bidder.
Contracts of less than $25,000 shall not require City Council approval and will
follow the open market procedure for bidding; the Purchasing Officer is
authorized to execute such contact. Award of contracts for $25,000 or more
shall be by formal written proposals in response to a request for proposals,
where possible, and will be made by the City Council.
(Ord. 656, passed 9-17-19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19; Am. Ord. 713, passed
9-17-24)
§ 34.34 LOCAL BUSINESS PREFERENCE.
   In order to promote the economic health of the city and to encourage local
participation in the procurement process, the city, in determining the lowest
responsible bidder, may take into consideration the sales tax which would be
returned to the city as a result of the award unless prohibited by grant,
state, or federal regulations or the vendor is unable to meet delivery date
needs of the city.
(Ord. 656, passed 9-17-19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.35 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Items that do not lend themselves to competitive bidding. Items such
as subscriptions, dues to approved organizations, conference expenses,
insurance payments, employee benefits, newspaper advertisements and notices,
payments to other government units, utility service payments, postage, and the
like.
   (B)   Cooperative and piggyback purchasing. The bidding requirements of this
subchapter shall not apply to purchasing of any equipment or supplies which the
purchasing agent determines to be in the best interest of the city obtained
through a cooperative competitive bidding procedure or a "piggyback" contract
prepared by and processed through another local, state, or federal governmental
agency or joint powers authority made up of government agencies, including but
not limited to the California Multiple Award Schedules (CMAS), California
Communities, US Communities, General Services Administration (GSA) or
Government Wide Acquisition Contracts (GWAC). The proposed contract should be
based on at least three bids from contractors identified in such purchasing
agreements or cooperatives. Purchases in excess of $25,000 require City Council
approval.
   (C)   Sole source purchases. Purchases of materials, supplies and equipment
if it can be obtained from only one manufacturer or vendor including
proprietary items sold directly from the manufacturer, items that have only one
distributor authorized to sell in this area, or items that perform a complex or
unique function. Also includes upgrades, alterations, additions, deletions, to
an existing proprietary article or process, or in which a warranty, guarantee
or other assurances could be voided. Purchases in excess of $25,000 require
City Council approval.
   (D)   Contracting for services in which an applicant deposits 100% of the
costs of such service and agrees to replenish a deposit account for any
additional costs incurred under the professional service agreement. The
professional services to be contracted shall be contractually obligated to the
city for purposes of oversight and supervision, not the applicant, and no
public funds will be a source of any payment to the service provider under that
specific contract. These contracts do not require City Council approval
regardless of dollar amount.
(Ord. 656, passed 9-17-19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19; Am. Ord. 713, passed
9-17-24)
§ 34.36 PURCHASE OF USED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   If opportunities arise to purchase used equipment, such equipment may
be purchased without competitive bidding, provided all the following conditions
are met:
      (1)   The equipment being sold is warrantied or, in the case of an "as
is, where-is" purchase, there is an inspection by a qualified party who
certifies that the condition of the item is acceptable and adequate for
efficient city use;
      (2)   The dealer/seller of the equipment is a bona-fide and reputable
dealer as verified through reference checks or the equipment is being purchased
from another governmental entity;
   (B)   If the purchase price is greater than $25,000, City Council approval
in advance of the purchase is required.
   (C)   Justification for the sole source purchase of used equipment must be
documented and maintained as part of the procurement file. It is not allowable
to purchase used equipment when procedures for the acquisition of new equipment
have been circumvented to avoid the competitive bidding process.
(Ord. 656, passed 9-17-19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19; Am. Ord. 713, passed
9-17-24)
§ 34.37 EMERGENCY PURCHASES.
   (A)   When an emergency requires immediate purchase of supplies and
equipment, the department concerned shall, after approval by the City Manager,
or acting City Manager, or in the event of his or her absence or
unavailability, the Finance Director, or, in the case of the absence of both,
on its own authority, immediately deliver a purchase order to the City
Manager's office, which will expedite verification of funds available and
complete the preparation of the purchase order, returning the vendor's copy to
the ordering department "on the spot" to enable an immediate purchase.
   (B)   If, at the time of the emergency, the Purchasing Officer is
unavailable, the department head, having obtained prior approval in accordance
with the provisions of divisions (A) above, may order immediately the needed
commodity from the nearest available source. As soon as possible thereafter,
the department head shall submit to the Purchasing Officer a requisition having
the approval of the City Manager and a notation that the commodity has been
ordered on an emergency basis from the vendor designated.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, an emergency shall be deemed to exist
only if:
      (1)   There is great public calamity; or
      (2)   There is an immediate need to prepare for national or local
defense; or
      (3)   There is a breakdown in machinery or essential service which
requires the immediate purchase of supplies or equipment to protect the public
health, welfare, or safety; or
      (4)   An essential departmental operation affecting the public health,
welfare, or safety would be greatly hampered if the prescribed purchasing
procedure would cause an undue delay in the procurement of the needed item.
('65 Code, § 2-7.11) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 656, passed 9-17-
19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.38 AWARD OF CONTRACT.
   In accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 40601, the Purchasing Officer is
authorized to sign and execute all contracts pursuant to this subsection for
$25,000 or less. The City Manager is authorized to sign and execute all
contracts greater than $25,000 pursuant to this subchapter after City Council
award.
(Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19; Am. Ord. 713, passed 9-17-24)
§ 34.39 PURCHASE ORDERS.
   Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made in accordance with
prescribed administrative regulations governing the preparation and issuance of
purchase orders. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the
administrative regulations shall establish responsibilities for processing
purchase orders, and no exception may be made unless specifically provided for
in the regulations.
(65 Code, § 2-7.09) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 656, passed 9-17-
19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.40 SPLITTING PURCHASES PROHIBITED.
   No acquisition of equipment, materials, supplies, or contractual services
from a single vendor or provider shall be accomplished by the issuance of
several purchase orders for portions thereof.
(Ord. 656, passed 9-17-19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.41 RECEIPT OF GOODS.
   The using department shall inspect supplies and equipment upon receipt to
verify that they conform in quantity and quality with the specifications
accompanying the purchase order. Before payment is authorized, satisfactory
receipt of goods shall be established as prescribed in the administrative
regulations governing the processing of purchase orders.
(65 Code, § 2-7.10) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 656, passed 9-17-
19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.42 CENTRAL STORES.
   (A)   Selected commodities with recurring high usage rates may be stocked
and issued from a central warehouse under the direction and control of the
Purchasing Officer. The Purchasing Officer shall examine the usage rates for
various commodities and, in coordination with the using departments, expand or
reduce the quantities and types of items in central stores.
   (B)   Central stores items shall be replenished as needed through regular
purchasing procedures. The inventory levels of commodities on hand shall be
determined by the Purchasing Officer, based upon economic and demand factors.
   (C)   Detailed instructions for ordering and accounting methods shall be set
forth in administrative regulations governing the central stores operation.
(65 Code, § 2-7.12) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 656, passed 9-17-
19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.43 APPROVAL OF EXPENDITURES SUBJECT TO PURCHASING PROCEDURES.
   Subject to the purchasing procedures of this chapter and the administrative
regulations promulgated thereunder, expenditures not exceeding $25,000 may be
approved by the City Manager subject to budgetary provisions, and expenditures
of $25,000 or more, which are subject to the purchasing provisions of this
chapter, shall require the approval of the Council prior to the issuance of a
purchase order.
(65 Code, § 2-7.13) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 656, passed 9-17-
19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19; Am. Ord. 713, passed 9-17-24)
§ 34.44 ESTIMATES OF REQUIREMENTS.
   All using agencies shall file detailed estimates of their requirements for
supplies and equipment in such a manner, at such time, and for such future
periods as the City Manager shall request.
(65 Code, § 2-7.14) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 656, passed 9-17-
19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.45 DISPOSITION OF OBSOLETE OR SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   Each using agency shall submit at least annually to the City Manager, in the
form and manner he or she shall prescribe, reports describing all supplies,
equipment, materials, fixtures, and other personal property of the city in the
agency's custody which is surplus to need or which has become obsolete or
unserviceable.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of division (E) of this section, the City
Manager is authorized, from time to time, to sell or exchange any and all
equipment, materials, fixtures, and other personal property of the city having
a salvage value and which is obsolete or unserviceable, or is surplus to the
city, or for which replacement is to be purchased. The City Manager may sell
the same for the best price obtainable in the open market or, when he or she
deems it advisable, to the highest bidder at a public sale, or he or she may
exchange the same for other property or for credit on other property.
   (B)   In the event the City Manager determines that any such obsolete or
surplus property has no salvage value, he or she may dispose of it as he or she
deems advisable.
   (C)   All sales shall be for cash or by certified check, guaranteed check,
or money order payable to the city.
   (D)   The City Manager shall have the authority to sign bills of sale and
other papers or documents evidencing transfer of title of such property for and
on behalf of the city.
   (E)   Prior to disposing of any obsolete or surplus personal property having
an apparent market value in excess of $25,000, the City Manager shall inform
the Council of the nature of the personal property proposed for disposition and
the price offered and obtain the Council's approval for disposition.
(65 Code, § 2-7.15) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 656, passed 9-17-
19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19; Am. Ord. 713, passed 9-17-24)
§ 34.46 GRATUITIES.
   The offer of any gratuity to an official or employee by any vendor or
contractor, or perspective vendor or contractor, shall be cause for declaring
such individual or firm to be an irresponsible bidder. Promotional items of
nominal value, such as pens, notepads, etc., shall not constitute a gift if
received as a non-personal item by the officer or employee, and the item is
distributed to customers or potential customers routinely by the contributor.
(Ord. 656, passed 9-17-19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.47 CHANGES IN POLICY AND PROCEDURE.
   Changes in the general method or policy of purchasing and the operation of
central stores shall be made by amending the provisions of this chapter.
Operational policies and procedures necessary for the effective and efficient
operation of the purchasing function as set forth herein shall be by shall be
set by council resolution. Changes affecting only details or forms used in the
administration of the provisions of this chapter concerning purchasing and
central stores may be initiated by the City Manager as administrative revisions
to the pertinent procedural regulations.
(65 Code, § 2-7.16) (Ord. 448-C.S., passed 4-18-95; Am. Ord. 656, passed 9-17-
19; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
FUNDS
§ 34.50 CAPITAL OUTLAYS FUND.
   (A)   Created. Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 53730
through 53737, and subject to the limitations therein stated, there is hereby
created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the Special Fund for
Capital Outlays. ('65 Code, § 3-4.101)
   (B)   Purpose. The fund shall remain inviolate for the making of such
capital outlays as the Council shall direct to be made from the fund. Money
shall not be disbursed therefrom for any other purpose except upon the consent
of the electors obtained as provided by the provisions of the California
Government Code. ('65 Code, § 3-4.102)
   (C)   Levy of taxes. The Council may include in its annual tax levy taxes
for the raising of money for such fund; provided, however, no levy so made
shall exceed the limitations imposed by the general laws of the state upon the
right of the city to impose taxes without the assent of two-thirds of the
qualified electors of the city voting at any general or special election at
which such proposition may be submitted. ('65 Code, § 3-4.103)
   (D)   Transfer of funds. The Council may transfer to such fund any portion
or all unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand at the end of any fiscal
year. ('65 Code, § 3-4.104)
(Ord. 874, passed - - )
§ 34.51 SPECIAL FUNDS.
   The Finance Director may establish such special funds as may be required by
law, administrative regulation or generally accepted governmental accounting
practice.
OFFICIAL BONDS
§ 34.65 FINANCE DIRECTOR AND CITY TREASURER.
   The Finance Director and the City Treasurer shall each execute a bond to the
city, issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, for
the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices in the penal
sums set opposite the names of their offices as follows:
   (A)   Finance Director   $ 250,000
   (B)   City Treasurer   $ 250,000
('65 Code, § 3-5.01) (Ord. 612, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 664, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 727, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 821, passed - - )
§ 34.66 OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   All other officers and employees of the city, including deputies of the
Finance Director and City Treasurer, shall be covered by an honesty position
bond, issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, for
the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices or
employment in the penal sum of $100,000 each.
('65 Code, § 3-5.02) (Ord. 612, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 664, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 728, passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
City officials, see Ch. 31
   
Personnel policies, see Ch. 38
§ 34.67 FORM; PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS.
   The bonds required by the provisions of this subchapter shall be in the
manner and form as set forth in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36518 through 36521, and the
premiums therefor shall be paid by the city.
('65 Code, § 3-5.03) (Ord. 612, passed - - )
PUBLIC PROJECTS BIDDING PROCEDURES
§ 34.75 INFORMAL BID PROCEDURES.
   Pubic projects, as defined in the Uniform Public Construction Cost
Accounting Act, Cal. Pub. Con. Code §§ 22000 et seq., and in accordance with
the limits listed in Cal. Pub. Con. Code § 22032, may be let to contract by
informal procedures as set forth in Cal. Pub. Con. Code §§ 22032 et seq.
(Ord. 570-C.S., passed 6-3-08; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.76 CONTRACTORS’ LIST.
   A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with
Cal. Pub. Con. Code § 22034 and criteria promulgated from time to time by the
California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission.
(Ord. 570-C.S., passed 6-3-08; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.77 NOTICE INVITING FORMAL BIDS.
   Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions
of this subchapter, a notice inviting formal bids shall be mailed, faxed, or
emailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the
list developed in accordance with §
34.76, and to all construction trade journals as specified by the California
Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Cal. Pub.
Con. Code § 22036. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals
may be notified at the discretion of the department/agency soliciting bids,
provided however:
   (A)   If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city
for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids
shall be mailed, faxed, or emailed only to the construction trade journals
specified by the Commission.
   (B)   If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be
obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting
informal bids may be mailed, faxed, or emailed exclusively to such contractor
or contractors.
(Ord. 570-C.S., passed 6-3-08; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
§ 34.78 AWARD OF CONTRACTS.
   The City Purchasing Officer, City Manager, and the Public Works Director are
each authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 570-C.S., passed 6-3-08; Am. Ord. 657, passed 11-5-19)
RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE
§ 34.80 RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE PRODUCT PROCUREMENT POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the policy of the city, applicable to all departments
and divisions, to incorporate environmental considerations including recycled-
content and recovered organic waste product use into purchasing practices and
procurement. This recovered organic waste product procurement policy (policy)
will help the city to:
      (1)   Protect and conserve natural resources, water, and energy;
      (2)   Minimize the city's contribution to climate change, pollution, and
solid waste disposal; and
      (3)   Comply with state requirements as contained in 14 CCR Division 7,
Chapter 12, Article 12 (SB 1383 procurement regulations) to procure a specified
amount of recovered organic waste products to support organic waste disposal
reduction targets and markets for products made from recycled and recovered
organic waste materials, and to purchase recycled-content paper products and
recycled- content printing and writing paper.
   (B)   Definitions. The following definitions will be applicable to this
section:
      ANNUAL RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE PRODUCT PROCUREMENT TARGET. The amount of
organic waste in the form of a recovered organic waste product that the city is
required to procure annually under 14 CCR § 18993.1. This target shall be
calculated by multiplying the per capita procurement target, which shall be
0.08 tons of organic waste per California resident per year, times the city's
residential population using the most recent annual data reported by the
California Department of Finance. Annually, CalRecycle will provide notice to
each city of its annual recovered organic waste product procurement target by
posting such information on CalRecycle's website and providing written notice
directly to the city.
      CITY. The City of San Gabriel
      COMPOST. Means:
         (a)   The product resulting from the controlled biological
decomposition of organic solid wastes that are source separated from the
municipal solid waste stream or which are separated at a centralized facility
or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17896.2(a)(4).
         (b)   Compost eligible for meeting the annual recovered organic waste
product procurement target must be produced at a compostable material handling
operation or facility permitted or authorized under 14 CCR Chapter 3.1 of
Division 7 or produced at a large volume in-vessel digestion facility that
composts on-site as defined and permitted under 14 CCR Chapter 3.2 of Division
7. Compost shall meet the state's composting operations regulatory
requirements.
      DIRECT SERVICE PROVIDER. A person, company, agency, district, or other
entity that provides a service or services to the city pursuant to a contract
or other written agreement or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(17).
      ELECTRICITY PROCURED FROM BIOMASS CONVERSION. Electricity generated from
biomass facilities that convert recovered organic waste, such as wood and
prunings from the municipal stream, into electricity. Electricity procured from
a biomass conversion facility may only count toward the city's annual recovered
organic waste product procurement target if the facility receives feedstock
directly from certain permitted or authorized compostable material handling
operations or facilities, transfer/processing operations or facilities, or
landfills, as described in 14 CCR § 18993.1(i).
      ORGANIC WASTE. Solid wastes containing material originated from living
organisms and their metabolic waste products including, but not limited to,
food, yard trimmings, organic textiles and carpets, lumber, wood, paper
products, printing and writing paper, manure, biosolids, digestate, and
sludges, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(46). Biosolids and
digestate are as defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(4) and 14 CCR § 18982(a)(16.5),
respectively.
      PAPER PRODUCTS. Include, but are not limited to, paper janitorial
supplies, cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, hanging files, corrugated
boxes, tissue, and toweling; or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(51).
      PRINTING AND WRITING PAPERS. Include, but are not limited to, copy,
xerographic, watermark, cotton fiber, offset, forms, computer printout paper,
white wove envelopes, manila envelopes, book paper, note pads, writing tablets,
newsprint, and other uncoated writing papers, posters, index cards, calendars,
brochures, reports, magazines, and publications; or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(54).
      PROCUREMENT OF RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE PRODUCTS. Purchase or acquisition
(e.g., free delivery or free distribution from a hauler or other entity via a
written agreement or contract), and end use by the city or others. The city's
annual recovered organic waste product procurement target can be fulfilled
directly by the city or by direct service providers through written contracts
or agreements for procurement of recovered organic waste products at the city's
behest.
      PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. Has the same meaning as in §
403.3(r) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE PRODUCTS. Products made from California,
landfill-diverted recovered organic waste processed at a permitted or otherwise
authorized operation or facility, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(60). Products that can be used to meet the annual recovered organic waste
product procurement target shall include compost, SB 1383 eligible mulch,
renewable gas from an in-vessel digestion facility, and electricity procured
from biomass conversion as described herein and provided that such products
meet requirements of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 12.
      RECORDKEEPING DESIGNEE. The public employee appointed by the City Manager
or their designee to track procurement and maintain records of recovered
organic waste product procurement efforts both by the city and others, if
applicable, as required by 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, Articles 12 and 13.
      RECYCLABILITY. The paper products and printing and writing paper offered
or sold to the city are eligible to be labeled with an unqualified recyclable
label as defined in 16 Code of Federal Regulations § 260.12 (2013).
      RECYCLED-CONTENT PAPER PRODUCTS AND RECYCLED-CONTENT PRINTING AND WRITER
PAPER. Such products that consist of at least 30%, by fiber weight,
postconsumer fiber, consistent with the requirements of Cal. Public Contract
Code §§ 22150 to 22154 and §§ 12200 and 12209, and as amended.
      RENEWABLE GAS. Gas derived from organic waste that has been diverted from
a landfill and processed at an in-vessel digestion facility that is permitted
or otherwise authorized by 14 CCR to recover organic waste, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(62).
      SB 1383. Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor on September
19, 2016, which added Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7,
and 39730.8, and added Cal. Public Resources Code Chapter 13.1 (commencing with
§ 42652) to Part 3 of Division 30, establishing methane emissions reduction
targets in a statewide effort to reduce emissions of short-lived climate
pollutants, as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time to
time.
      SB 1383 REGULATIONS or SB 1383 REGULATORY. Means or refers to, for the
purposes of this policy, the Short-Lived Climate Pollutants (SLCP): organic
waste reductions regulations developed by CalRecycle and adopted in 2020 that
created Chapter 12 of 14 CCR, Division 7 and amended portions of regulations of
14 CCR and 27 CCR.
      SB 1383 ELIGIBLE MULCH. Mulch eligible to meet the annual recovered
organic waste product procurement target, pursuant to 14 CCR Chapter 12 of
Division 7. This SB 1383 eligible mulch shall meet the following conditions for
the duration of the applicable procurement compliance year, as specified by 14
CCR § 18993.1(f)(4):
         (a)   Produced at one of the following facilities:
            1.   A compostable material handling operation or facility as
defined in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(12), that is permitted or authorized under 14 CCR
Division 7, other than a chipping and grinding operation or facility as defined
in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(10);
            2.   A transfer/processing facility or transfer/processing
operation as defined in 14 CCR §§ 17402(a)(30) and (31), respectively, that is
permitted or authorized under 14 CCR Division 7; or
            3.   A solid waste landfill as defined in Cal. Public Resources
Code § 40195.1 that is permitted under 27 CCR Division 2.
         (b)   Meet or exceed the physical contamination, maximum metal
concentration, and pathogen density standards for land application specified in
14 CCR § 17852 (a)(24.5)(A)1 through 3.
      STATE. The State of California.
   (C)   Recovered organic waste product procurement.
      (1)   Procurement target.
         (a)   The city will annually procure for use or giveaway a quantity of
recovered organic waste products that meets or exceeds its annual recovered
organic waste product procurement target through the implementation of
divisions (C) through (E) of this section.
         (b)   To be eligible to meet the annual recovered organic waste
product procurement target, products that may be procured include the following
(provided that each product meets the criteria included in their respective
definition in division (B) of this section):
            1.   SB 1383 eligible compost.
            2.   SB 1383 eligible mulch.
            3.   Renewable gas in the form of transportation fuel, electricity,
or heat.
            4.   Electricity procured from biomass conversion.
      (2)   Requirements for city departments.
         (a)   Compost and SB 1383 eligible mulch procurement. Divisions and
departments responsible for landscaping maintenance, renovation, or
construction shall:
            1.   Use compost and SB 1383 eligible mulch produced from recovered
organic waste for landscaping maintenance, renovation, or construction, as
practicable, whenever available, and capable of meeting quality standards and
criteria specified. SB 1383 eligible mulch used for land application must meet
or exceed the physical contamination, maximum metal concentration and pathogen
density standards specified in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(24.5)(A)(1) through (3).
            2.   When the city uses compost and SB 1383 eligible mulch and the
applications are subject to the city's Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance
(WELO), comply with one of the following, whichever is more stringent: (i) the
city's WELO, if more stringent than the state's Model Water Efficient Landscape
Ordinance (MWELO); or (ii) § 492.6 (a)(3)(B), (C), (D), and (G) of the state's
Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, Title 23, Division 2, Chapter 2.7 of
the CCR, as amended September 15, 2015, which requires the submittal of a
landscape design plan with a "Soil Preparation, Mulch, and Amendments Section"
to include the following:
         (b)   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of
four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated
to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than 6% organic
matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and
tilling.
         (c)   Apply a minimum three-inch layer of mulch on all exposed soil
surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting
groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To
provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, leave up to 5% of
the landscape area without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in
the landscape design plan as such.
         (d)   Procure organic mulch materials made from recycled or
postconsumer materials rather than inorganic materials or virgin forest
products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally
available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel
modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.
         (e)   For all mulch that is land applied, procure SB 1383 eligible
mulch that meets or exceeds the physical contamination, maximum metal
concentration, and pathogen density standards for land applications specified
in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(24.5)(A)(1) through (3).
         (f)   Keep records, including invoices or proof of recovered organic
waste product procurement (either through purchase or acquisition), and submit
records to the recordkeeping designee, on a schedule to be determined by
recordkeeping designee. Records shall include:
            1.   General procurement records, including:
               a.   General description of how and where the product was used
and applied, if applicable;
               b.   Source of product, including name, physical location, and
contact information for each entity, operation, or facility from whom the
recovered organic waste products were procured;
               c.   Type of product;
               d.   Quantity of each product; and
               e.   Invoice or other record demonstrating purchase or
procurement.
            2.   For compost and SB 1383 eligible mulch provided to residents
through giveaway events or other types of distribution methods, keep records of
the compost and SB 1383 eligible mulch provided to residents. Records shall be
maintained and submitted to the recordkeeping designee in accordance with the
requirements specified in this section.
            3.   For procurement of SB 1383 eligible mulch, maintain an updated
copy of the ordinance or enforceable mechanism(s) requiring that the mulch
procured by the city or direct service provider meets the land application
standards specified in 14 CCR § 18993.1, as it may be amended from time to
time.
         (g)   When procurement of recovered organic waste products occurs
through a direct service provider, enter into a written contract or agreement
or execute a purchase order with enforceable provisions that includes:
            1.   Definitions and specifications for SB 1383 eligible mulch,
compost, renewable gas, and/or electricity procured from biomass conversion;
and
            2.   An enforcement mechanism (e.g., termination, liquidated
damages) in the event the direct service provider is not compliant with the
requirements.
      (3)   Renewable gas procurement (used for fuel for transportation,
electricity, or heating applications). For renewable gas procurement, the city
shall:
         (a)   Procure renewable gas made from recovered organic waste for
transportation fuel, electricity, and heating applications to the degree that
it is appropriate and available for the city and to help meet the annual
recovered organic waste product procurement target, which requires compliance
with criteria specified in 14 CCR § 18993.1.
         (b)   Keep records in the same manner indicated in this section for
the amount of renewable gas procured and used by the city, including the
general procurement record information specified in this section, and submit
records to the recordkeeping designee on a quarterly schedule. The quarterly
schedule shall be as follows: renewable gas records are to be provided to the
recordkeeping designee by April 15 for January 1 through March 31, July 15 for
April 1 through June 30, October 15 for July 1 through September 30, and
January 15 for October 1 through December 31. The city shall additionally
obtain the documentation and submit records specified in this section, if
applicable.
         (c)   If the city procures renewable gas from a POTW:
            1.   Annually verify that the renewable gas from the POTW complies
with the requirements specified in 14 CCR § 18993.1(h), including, but not
limited to the exclusion in 14 CCR § 17896.6(a)(1) and the items listed in this
section.
            2.   Annually receive a record from the POTW documenting the tons
of organic waste received by the POTW from:
               a.   A compostable material handling operation or facility as
defined in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(12), other than a chipping and grinding operation
or facility as defined in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(10), that is permitted or
authorized under 14 CCR Division 7;
               b.   Transfer/processing facility or transfer/processing
operation as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(30) and (31), respectively, that is
permitted or authorized under 14 CCR Division 7; or
               c.   A solid waste landfill as defined in Cal. Public Resources
Code § 40195.1 that is permitted under 27 CCR Division 2.
            3.   Annually receive documentation from the POTW of the percentage
of biosolids that the POTW produced and transported to activities that
constitute landfill disposal in order to demonstrate that the POTW transported
less than 25% of the biosolids it produced to activities that constitute
landfill disposal. For the purposes of this policy, landfill disposal is
defined pursuant to 14 CCR § 18983.1(a) and includes final disposition at a
landfill; use of material as alternative daily cover or alternative
intermediate cover at a landfill, and other dispositions not listed in 14 CCR §
18983.1(b). Alternative daily cover or alternative intermediate cover are
defined in 27 CCR §§ 20690 and 20700, respectively.
            4.   Annually receive documentation that the POTW receives vehicle-
transported solid waste that is an anaerobically digestible material for the
purpose of anaerobic co-digestion with POTW treatment plant wastewater to
demonstrate that the POTW meets the requirement of 14 CCR § 18993.1(h)(2).
            5.   The city shall submit these records to the recordkeeping
designee on an annual basis, not to exceed 20 days from receipt of notification
from the POTW.
      (4)   Electricity procured from biomass conversion. For electricity
procured from biomass conversion, the city shall:
         (a)   Procure electricity from a biomass conversion facility that
receives feedstock from a composting facility, transfer/processing facility, a
solid waste landfill, and/or receives feedstock from the generator or employees
on behalf of the generator of the organic waste and to the degree that it is
available and practicable for the city and to help meet the annual recovered
organic waste product procurement target, which requires compliance with
criteria specified in 14 CCR § 18993.1.
         (b)   Maintain records and conduct the following recordkeeping
activities:
            1.   Keep records in the same manner indicated in this section for
the amount of electricity procured from biomass conversion facilities,
including the general procurement record information specified in this section.
            2.   Receive written notification by an authorized representative
of the biomass conversion facility certifying that biomass feedstock was
received from a permitted solid waste facility identified in 14 CCR § 18993.1
(i).
            3.   Provide these records to the recordkeeping designee.
   (D)   Requirements for direct service providers.
      (1)   Direct service providers of landscaping maintenance, renovation,
and construction shall:
         (a)   Use compost and SB 1383 eligible mulch, as practicable, produced
from recovered organic waste for all landscaping renovations, construction, or
maintenance performed for the city, whenever available, and capable of meeting
quality standards and criteria specified. SB 1383 eligible mulch used for land
application shall comply with 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 12 and
must meet or exceed the physical contamination, maximum metal concentration and
pathogen density standards specified in 14 CCR § 17852 (a)(24.5)(A)(1) through
(3).
         (b)   If direct service provider is subject to the city's WELO, comply
with one of the following, whichever is more stringent:
            1.   The locally-adopted WELO that is more stringent than the
state's MWELO; or
            2.   Sections 492.6 (a)(3)(B), (C), (D), and (G) of the state's
MWELO, Title 23, Division 2, Chapter 2.7 of the CCR, as amended September 15,
2015, which requires the submittal of a landscape design plan with a "Soil
Preparation, Mulch, and Amendments Section" to include the following:
               a.   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum
of four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet of permeable area shall be
incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than 6%
organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and
tilling.
               b.   Apply a minimum three-inch layer of mulch on all exposed
soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting
groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To
provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, leave up to 5% of
the landscape area without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in
the landscape design plan as such.
               c.   Procure organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-
consumer materials rather than inorganic materials or virgin forest products
unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available.
Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel modification
plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.
               d.   For all mulch that is land applied, procure SB 1383
eligible mulch that meets or exceeds the physical contamination, maximum metal
concentration, and pathogen density standards for land applications specified
in 14 CCR § 17852(a)(24.5)(A)(1) through (3).
         (c)   Keep and provide records of procurement of recovered organic
waste products (either through purchase or acquisition) to recordkeeping
designee, on a schedule to be determined by recordkeeping designee. Information
to be provided shall include:
            1.   General description of how and where the product was used and
if applicable, applied;
            2.   Source of product, including name, physical location, and
contact information for each entity, operation, or facility from whom the
recovered organic waste products were procured;
            3.   Type of product;
            4.   Quantity of each product; and
            5.   Invoice or other record demonstrating purchase or procurement.
      (2)   Direct service provider of organic waste collection services shall:
         (a)   Provide a specified quantity of compost or SB 1383 eligible
mulch to the city and its customers via periodic "giveaways" as specified in a
franchise agreement or other agreement.
         (b)   Keep and provide records to the city including the following:
            1.   Dates provided;
            2.   Source of product including name, physical location and
contact information for each entity, operation or facility from whom the
recovered organic waste products were procured;
            3.   Type of product;
            4.   Quantity provided; and
            5.   Invoice or other record or documentation demonstrating
purchase, procurement, or transfer of material to giveaway location.
      (3)   Renewable gas procurement by direct service providers.
         (a)   If renewable gas made from recovered organic waste is used by
direct service providers, direct service providers shall submit information
listed in this section on a schedule to be determined by the city, but not less
than annually to the recordkeeping designee.
         (b)   Renewable gas used by direct service providers under divisions
(C)(3)(a) and (b) shall comply with criteria specified in 14 CCR § 18993.1.
   (E)   Recycled-content paper procurement.
      (1)   Requirements for city departments:
         (a)   Comparable or more favorable pricing. If fitness and quality of
recycled-content paper products and recycled-content printing and writing paper
are equal to that of non-recycled items, all departments and divisions of the
city shall purchase recycled-content paper products and recycled-content
printing and writing paper that consists of at least 30%, by fiber weight,
postconsumer fiber, whenever available at the same or a lesser total cost than
non-recycled items, consistent with the requirements of the Cal. Public
Contracts Code, §§ 22150 through 22154 and §§ 12200 and 12209, as amended.
         (b)   All paper products and printing and writing paper shall be
eligible to be labeled with an unqualified recyclable label as defined in Title
16 Code of Federal Regulations § 260.12 (2013).
         (c)   Provide records to the recordkeeping designee of all paper
products and printing and writing paper purchases within 30 days of the
purchase (both recycled-content and non-recycled content, if any is purchased)
made by a division or department or employee of the city. Records shall include
a copy of the invoice or other documentation of purchase, written
certifications as required in this section for recycled-content purchases,
vendor name, purchaser name, quantity purchased, date purchased, and recycled
content (including products that contain none), and if non-recycled-content
paper products and/or non-recycled-content printing and writing paper are
provided, include a description of why recycled-content paper products and/or
recycled-content printing and writing paper were not provided.
      (2)   Requirements for vendors.
         (a)   All vendors that provide paper products (including janitorial
paper products) and printing and writing paper to the city shall:
            1.   Provide recycled-content paper products and recycled-content
printing and writing paper that consists of at least 30%, by fiber weight,
postconsumer fiber, if fitness and quality are equal to that of non-recycled
item and available at equal or lesser price.
            2.   Only provide paper products and printing and writing papers
that meet Federal Trade Commission Recyclability standard as defined in Title
16 Code of Federal Regulations § 260.12 (2013).
            3.   Certify in writing, under penalty of perjury, the minimum
percentage of postconsumer material in the paper products and printing and
writing paper offered or sold to the city. This certification requirement may
be waived if the percentage of postconsumer material in the paper products,
printing and writing paper, or both can be verified by a product label,
catalog, invoice, or a manufacturer or vendor internet website.
            4.   Certify in writing, under penalty of perjury, that the paper
products and printing and writing paper offered or sold to the city is eligible
to be labeled with an unqualified recyclable label as defined in Title 16 Code
of Federal Regulations § 260.12 (2013).
            5.   Provide records to the recordkeeping designee of all paper
products and printing and writing paper purchased from the vendor within 30
days of the purchase (both recycled-content and non-recycled content, if any is
purchased) made by a division or department or employee of the city. Records
shall include a copy of the invoice or other documentation of purchase, written
certifications as required in this section for recycled-content purchases,
purchaser name, quantity purchased, date purchased, and recycled content
(including products that contain none), and if non-recycled-content paper
products and/or non-recycled-content printing and writing paper are provided,
include a description of why recycled-content paper products and/or recycled-
content printing and writing paper were not provided.
         (b)   All vendors providing printing services to the city via a
printing contract or written agreement, shall use printing and writing paper
that consists of at least 30%, by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber, or as
amended by Cal. Public Contract Code § 12209.
   (F)   Recordkeeping responsibilities.
      (1)   The Finance Department will be the responsible department and will
select an employee to act as the recordkeeping designee that will be
responsible for obtaining records pertaining to procurement of recovered
organic waste products and recycled-content paper products and recycled-content
printing and writing paper.
      (2)   The recordkeeping designee will do the following to track
procurement of recovered organic waste products, recycled-content paper
products, and recycled-content printing and writing paper:
         (a)   Collect and collate copies of invoices or receipts (paper or
electronic) or other proof of purchase that describe the procurement of
printing and writing paper and paper products, including the volume and type of
all paper purchases; and, copies of certifications and other required
verifications from all departments and/or divisions procuring paper products
and printing and writing paper (whether or not they contain recycled content)
and/or from the vendors providing printing and writing paper and paper
products. These records must be kept as part of city's documentation of its
compliance with 14 CCR § 18993.3.
         (b)   Collect and collate copies of invoices or receipts or
documentation evidencing procurement from all departments and divisions
procuring recovered organic waste products and invoices or similar records from
vendors/contractors/others procuring recovered organic waste products on behalf
of the city to develop evidence of the city meeting its annual recovered
organic waste product procurement target. These records must be kept as part of
the city's documentation of its compliance with 14 CCR § 18993.1.
         (c)   Collect, collate, and maintain documentation submitted by the
city, direct service providers, and/or vendors, including the information
reported to the recordkeeping designee in accordance with this section.
         (d)   Compile an annual report on the city's direct procurement, and
vendor/other procurement on behalf of the city, of recovered organic waste
products, recycled-content paper products, and recycled-content printing and
writing paper, consistent with the recordkeeping requirements contained in 14
CCR § 18993.2 for the annual recovered organic waste product procurement target
and 14 CCR § 18993.4 for recycled-content paper products and recycled-content
printing and writing paper procurement. This report shall be made available to
the city's responsible entity for compiling the annual report to be submitted
to CalRecycle (which will include a description of compliance on many other SB
1383 regulatory requirements) pursuant to 14 CCR Division 7, Chapter 12,
Article 13. The procurement report shall also be shared with Council annually
as evidence of implementing this policy.
   (G)   Effective date of policy. This policy shall go into effect December 2,
2021.
(Ord. 681, passed 11-2-21)
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
35.001   Taxes to be collected pursuant to California Government Code
provisions
   
35.002   Assessment and collection duties to be performed by county
   
35.003   Claims required
   
35.004   Form of claim
   
35.005   Claim prerequisite to suit
   
35.006   Suit
Real Property Transfer Tax
   
35.015   Title
   
35.016   Tax imposed
   
35.017   Person responsible for payment
   
35.018   Exemptions
   
35.019   Debt security instruments exempted
   
35.020   Governmental agencies exempted
   
35.021   Bankruptcies, receiverships, and reorganizations
   
35.022   Securities and Exchange Commission
   
35.023   Partnerships
   
35.024   Administration
   
35.025   Claims for refunds
Sales and Use Tax
   
35.035   Title
   
35.036   Purpose
   
35.037   Sales tax
   
35.038   Use tax
   
35.039   Amendments
   
35.040   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
35.041   Existing sales and use tax ordinances suspended
Transient Occupancy Tax
   
35.055   Title
   
35.056   Definitions
   
35.057   Tax imposed
   
35.058   Exemptions
   
35.059   Operator's duties
   
35.060   Registration
   
35.061   Reporting and remitting
   
35.062   Delinquency and interest
   
35.063   Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax
   
35.064   Appeals
   
35.065   Records
   
35.066   Refunds
   
35.067   Actions to collect
   
35.068   Violations of provisions
Utility Users Tax
   
35.080   Communication users’ tax
   
35.081   Telephone users tax
   
35.082   Electricity users tax
   
35.083   Gas users tax
   
35.084   Water users tax
   
35.085   Service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity
   
35.086   Bundling taxable items with non-taxable items
   
35.086.5   Substantial nexus/minimum contacts
   
35.087   Temporary rebates for extraordinary utility costs
   
35.088   Delinquency; interest
   
35.089   Actions to collect
   
35.090   Duty to collect; procedure
   
35.091   Duty to remit; procedures
   
35.092   Additional powers and duties of Tax Administrator
   
35.093     Administrative remedy; service users
   
35.094   Assessments
   
35.095   Records
   
35.096   Refunds
   
35.097   Appeals
   
35.098   Exemptions
   
35.099   Exemption for residents
   
35.100   Remedies cumulative
   
35.101   Notice of changes to ordinance
   
35.102   Termination or suspension of utility users tax
   
35.103   Annual review
   
35.104   State Public Utilities Commission jurisdiction
   
35.105   Changes without voter approval
   
35.106   Effect of state and federal reference/authorization
   
35.107   Interaction with prior tax
Transactions and Use Tax
   
35.115   Short title
   
35.116   Operative date
   
35.117   Purpose
   
35.118   Contract with state
   
35.119   Transactions tax rate
   
35.120   Place of sale
   
35.121   Use tax rate
   
35.122   Adoption of provisions of state law
   
35.123   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes
   
35.124   Permit not required
   
35.125   Exemptions and exclusions
   
35.126   Amendments
   
35.127   Enjoining collection forbidden
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.001 TAXES TO BE COLLECTED PURSUANT TO CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE
PROVISIONS.
   The Council, deeming it to be for the best interests of the city and
determining that the public interest and necessity demand the action herein
taken, does hereby elect to avail itself, and the city does hereby elect to
avail itself, of all the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code Article 1, Chapter 2,
Part 2, Division I, Title 5 (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 51500 et seq.) relating to the
transfer of city tax functions.
('65 Code, § 3-6.101) (Ord. 51, passed - - )
§ 35.002 ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION DUTIES TO BE PERFORMED BY COUNTY.
   All assessments for taxes in and for the city shall be made, and all such
taxes collected, by the Assessor and Tax Collector, respectively, of the
county, and the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by
law to be performed by the Assessor and Tax Collector of the city shall be
performed by the Assessor and Tax Collector, respectively, of the county until
the city shall, by ordinance, elect not to avail itself of the provisions of
said state law for any longer time.
('65 Code, § 3-6.102) (Ord. 51, passed - - )
§ 35.003 CLAIMS REQUIRED.
   All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by
the Tort Claims Act, Cal. Gov't Code §§ 900 et seq., or another state law
(hereinafter in this chapter, "claims") shall be presented within the time and
in the manner prescribed by Cal. Gov't Code, Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3
(commencing with § 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by
its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and
as further provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 516-C.S., passed 8-21-01)
§ 35.004 FORM OF CLAIM.
   All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his
or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed
on behalf of a class of person unless verified by every member of that class as
required by Cal. Gov't Code § 910.
(Ord. 516-C.S., passed 8-21-01)
§ 35.005 CLAIM PREREQUISITE TO SUIT.
   In accordance with Cal. Gov't Code §§ 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be
presented as provided in this chapter and acted upon by the City Council prior
to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained
by a person who has not complied with the requirements of §
35.003 hereof.
(Ord. 516-C.S., passed 8-21-01)
§ 35.006 SUIT.
   Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform
to the requirements of the Cal. Gov't Code §§ 940-949. Any action brought
against any employee of the city shall conform with the requirements of Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 950-951.
(Ord. 516-C.S., passed 8-21-01)
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
§ 35.015 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Real Property Transfer Tax Law of the
city. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code Division 2, Part 6.7 (commencing with § 11901).
('65 Code, § 3-6.401) (Ord. 36-C.S., passed - - )
§ 35.016 TAX IMPOSED.
   There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any
lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted,
assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or
purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds $100 a tax at the rate of $0.275 cents for each $500 or fractional part
thereof.
('65 Code, § 3-6.402) (Ord. 36-C.S., passed - - )
§ 35.017 PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of §
35.016 of this subchapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or
issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or
benefit the same is made, signed, or issued.
('65 Code, § 3-6.403) (Ord. 36-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.018 EXEMPTIONS.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall not
apply to those exemptions set forth in Cal. Rev. & Tax Code §§ 11921 through
11929.
§ 35.019 DEBT SECURITY INSTRUMENTS EXEMPTED.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall not
apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.
('65 Code, § 3-6.404) (Ord. 36-C.S., passed - - )
§ 35.020 GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES EXEMPTED.
   The United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or
territory or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall
not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter
with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but
the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.
('65 Code, § 3-6.405) (Ord. 36-C.S., passed - - )
§ 35.021 BANKRUPTCIES, RECEIVERSHIPS, AND REORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall
not apply to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective
any plan of reorganization or adjustment:
      (1)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
      (2)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving
a railroad corporation, as defined in the United States Code, subsection (m) of
§ 205 of Title 11, as amended;
      (3)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving
a corporation, as defined in the United States Code, subsection (3) of § 506 of
Title 11, as amended; or
      (4)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization
is effected.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making,
delivery, or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within
five years from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change.
('65 Code, § 3-6.406) (Ord. 36-C.S., passed - - )
§ 35.022 SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall not
apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of
the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in the Internal Revenue Code
of 1954, subsection (a) of § 1083, but only if:
   (A)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of the United States Code § 79k of
Title 15 relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
   (B)   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and
   (C)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
('65 Code, § 3-6.407) (Ord. 36-C.S., passed - - )
§ 35.023 PARTNERSHIPS.
   (A)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be
imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter by reason of any transfer
of an interest in a partnership or otherwise if:
      (1)   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a
continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954; and
      (2)   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (B)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes of this
subchapter such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument
whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of
any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership
at the time of such termination.
   (C)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter by reason of a termination described in division (B) of this
section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by
such partnership at the time of such termination.
('65 Code, § 3-6.408) (Ord. 36-C.S., passed - - )
§ 35.024 ADMINISTRATION.
   The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this subchapter in
conformity with the provisions of Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code Division 2, Part 6.7
and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
('65 Code, § 3-6.409) (Ord. 36-C.S., passed - - )
§ 35.025 CLAIMS FOR REFUNDS.
   Claims for the refund of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter shall be governed by the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code
Division 1, Part 9, Chapter 5 (commencing with § 5096).
('65 Code, § 3-6.410) (Ord. 36-C.S., passed - - )
SALES AND USE TAX
§ 35.035 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of
the city.
('65 Code, § 3-6.201) (Ord. 717, passed - - )
§ 35.036 PURPOSE.
   The Council hereby declares that this subchapter is adopted to achieve the
following purposes and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in
order to accomplish those purposes:
   (A)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which complies with the requirements
and limitations contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5;
   (B)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as these
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained
in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5;
   (C)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which imposes a 1% tax and provides a
measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of
Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and
requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; and
   (D)   To adopt a sales and use tax law which can be administered in a manner
that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and
use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon
persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 3-6.202) (Ord. 717, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 859, passed - - )
§ 35.037 SALES TAX.
   (A)   (1)   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at
retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate 1%
of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal
property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of this
subchapter.
      (2)   For the purposes of this subchapter, all retail sales are
consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible
personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-
state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state
destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges,
when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the
place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place
of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or
places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under
rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of
Equalization.
   (B)   (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5,
all of the provisions of Division 2, Part 1 of said code, as amended and in
force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes, are hereby
adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.
      (2)   Wherever, and to the extent that, in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division
2, Part 1, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the city
shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this division shall be deemed to
require the substitution of the name of the city for the word “state” when that
word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer,
the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the
state treasury, or of the Constitution of the State of California; nor shall
the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when
the results of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against
the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of
Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this subchapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to
have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to,
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of
the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to
certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while
those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part. 1; nor to impose this tax with respect
to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under
the said provisions of that code; and, in addition, the name of the city shall
not be substituted for that of the state in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6701, 6702
(except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 as
adopted.
      (3)   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Rev.
& Tax. Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by
reason of this section.
      (4)   There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is
measured:
         (a)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer; and
         (b)   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property
to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in
which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of
the state, the United States, or any foreign government.
('65 Code, § 3-6.204) (Ord. 717, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 859, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 154-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 254-C.S., passed - - )
§ 35.038 USE TAX.
   (A)   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any
retailer on or after the operative date of this subchapter for storage, use or
other consumption in the city at the rate of 1% of the sales price of the
property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are
subject to state sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made.
   (B)   (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5,
all of the provisions of Division 2, Part 1 of said code, as amended and in
force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes are hereby adopted
and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this section.
      (2)   Wherever, and to the extent that, in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division
2, Part 1, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the city
shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to
require the substitution of the name of the city for the word “state” when that
word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer,
the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the name of the
state treasury, or the Constitution of the State; nor shall the name of the
city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of
that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or
any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization,
in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
subchapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in
those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring
to the exterior boundaries of the state where the result of the substitution
would be to provide an exemption from such tax with respect to certain storage,
use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from such tax while such storage, use, or other consumption
remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Cal. Rev. and Tax.
Code Division 2, Part 1, or to impose such tax with respect to certain storage,
use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be
subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of the state code; and,
in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the
state in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence
thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 as adopted, and the name of the city
shall not be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged
in business in this state” in Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code § 6203 nor in the
definition of such phrase in § 6203.
      (3)   There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
         (a)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer;
         (b)   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales
tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev.
and Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5 by any city and county, county, or city in
the state;
         (c)   The storage or use of tangible personal property in
transportation or transmission of persons, property, or communications, or in
the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity, or in the
manufacture, transmission, or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate, or
foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public
Utilities Commission of the state; and
         (d)   The use or consumption of property purchased by operators of
common carrier and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation
of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside the city.
      (4)   There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
         (a)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer;
         (b)   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales
tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with the
provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5 by any city and
county, county, or city in the state; and
         (c)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code
§§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the
United States, or any foreign government.
('65 Code, § 3-6.205) (Ord. 717, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 859, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 154-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 254-C.S., passed - - )
§ 35.039 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments of the California Revenue and Taxation Code enacted
subsequent to the effective date of this subchapter which relate to the sales
and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division
2, Part 1.5 shall automatically become a part of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 3-6.206) (Ord. 717, passed - - )
§ 35.040 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this subchapter, or Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part
1.5, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
('65 Code, § 3-6.207) (Ord. 717, passed - - )
§ 35.041 EXISTING SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCES SUSPENDED.
   At the time this subchapter goes into operation, the provisions of Ordinance
Nos. 576, 641, 708, and 731 shall be suspended and shall not again be of any
force and effect until and unless for any reason the State Board of
Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the administration and
operation of the sales and use tax hereby imposed; provided, however, that if
for any reason it is determined that the city is without power to adopt this
subchapter, or that the State Board of Equalization is without power to perform
the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed
by this subchapter, the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 576, 641, 708, and 731
shall not be deemed to have been suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in
full force and effect at the rate of 1% continuously from and after April 1,
1956. Upon the ceasing of the State Board of Equalization to perform the
functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by
this subchapter, the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 576, 641, 708 and 731 shall
again be in full force and effect at the rate of 1%. Nothing in this subchapter
shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay to the city
any sales or use tax accrued and owing by reason of the provisions of Ordinance
Nos. 576, 641, 708 and 731 in force and effect prior to and including March 31,
1956.
('65 Code, § 3-6.208) (Ord. 717, passed - - )
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 35.055 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law of
the city.
('65 Code, § 3-6.301) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
§ 35.056 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOTEL. Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied, or
intended or designed for occupancy, by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes and shall include any hotel, inn, tourist home or house,
motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment
house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a
fixed location, or other similar structure, or portion thereof.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of
any room, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping
purposes.
   OPERATOR. The person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any
other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing
agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall
also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this subchapter and shall have
the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter by either the principal or the managing agent,
however, shall be considered to be compliance by both.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
   RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy
of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods,
labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property, and
services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
   TRANSIENT. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by
reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for
a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar
days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be
deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired, unless there
is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for
a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient,
uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the
effective date of the provisions of this subchapter may be considered.
('65 Code, § 3-6.302) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
§ 35.057 TAX IMPOSED.
   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall be subject
to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 12% of the rent charged by the
operator. Such tax shall constitute a debt owed by the transient to the city,
which debt shall be extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the
city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time
the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of
the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon
the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax
due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the Finance Director may require
that such tax be paid directly to him.
('65 Code, § 3-6.303) (Ord. 925, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 163-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 199-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 316-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 721,
passed 9-16-25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.058 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No tax shall be imposed upon:
      (1)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond
the power of the city to impose the tax provided for in this subchapter;
      (2)   Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;
and
      (3)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government, which officer or
employee is exempt by reason of express provisions of federal laws or an
international treaty.
   (B)   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the
time the rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed
by the Finance Director.
('65 Code, § 3-6.304) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
§ 35.059 OPERATOR'S DUTIES.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this
subchapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected
from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the
amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for
payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in
any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part thereof,
will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to
the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner
provided in this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 3-6.305) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.060 REGISTRATION.
   Within 30 days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting
an occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the Finance Director
and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate which shall
at all times be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate,
among other things, shall set forth the following information:
   (A)   The name of the operator;
   (B)   The address of the hotel;
   (C)   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
   (D)   A statement as follows: “This transient occupancy registration
certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled
the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law by registering with
the Finance Director for the purpose of collecting from transients the
transient occupancy tax and remitting such tax to the Finance Director. This
certificate shall not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or
to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel
without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not
limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or
office of this city. This certificate shall not constitute a permit.
('65 Code, § 3-6.306) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.061 REPORTING AND REMITTING.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the
close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period
which may be established by the Finance Director, make a return to the Finance
Director, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and
the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return
is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Finance
Director. The Finance Director may establish shorter reporting periods for any
certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of
the tax, and he may require further information in the return. Returns and
payments shall be due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason.
All taxes collected by operators pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter
shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is
made to the Finance Director.
('65 Code, § 3-6.307) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.062 DELINQUENCY AND INTEREST.
   (A)   Original delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any tax
imposed by the provisions of this subchapter within the time required shall pay
a penalty in the amount of 10% of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
   (B)   Continued delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency
penalty in the amount of 10% of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax
and the 10% penalty first imposed.
   (C)   Fraud. If the Finance Director shall determine that the nonpayment of
any remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter is due to
fraud, a penalty in the amount of 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added
thereto in addition to the penalties set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this
section.
   (D)   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who shall
fail to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this subchapter shall pay
interest at the rate of 0.05% per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of
the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent until paid.
   (E)   Penalties and interest merged with tax. Every penalty imposed, and
such interest as accrues, pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
become a part of the tax required to be paid by the provisions of this
subchapter.
('65 Code, § 3-6.308) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
§ 35.063 FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX; DETERMINATION OF TAX.
   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make, within
the time provided in this subchapter, any report and remittance of such tax, or
any portion thereof, required by the provisions of this subchapter, the Finance
Director shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts
and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the
Finance Director shall procure such facts and information as he is able to
obtain upon which to base the assessment of any such tax imposed by the
provisions of this subchapter and payable by any operator who has failed or
refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the Finance
Director shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax,
interest, and penalties provided for by the provisions of this subchapter. In
the event such determination is made, the Finance Director shall give notice of
the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the
United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at
his last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten days after the
service or mailing of such notice, make an application in writing to the
Finance Director for a hearing on the amount assessed. If an application by the
operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax,
interest, and penalties, if any, determined by the Finance Director shall
become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such an
application is made, the Finance Director shall give not less than five days
written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show
cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why the amount specified therein
should not be fixed for such tax, interest, and penalties. At such hearing the
operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, and
penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing the Finance Director shall
determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written
notice to the operator in the manner prescribed in this section of such
determination and the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount
determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days the service or mailing of
such notice unless an appeal is filed as provided in § 35.064 of this
subchapter.
('65 Code, § 3-6.309) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
§ 35.064 APPEALS.
   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director with respect
to the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 10 days after
the service or mailing of the determination of the tax due. The Council shall
fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give
notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The
decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon
the appellant in the manner prescribed in this subchapter for the service of a
notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and
payable upon the service of notice.
('65 Code, § 3-6.310) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
§ 35.065 RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment
to the city of any tax imposed by the provisions of this subchapter to keep and
preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection
of and payment to the city, which records the Finance Director shall have the
right to inspect at all reasonable times.
('65 Code, § 3-6.311) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.066 REFUNDS.
   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid, or
paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the
city pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, such amount may be refunded
as provided in accordance with the procedure adopted in through
35.006 of the San Gabriel Municipal Code. The City Council authorizes the
Finance Director to adopt administrative procedures allowing for staff
processing and settlement of individual or operator transient occupancy tax
refund claims, not exceeding $500.
('65 Code, § 3-6.312) (Ord. 925, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 516-C.S., passed 8-21-
01)
§ 35.067 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid by any transient pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any
such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be
deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the
city pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be liable to an action
brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount.
('65 Code, § 3-6.313) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
§ 35.068 VIOLATIONS OF PROVISIONS.
   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in
this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or
refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Finance
Director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and punishable as set forth in §
10.99 of this code. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any
report or claim and who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with
intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by the
provisions of this chapter to be made shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punishable as provided in this section.
('65 Code, § 3-6.314) (Ord. 925, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
UTILITY USERS TAX
§ 35.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANCILLARY TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. The services that are associated with
or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications
services, including, but not limited to, the following services.
      CONFERENCE BRIDGING SERVICE. An ancillary service that links two or more
participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision
of a telephone number. CONFERENCE BRIDGING SERVICE does not include the
telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.
      DETAILED TELECOMMUNICATIONS BILLING SERVICE.  An ancillary service of
separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer’s
billing statement.
      DIRECTORY ASSISTANCE. An ancillary service of providing telephone number
information, and/or address information.
      VERTICAL SERVICE.  An ancillary service that is offered in connection
with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling
features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls
and call connections, including conference bridging services.
      VOICE MAIL SERVICE. An ancillary service that enables the customer to
store, send or receive recorded messages. VOICE MAIL SERVICE does not include
any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to
utilize the voice mail service.
   BILLING ADDRESS. The mailing address of the service user where the service
supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.
   CITY. The City of San Gabriel.
   EXEMPT WHOLESALE GENERATOR.  The same meaning as set forth in the Federal
Power Act (15 U.S.C. § 79z-5a) and the regulations thereunder.
   GAS. Natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel, which
may be substituted therefor.
   MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.  The meaning and usage as set forth in
the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. § 124) and the regulations
thereunder.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NON-UTILITY SERVICE SUPPLIER.
      (1)   A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution
services to all or a significant portion of the city, which generates
electricity for sale to others, and shall include, but is not limited to, any
publicly-owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator,
distributed generation provider, exempt wholesale generator, municipal utility
district, federal power marketing agency, electric rural cooperative or other
supplier or seller of electricity.
      (2)   An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer,
aggregator, pool operator or other electricity supplier other than a supplier
of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city,
which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity
users within the city.
      (3)   A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer or broker, other than
a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the
city, which sells or supplies gas or supplemental services to users within the
city.
   PAGING. A telecommunications service that provides transmission of coded
radio signals for the purpose of activating specific pagers; such transmissions
may include messages and/or sounds.
   PERSON. Without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law
trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint
stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including
foreign, domestic and non-profit), municipal district or municipal corporation
(other than the city) cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
   PLACE OF PRIMARY USE.  The street address representative of where the
customer’s use of the communications service primarily occurs, which must be
the residential street address or the primary business street address of the
customer.
   POST-PAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. The telecommunication service obtained
by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through
the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card,
credit card, debit card or by charge made to a service number which is not
associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication
service.
   PREPAID TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. The right to access telecommunication
services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination
of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether
manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or
dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.
   PRIVATE TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. A telecommunication service that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in
which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity,
extension lines, stations and any other associated services that are provided
in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications
channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are
transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the
location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The residential street address or the business street
address of the service user. For a telecommunication or video service user,
SERVICE ADDRESS means either:
      (1)   The location of the service user’s telecommunication or video
equipment from which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of
where the communication is billed or paid;
      (2)   If the location in division (1) above is unknown (e.g., mobile
telecommunications service or VOIP service), the service address shall mean the
location of the service user’s place of primary use; or
      (3)   For prepaid telecommunication service, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean
the location associated with the service number.
   SERVICE SUPPLIER.  Any entity or person, including the city, that provides
communication service to a user of such service within the city.
   SERVICE USER. A person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of
this subchapter.
   STATE. The State of California.
   STREAMLINED SALES AND USE TAX AGREEMENT. The multi-state agreement commonly
known and referred to as the Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement, and as it
is amended from time to time.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Finance Director of the city or his or her designee.
   TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. The transmission, conveyance or routing of voice,
data, audio, video or any other information or signals to a point, or between
or among points, whatever the technology used. The term TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICES includes such transmission, conveyance or routing in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the
content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to
whether such services are referred to as voice over internet protocol (VOIP)
services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced
or value added, and includes video and/or data services that is functionally
integrated with telecommunication services. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
include, but are not limited to, the following services, regardless of the
manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary
telecommunication services; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid
telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private
telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free
numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); 900 service (or
any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission
for services whereby subscribers who call in to pre-recorded or live service).
   VOIP (VOICE OVER INTERNET PROTOCOL).  The digital process of making and
receiving real-time voice transmissions over any internet protocol network.
   800 SERVICE. A telecommunications service that allows a caller to dial a
toll-free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is
typically marketed under the name “800”, “855”, “866”, “877” and “888” toll-
free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal
Communications Commission.
   900 SERVICE. An inbound toll telecommunications service purchased by a
subscriber that allows the subscriber’s customers to call in to the
subscriber’s pre-recorded announcement or live service. 900 SERVICE does not
include the charge for: collection services provided by the seller of the
telecommunications services to the subscriber, or service or product sold by
the subscriber to the subscriber’s customer. The service is typically marketed
under the name “900 service”, and any subsequent numbers designated by the
Federal Communications Commission.
(‘65 Code, §3-6.501) (Ord. 578, passed 11-4-08)
Cross-reference:
   Public Works, see Title V
§ 35.081 COMMUNICATION USERS’ TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using
communication services including intrastate, interstate and international
communication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of
8% of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the
service user by the communication services supplier or its billing agent. There
is a rebuttable presumption that communication services, which are billed to a
billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within
the city’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this
subchapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the
service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for
purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall
include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or
nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the
communication services. “Communications services” does not include that portion
of cable or video television services subject to a cable or video television
fee.
   (B)   “Mobile Telecommunications Service” shall be sourced in accordance
with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act
(4 U.S.C, § 124). The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to
communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection
requirements of this subchapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other
communication services, including, but not limited to, post-paid communication
services, prepaid communication services and private communication services,
provided that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further
administrative efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional taxation (e.g.,
Streamline Sales and Use Tax Agreement).
   (C)   The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication
service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this
subchapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services
or charges therefor, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of division
(A) above.
   (D)   As used in this section, the term “telecommunication services” shall
include, but are not limited to, charges for: connection, re-connection,
termination, movement or change of telecommunication services; late payment
fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including,
but not limited to, call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and
three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory
assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory,
administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability
charges and text and instant messaging. “Telecommunication services” shall not
include digital downloads that are not “ancillary telecommunication services”,
such as music, ringtones, games and similar digital products.
   (E)   To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of communication
services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the
Tax Administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in
another state or city on such communication services, shall be allowed a credit
against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed
in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not
exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.
   (F)   The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be
collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax
collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the
following month.
(‘65 Code, §3-6.502) (Ord. 578, passed 11-4-08)
§ 35.082 ELECTRICITY USERS TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electricity in
the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of  8%  of the
charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental services or other
associated activities directly related to and/or necessary for the provision of
electricity to the service user, which are provided by a service supplier or
non-utility service supplier to a service user. The tax shall be collected from
the service user by the service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or
its billing agent.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall apply to all services,
components, and items that are: (i) necessary for or common to the receipt,
use, or enjoyment of electric service; or (ii) currently, or historically have
been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local
distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term CHARGES shall
include but is not limited to the following charges:
      (1)   Energy charges;
      (2)   Distribution or transmission charges;
      (3)   Metering charges;
      (4)   Stand-by, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support, regulation,
emergency, or other similar minimum charges for services;
      (5)   Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or
reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power
exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded
investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program
charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond
financing charges), franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and monthly
charges, and other charges, fees or surcharges which are necessary for or
common to the receipt, use, or enjoyment of electric service; and,
      (6)   Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or programs
which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges
appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.
   (C)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or
services related to the provision of such electricity.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric
service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of
electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and
commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor,
including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies
as a condition of providing such electric service. The Tax Administrator,
thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an
administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (i)
necessary for or common to the receipt, use, or enjoyment of electric service;
or (ii) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled
rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail
customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of
division (A) above.
   (E)   As used in this section, the term USING ELECTRICITY shall not be
construed to include the mere receiving of such electricity by an electric
corporation or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale.
   (F)   The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a non-utility
service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this subchapter shall be
collected and remitted in the manner set forth in §
35.085 of this subchapter. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed
in this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric
service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected by a service
supplier in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be
received by the Tax Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the
following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and/or
remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by
the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service
user, which must be received by the Tax Administrator on or before the
twentieth day of the following month, provided that such person shall submit an
adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60 days
following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax
Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent remittance that becomes
due.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.503) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 578, passed 11-4-08)
§ 35.083 GAS USERS TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the city
which is transported and delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The
tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 8% of the charges made for
such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation, and
delivery of such gas. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the
service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall apply to all services,
components, and items for gas service that are: (i) necessary for or common to
the receipt, use, or enjoyment of gas service; or (ii) currently, or
historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by
a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term CHARGES
shall include but is not limited to the following charges:
      (1)   The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned
by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling,
production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other
operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which
is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system;
      (2)   Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the
extent not included in commodity charges);
      (3)   Storage charges; provided, however, that the service supplier shall
not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when
the service supplier cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction
where such stored gas is ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the
service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for
gas storage by the service supplier and to remit the tax to the appropriate
jurisdiction;
      (4)   Capacity or demand charges, late charges, service establishment or
reestablishment charges, transition charges, customer charges, minimum charges,
annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary for or
common to the receipt, use, or enjoyment of gas service; and,
      (5)   Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs which are
mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear
on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.
   (C)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services
related to the delivery of such gas.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service
suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail
service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial
customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are
mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing
such gas service. The Tax Administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate
to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those
components and items which are: (i) necessary for or common to the receipt,
use, or enjoyment of gas service; or (ii) currently, or historically have been,
included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution
company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items
shall be subject to the tax of division (A) above
   (E)   There shall be excluded from the calculation of the tax imposed in
this section:
      (1)   Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a
pipeline distribution system; and
      (2)   Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as
that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code.
   (F)   The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a non-utility service
supplier not under the jurisdiction of this subchapter shall be collected and
remitted in the manner set forth in §
35.085 of this subchapter. All other taxes on charges for gas imposed in this
section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or
its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted
to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator on or
before the twentieth day of the following month; or, at the option of the
person required to collect and/or remit the tax, such person shall remit an
estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or
upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the Tax
Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month, provided
that such person shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as
appropriate, within 60 days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if
approved by the Tax Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent
remittance that becomes due.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.504) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 578, passed 11-4-08)
§ 35.084 WATER USERS TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using water in the
city which is delivered through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed
by this section shall be at the rate of 8% of the charges made for such water
and shall be collected from the service user by the water service supplier, or
its billing agent.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall apply to all services,
components, and items that are: (i) necessary for or common to the receipt,
use, or enjoyment of water service; or (ii) currently, or historically have
been, included in a single or bundled rate for water service by a local
distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term CHARGES shall
include but is not limited to the following charges:
      (1)   Water commodity charges (potable and non-potable);
      (2)   Distribution or transmission charges;
      (3)   Metering charges;
      (4)   Customer charges, late charges, service establishment or
reestablishment charges, franchise fees, franchise surcharges, annual and
monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary for
or common to the receipt, use, or enjoyment of water service; and,
      (5)   Charges, fees, or surcharges for water services or programs, which
are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency, whether or not
such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the
customer billing.
   (C)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall include the value of
any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other
consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the water services.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator, from time to time, may survey the water service
suppliers in the city to identify the various unbundled billing components of
water retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/
industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those
items that are mandated by a water district or a state or federal agency as a
condition of providing such water service. The Tax Administrator, thereafter,
may issue and disseminate to such water service suppliers an administrative
ruling identifying those components and items which are: (i) necessary for or
common to the receipt, use, or enjoyment of water service; or (ii) currently,
or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for water
service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges
for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of division (A)
above.
   (E)   There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this
section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered
through a pipeline distribution system.
   (F)   The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service
user by the water service supplier or its billing agent. The amount collected
in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator and must be received by
the Tax Administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.505) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 578, passed 11-4-08)
§ 35.085 SERVICE USERS RECEIVING DIRECT PURCHASE OF GAS OR ELECTRICITY.
   (A)   Any service user subject to the tax imposed by §
35.082 or by §
35.083 of this subchapter, which produces gas or electricity for self-use;
which receives gas or electricity, including any related supplemental services,
directly from a non-utility service supplier not under the jurisdiction of this
subchapter; or which, for any other reason, is not having the full tax
collected and remitted by its service supplier, a non-utility service supplier,
or its billing agent on the use of gas or electricity in the city, including
any related supplemental services, shall report said fact to the Tax
Administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the Tax Administrator
within 30 days of such use. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user
may, at its option, remit to the Tax Administrator within 30 days of such use
an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or
upon the payment pattern of similar customers of the service supplier using
similar amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall
submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within 60
days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the Tax
Administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may require the service user to identify its
non-utility service supplier and provide, subject to audit: invoices; books of
account; or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or
electricity used, including any related supplemental services, and the cost or
price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory
evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax in the opinion
of the Tax Administrator is excessive, the Tax Administrator may determine the
tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would
have incurred if the gas or electricity used, including any related
supplemental services, had been provided by the service supplier that is the
primary supplier of gas or electricity within the city. Rate schedules for this
purpose shall be available from the city.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.506) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
 - ) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.086 BUNDLING TAXABLE ITEMS WITH NON-TAXABLE ITEMS.
   If any non-taxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from
taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier,
the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies,
by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge
that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier’s books and
records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for
tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper
apportionment of taxable and non-taxable charges. If the service supplier
offers a combination of taxable and non-taxable services, and the charges are
separately stated, then for taxation purposes, the values assigned the taxable
and non-taxable services shall be based on its books and records kept in the
regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service
supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation of the taxable and non-
taxable services.
(Ord. 578, passed 11-4-08)
§ 35.086.5 SUBSTANTIAL NEXUS/MINIMUM CONTACTS.
   For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a
tax under this subchapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be
construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of
the utility users tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law,
and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by
statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VOIP) used by a
person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of
terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be
subject to a rebuttable presumption that substantial nexus/minimum contacts
exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and
remit a tax, under this subchapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have
sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if
its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains
or has within the city, directly or through an agent, affiliate or subsidiary,
a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees,
independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits
business in the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by
means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter within the
city or distributed from a location with the city; or advertises in newspapers
or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials
distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail; or if there
are activities performed in the city on behalf of the service supplier that are
significantly associated with the service supplier’s ability to establish and
maintain a market in the city for the provision of services that are subject to
a tax under this subchapter.
(Ord. 578, passed 11-4-08)
§ 35.087 TEMPORARY REBATES FOR EXTRAORDINARY UTILITY COSTS.
   (A)   The City Council, by resolution, may grant a temporary utility users
tax rebate to any class of service users for the purpose of easing the tax
burden on such customer class, which is due to an unusually large increase in
the service charges for a particular utility industry subject to the utility
users tax. The City Council may rebate an appropriate percentage of the tax
prospectively for a period of no more than 12 months. If applicable, the Tax
Administrator shall implement the temporary tax rebate by giving 60 day written
notice to all affected service suppliers as required by Cal. Pub. Util. Code §
799.
   (B)   The City Council shall consider the following factors in determining
whether to grant a temporary tax rebate under this section:
      (1)   The amount of the increase in the average billing for the utility
service for which a rebate is being considered;
      (2)   The severity of the burden that the increased billing and
associated tax imposes on the customer class for which a rebate is being
considered;
      (3)   The increased expense to the city as a utility customer, which
occurs as a result of the increase in the cost of such utility service;
      (4)   The estimated time period that the billing increase will likely
persist;
      (5)   The forecasted and historical increases or decreases in the other
sources of utility users tax;
      (6)   The forecasted and historical increases or decreases in municipal
tax revenues other than the utility users tax;
      (7)   The overall inflation rate during relevant time periods, as
measured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI);
      (8)   The cost of administering the rebate; and,
      (9)   Any other factor that affects the fairness or equity of granting
such a temporary rebate.
   (C)   In a resolution granting a temporary tax rebate, the City Council
shall make the following findings:
      (1)   The temporary tax rebate is necessary to abate a significantly
increased tax burden on a class of service users; and,
      (2)   The temporary tax rebate shall not adversely affect the city’s
ability to meet its financial obligations as contemplated in its current
budget.
   (D)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the City Council from granting
consecutive temporary rebates, provided that the City Council reconsiders the
factors enumerated in division (B), above, for each subsequent temporary
rebate, and makes appropriate findings for each resolution. As stated in Cal.
Gov’t Code § 9611, the enactment of a temporary tax rebate by the City Council
shall not constitute a repeal of one or more of the original provisions of this
subchapter. Upon the expiration of the time of the temporary tax rebate, the
original provisions of this subchapter shall have the same force and effect as
if the temporary tax rebate had not been enacted. Nothing herein is intended to
constitute a decrease in a tax, or an increase in a tax requiring an election
approval under California Constitution Article XIIIC; and to the extent that
any aspect of a temporary tax rebate resolution is found to invoke such a
requirement, the entire temporary rebate resolution shall be deemed null and
void ab initio, and there shall be no entitlement to a rebate for any service
user.
(Ord. Measure A, passed - - )
§ 35.088 DELINQUENCY; INTEREST.
   (A)   Taxes collected from a service user, or owed by a service user subject
to §
35.085 of this subchapter are delinquent if not received by the Tax
Administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend
or legal holiday, the return must be received by the Tax Administrator on or
before the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A
direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods
of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a
service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this division shall
be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date,
and the transfer settles into the city’s account on or before the following
business day.
   (B)   If the person required to collect and/or remit the utility users tax
fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more
services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to remit the tax
collected on or before the due date, or, in the case of a service user that
fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax on or before the due date
under §
35.085 of this subchapter, the Tax Administrator shall attach a penalty for
such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of 15% of the total tax that is
delinquent or deficient in the remittance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
person required to collect and/or remit the utility users tax shall not be
subject to the 15% penalty and interest for an “improper assessment” if such
“improper assessment” is voluntarily disclosed to the Tax Administrator, or its
agent, and promptly corrected thereafter by such person, whether the disclosure
occurs in the course of a Tax Administrator survey under §§
35.081(C),
35.082(D),
35.083(D), and
35.084(D) or the disclosure is voluntarily initiated by such person. For
purposes of this division, the term VOLUNTARILY DISCLOSED shall mean
information freely offered by a service supplier to the city for the purpose of
increasing the accuracy of the service supplier’s tax collection and/or
remittances before the issue has been raised or an inquiry has been initiated
by the city or any other California municipality.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to impose additional
penalties upon persons required to collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or
remitting at the rate of 15% of the amount of the tax collected and/or required
to be remitted, or as recomputed by the Tax Administrator.
   (D)   In addition to any other penalties imposed by this subchapter, any
person required to collect and/or remit any tax imposed by the provisions of
this subchapter who fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the
tax on one or more services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to
remit the tax collected on or before the due date, or, in the case of a service
user that fails to properly self-collect and remit the tax under §
35.085 of this subchapter on or before the due date, shall pay interest at the
rate of 3/4 of 1% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax,
exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent, until paid.
   (E)   The interest accrued under the provision of this section shall become
a part of the tax required to be paid.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.507) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
 - )
§ 35.089 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any
such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the Tax
Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to
collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person
owing money to the city under the provisions of this subchapter shall be liable
to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount,
including penalties and interest as provided for in this subchapter, along with
any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person’s
noncompliance with this subchapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable
attorneys fees.
(‘65 Code, §3-6.508) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed --
)
§ 35.090 DUTY TO COLLECT; PROCEDURE.
   The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this
subchapter shall be performed as follows:
   (A)   The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as
and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing
practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a
service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has
accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and
the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user
has notified the service supplier of  his or her  refusal to pay the tax
imposed on the energy charges, §
35.093(B) will apply.
   (B)   The duty of a service supplier to collect tax from a service user
shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period
applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such
regular billing are subject to the provisions of this subchapter. Where a
person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods
than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.509) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
 - )
§ 35.091 DUTY TO REMIT; PROCEDURES.
   Each person required by this subchapter to remit a tax shall file a return
with the Tax Administrator on forms approved by the Tax Administrator on or
before the due date. The full amount of the tax owed shall be included with the
return and filed with the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator is
authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary
to determine if the tax is being levied, collected and remitted in accordance
with this subchapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business
for any reason. Pursuant to Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7284.6, the Tax
Administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as
confidential information, and not subject to the Public Records Act.
(Ord. Measure A, passed - - )
§ 35.092 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty to enforce each
and all of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations
consistent with provisions of this subchapter for the purpose of interpreting,
clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance
of the taxes herein imposed. The administrative ruling shall not impose a new
tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this section or increase
an existing tax, except as allowed by Cal. Gov’t Code § 53750(h)(2). A copy of
such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax
Administrator’s office. To the extent that the Tax Administrator determines
that the tax imposed under this subchapter shall not be collected in full for
any period of time from any particular service supplier or service user, that
determination shall be considered an exercise of the Tax Administrator’s
discretion to settle disputes and shall not constitute a change in taxing
methodology for purposes of Cal. Gov’t Code § 53750 or otherwise. The Tax
Administrator is not authorized to amend the city’s methodology for purposes of
Cal. Gov’t Code § 53750 and the city does not waive or abrogate its ability to
impose the communication users’ tax in full as a result of promulgating
administrative rulings or entering into agreements.
   (C)   Upon a proper showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may make
administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict
requirements of this subchapter and thereby:
      (1)   Conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier
so long as the agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance
with the general purpose and scope of this subchapter; or
      (2)   To avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection
and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement
shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office, and are voidable by the Tax
Administrator or the city at any time.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter, of any person required to
collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this subchapter. The Tax Administrator
shall notify the person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the
absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review
shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of
the written notice by the person from the Tax Administrator. Upon completion of
the audit, the Tax Administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant
to this subchapter for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest) owed
and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the Tax
Administrator. If the person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient
records to enable the Tax Administrator to verify compliance with this
subchapter, the Tax Administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate
of the deficiency. The reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable
presumption of correctness.
   (E)   Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause,
the Tax Administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required
pursuant to this subchapter for a period of not to exceed 45 days, provided
that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the
request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason
of such extension. Interest shall accrue during the extension at the rate of
0.75% per month, prorated for any portion thereof.
   (F)   The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person
who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of the tax imposed by this
subchapter.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any provision in this subchapter to the contrary, the
Tax Administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person
required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this
subchapter if the non-collection occurred in good faith. In determining whether
the non-collection was in good faith, the Tax Administrator shall take into
consideration industry practice or other precedence.
(‘65 Code, §3-6.510) (Ord. 578, passed 11-4-08)
§ 35.093 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY; SERVICE USERS.
   (A)   Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has
deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the
amounts remitted to a service supplier required to collect the tax, that a
service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two or more
billing periods, or whenever the Tax Administrator deems it in the best
interest of the city, the Tax Administrator may relieve such person of the
obligation to collect taxes due under this subchapter from certain named
service users for specified billing periods. The service supplier shall provide
the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of
taxes owed under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator shall notify the service user that he or she has
assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and
demand payment of the taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by
handing it to  him or her  personally or by deposit of the notice in the United
States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the
address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax;
or, should the service user have changed his or her address, to his or her last
known address.
   (C)   If a service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator
within 15 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her,
which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person,
the Tax Administrator may assess the delinquent service user for the required
tax pursuant to §
35.094 of this subchapter.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.511) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
 - )
§ 35.094 ASSESSMENTS.
   The Tax Administrator may make an assessment for taxes not paid or remitted
by a person required to pay or remit. The Tax Administrator shall mail a notice
of such assessment, which shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes,
penalties and interest imposed and the time and place where the assessment may
be contested, to the service supplier and/or the service user at least ten days
prior to the date of the hearing and shall post such notice for at least five
continuous days prior to the date of the hearing. A penalty of 25% of the
amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, along with interest
at the rate of 3/4 of 1% per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of
the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent, until paid, but not less than $5. Any interested party
having any objections may appear and be heard at the hearing provided his or
her objection is filed in writing with the Tax Administrator, within 14
calendar days of the date of the notice. At the time fixed for considering such
assessment, the Tax Administrator shall hear the same, together with any
objections filed as provided in this section, and thereupon may confirm or
modify such assessment.
(Ord. Measure A, passed --)
§ 35.095 RECORDS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit
to the city any tax imposed by this subchapter to keep and preserve, for a
period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine
the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of
and remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator
shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.
   (B)   The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to
deliver, to the Tax Administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by
the Tax Administrator to establish compliance with this subchapter, including
the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available
media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and
ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed
records to the Tax Administrator on or before the due date provided in the
administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside
the city on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse
the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect
those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses,
but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by
the city to conduct the inspection.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator is authorized to execute a non-disclosure
agreement approved by the City Attorney to protect the confidentiality of
customer information pursuant to Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7284.6 and 7284.7.
The Tax Administrator may request from a person providing transportation or
distribution services of gas or electricity to service users within the city, a
list of the names, billing and service addresses, quantities of gas or
electricity delivered, and other pertinent information, of its transportation
customers within the city pursuant to Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 6354(e).
   (D)   If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to
bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (i) provide to
the Tax Administrator the name, address, and telephone number of each billing
agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to
bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and (ii) upon request of the
Tax Administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or
records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in
the opinion of the Tax Administrator, is necessary to verify the proper
application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city.
   (E)   If any person subject to record-keeping under this section
unreasonably denies the Tax Administrator, or the Tax Administrator’s
designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce the
information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified,
the Tax Administrator may impose a penalty of $500 on such person for each day
following: (i) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access;
or (ii) the due date for production of records as set forth in the
administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed under this subchapter.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.512) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
-) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.096 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid, paid more than once,
or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax
Administrator under this subchapter, it may be refunded as provided in this
section.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid, paid
more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by
the Tax Administrator under this subchapter, provided that no refund shall be
paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her
guardian, conservator, executor or administrator has submitted a written claim,
under penalty of perjury, to the Tax Administrator within one year of the
overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must
clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing
entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a refund claim
on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers. Where the amount of any individual
refund claim is in excess of $15,000, City Council approval shall be required.
   (C)   It is the intent of the city that the one year written claim
requirement of this section be given retroactive effect, provided, however,
that any claims which arose prior to the enactment of the one year claims
period of this section, and which are not otherwise barred by a then-applicable
statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the Tax
Administrator as provided in this division within 90 days following the
effective date of this ordinance.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator, or the City Council where the claim is in
excess of $15,000, shall act upon the refund claim within 45 days of the
initial receipt of the refund claim. Said decision shall be final. If the Tax
Administrator/City Council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the
45 day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the Tax
Administrator/City Council on the forty-fifth day. The Tax Administrator shall
give notice of the action in a form which substantially complies with that set
forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 913.
   (E)   The filing of a written claim is a prerequisite to any suit thereon.
Any action brought against the city pursuant to this section shall be subject
to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 945.6 and 946.
   (F)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service
supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission,
makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes
paid pursuant to this subchapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall
also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled
to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is
due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this subchapter is repealed,
the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the city.
   (G)   Notwithstanding divisions (B) and (C) above, a service supplier shall
be entitled to take any overpayment as a credit against an underpayment
whenever such overpayment has been received by the city within the three years
next preceding a notice of tax deficiency or assessment by the Tax
Administrator, or during any year for which the service supplier, at the
request of the Tax Administrator, has executed a waiver of the defense of the
statute of limitations with regard to any claim the city may have for a utility
users tax. A service supplier shall not be entitled to said credit unless it
clearly establishes the right to the credit by written records showing
entitlement thereto. Under no circumstances shall an overpayment taken as a
credit against an underpayment pursuant to this division qualify a service
supplier for a refund to which it would not otherwise be entitled under the
one-year written claim requirement of this section.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.513) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 516-C.S., passed 8-
21-01; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed - - )
§ 35.097 APPEALS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to any assessment, decision or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, other than a decision relating
to a refund pursuant to §
35.096 of this subchapter. Any person aggrieved by any assessment, decision or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, other than a decision relating
to a refund, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this
section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit
thereon. [See Cal. Gov’t Code § 935(b).] Nothing herein shall permit the filing
of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.
   (B)   If any person is aggrieved by any assessment, decision or
administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator, other than a decision relating
to a refund; or with the failure of the Tax Administrator to grant an exemption
as provided for under this subchapter; he or she may appeal to the City Manager
by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 14 days of the date of
the assessment, decision or administrative ruling of the Tax Administrator
which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.
   (C)   The matter shall be set for hearing no more than 30 days from the
receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time
and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five
calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to
time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the
Tax Administrator, the City Manager, and any other interested person may
present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the
determination from which the appeal is taken.
   (D)   Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the
city’s files, the City Manager shall issue a written notice and order
upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is
taken. The notice shall be given within 14 days after the conclusion of the
hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify
that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be
filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Cal. Civ.
Proc. Code § 1094.6. If the City Manager fails or refuses to act on a refund
claim within the 14 day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected
by the City Manager on the fourteenth day.
   (E)   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process
shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city
or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under
this subchapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or
remitted.
(Ord. Measure A, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
§ 35.098 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon:
      (1)   Any person or service when the imposition of such tax upon that
person or service would be in violation of the Constitution or the laws of the
United States or of the State of California;
      (2)   The city; and,
      (3)   Any state or federal government entity, including public school
districts.
   (B)   Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this
subchapter pursuant to division (A) shall file an application with the Tax
Administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not
apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a
commonly recognized name. Said application shall be made upon a form approved
by the Tax Administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of
perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the
names of all utility service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed
exempt by the Tax Administrator, such service user shall give the Tax
Administrator timely written notice of any change in utility service suppliers
so that the Tax Administrator can properly notify the new utility service
supplier of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to
comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users
taxes collected and remitted to the Tax Administrator from such service user as
a result of such non-compliance. Upon request of the Tax Administrator, a
service supplier or non-utility service supplier, or its billing agent, shall
provide a list of the names and addresses of those customers which, according
to its billing records, are deemed exempt from the utility users tax. A
telephone communication services supplier shall provide a copy of the federal
exemption certificate for each exempt customer within the city that is served
by such service supplier upon request of the Tax Administrator.
   (C)   The decision of the Tax Administrator may be appealed pursuant to §
35.097 of this subchapter. Filing an application with the Tax Administrator and
appeal to the City Manager pursuant to §
35.097 of this subchapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.514) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
§ 35.099 EXEMPTION FOR RESIDENTS.
   (A)   Any service user shall be eligible for an exemption from the taxes
imposed by this subchapter if the service user qualifies for either the
California Alternate Rates for Energy (CARE) Programs of The Southern
California Gas Company or Southern California Edison Company, or qualifies for
the Lifeline Rate Program of Pacific Bell. Proof of such eligibility shall be
submitted by the service user to the Tax Administrator, pursuant to
administrative procedures promulgated by the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator shall maintain a list of all service users
exempt from the utility users tax, according to the provisions of division (A)
of this section. The Tax Administrator shall advise all of the service
providers required to collect and remit this tax of the names and service
addresses of exempt service users.
   (C)   An exemption shall automatically terminate with any change in the
service address or residence of the exempt service user, or assignment of a
different account number by the service supplier because of discontinuance or
suspension of service at the request of the service user; and provided further,
that such individual may nevertheless apply for a new exemption with each
change of address or residence.
   (D)   Any service user who has been exempted under this section shall notify
the Tax Administrator within ten days of any change in fact or circumstance
which might disqualify said individual from receiving such exemption. It shall
be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of the
exemption provided by this section when the basis for such exemption does not
exist or ceases to exist.
   (E)   Any service supplier, who determines by any means that a non-exempt
service user is receiving service through a meter or connection exempt by
virtue of an exemption issued to a previous user or exempt user of the same
meter or connection, shall immediately notify the Tax Administrator of such
fact, and the Tax Administrator shall conduct an investigation to ascertain
whether or not the provisions of this section have been complied with, and,
where appropriate, order the service supplier to commence collecting the tax
from the service user.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.515) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
 - ) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.100 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   All remedies and penalties prescribed by this subchapter or which are
available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited
to the California False Claims Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 12650 et seq.), are
cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use
of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. Measure A, passed - - )
§ 35.101 NOTICE OF CHANGES TO ORDINANCE.
   If a tax under this subchapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or
the tax base is changed, the Tax Administrator shall follow the notice
requirements of Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 799. Prior to the effective date of the
ordinance change, the service supplier shall provide the Tax Administrator with
a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service
supplier needs to implement the ordinance change. If the service supplier fails
to provide such written instructions, the Tax Administrator, or his or her
agent, shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the ordinance change to all
collectors and remitters of the city’s utility users taxes according to the
latest payment records of the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. Measure A, passed - - )
§ 35.102 TERMINATION OR SUSPENSION OF UTILITY USERS TAX.
   The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any
utility users tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs
after the effective date of such action by the City Council.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.517) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
 - )
§ 35.103 ANNUAL REVIEW.
   The utility users tax shall be reviewed annually by the City Council which
may adjust the rate, temporarily suspend the tax, temporarily grant a rebate
pursuant to §
35.087, or repeal the tax as appropriate to the financial condition of the
city.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.519) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
 - )
§ 35.104 STATE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION JURISDICTION.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter is intended to conflict with applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs of any service supplier subject to the
jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. In the event of any
conflict, the provisions of said rules, regulations and tariffs shall control.
(‘65 Code, § 3-6.520) (Ord. 390-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. Measure A, passed -
 - )
§ 35.105 CHANGES WITHOUT VOTER APPROVAL.
   The City Council may, by order or resolution, establish one or more classes
of persons or one or more classes of energy, products, or services otherwise
subject to payment of a tax imposed by this subchapter and provide that such
person(s) or service(s) shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from such tax.
The City Council is further authorized to make any amendments to this
subchapter, as adopted by the voters, without a vote of the people; provided
however, that it shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax
methodology, or increase an existing tax without first complying with all
relevant constitutional and statutory provisions.
(Ord. Measure A, passed - -)
§ 35.106 EFFECT OF STATE AND FEDERAL REFERENCE/AUTHORIZATION.
   Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal
statute in this subchapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from
time to time, provided that such reference to a statute herein shall not
include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of
interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law with the
duty to interpret such law, to the extent that such amendment or change of
interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the
extent that such change would result in a tax decrease (as a result of
excluding all or a part of a communication service, or charge therefor, from
taxation). Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a
tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation)
shall remain applicable; for any application or situation that would not
require voter approval or result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the
amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum
possible extent. To the extent that the city’s authorization to collect or
impose any tax imposed under this subchapter is expanded or limited as a result
of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this
subchapter shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax
shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to
the full amount of the tax imposed under this subchapter.
(Ord. 578, passed 11-4-08)
§ 35.107 INTERACTION WITH PRIOR TAX.
   (A)   Collection of tax by service providers. Service providers shall begin
to collect the tax imposed by this subchapter as soon as feasible after the
effective date of the subchapter, but in no event later than permitted by Cal.
Pub. Util. Code § 799.
   (B)   Judicial determinations. In the event that a final court order should
determine that the election enacting the amendments to this subchapter is
invalid for whatever reason, or that any tax imposed under this amended
subchapter is invalid in whole or in part, then the tax imposed under this
subchapter prior to its amendment as provided herein, shall automatically
continue to apply with respect to any service for which the tax levied pursuant
to this subchapter has been determined to be invalid. Such automatic
continuation shall be effective beginning as of the first date of service (or
billing date) for which the tax imposed by this subchapter is not valid.
However, in the event of an invalidation, any tax (other than a tax that is
ordered refunded by the court or is otherwise refunded by the city) paid by a
person with respect to a service and calculated pursuant to this subchapter
shall be deemed to satisfy the tax imposed under this subchapter prior to its
amendment as provided herein, so long as the tax is paid with respect to a
service provided no later than six months subsequent to the date on which the
final court order is published.
(Ord. 578, passed 11-4-08)
TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
§ 35.115 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “City of San Gabriel Transactions and
Use Tax Ordinance of 2020.” The City of San Gabriel hereinafter shall be called
“city.” This subchapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of
the city.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.116 OPERATIVE DATE.
   OPERATIVE DATE means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing
more than 110 days after the adoption of this subchapter, the date of such
adoption being as set forth below. The transactions and use tax established and
codified hereunder shall have an indefinite term. The foregoing
notwithstanding, the transactions and use tax established hereunder may be
later terminated by the voters of the City of San Gabriel by means of a ballot
measure to repeal the same at a future general or special municipal election of
the city.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.117 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes,
and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish
those purposes:
   (A)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with § 7251) of Division 2 and § 7285.9 of
Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, authorizing the city to
adopt this subchapter, which shall be operative if a majority of the electors
voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election
called for that purpose;
   (B)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code;
   (C)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a
tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by
the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and
collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;
   (D)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and
at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to
taxation under the provisions of this subchapter;
   (E)   The revenues generated by the transactions and use tax imposed under
this subchapter may be used for any lawful governmental purpose of the city, as
authorized by ordinance, resolution or action of the City Council or by
ordinance adopted by the electorate of the city. The transactions and use tax
established under this subchapter does not meet the criteria established by
California Constitution Article IIIC, Section 1(d) for special taxes and said
tax is instead a general tax within the meaning of California Constitution
Article IIIC, Section 1(a) whose revenues may be used for any unrestricted
general revenue purpose;
   (F)   Transactions and use tax revenues collected by the city shall be
deposited in the city’s general fund which is subject to the city’s annual
financial audit conducted by the city’s third-party auditor.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.118 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to
the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance;
provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall
nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a
contract.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.119 TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at
the rate of 0.75% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all
tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the
operative date of this subchapter.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.120 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or
to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are
subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax
and Fee Administration.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.121 USE TAX RATE. 
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this subchapter for storage, use or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of 0.75% of the sales price of the property. The
sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to
state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.122 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW. 
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter and except insofar as they
are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev.
& Tax. Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with § 6001) of
Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code are hereby adopted and made a part of
this subchapter as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.123 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code:
   (A)   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made:
      (1)   When the word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State
of California;
      (2)   When the result of that substitution would require action to be
taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof
rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this subchapter;
      (3)   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be:
         (a)   To provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain
sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or
other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of
Part 1 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code; or
         (b)   To impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject
to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      (4)   In §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715,
6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code.
   (B)   (1)   The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the
phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in § 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in § 6203 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code.
      (2)   “A retailer engaged in business in the District” shall also include
any retailer that, in the preceding calendar year or the current calendar year,
has total combined sales of tangible personal property in this state or for
delivery in the state by the retailer and all persons related to the retailer
that exceeds $500,000. For purposes of this section, a person is related to
another person if both persons are related to each other pursuant to § 267(b)
of Title 26 of the United States Code and the regulations thereunder.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.124 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under § 6067 of the Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by
this subchapter.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.125 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or use tax.
   (B)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government;
      (2)   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a
point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier
for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this section,
delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
         (a)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles)
subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of
Division 3 of the Cal. Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with §
21411 of the Cal. Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered
under Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840) of the Cal. Vehicle Code by
registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of
perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her
principal place of residence; and
         (b)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out of city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      (3)   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated
to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this subchapter;
      (4)   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this subchapter;
      (5)   For the purposes of divisions (3) and (4) above, the sale or lease
of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a
contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or
lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon
notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   (C)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this subchapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
      (1)   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance;
      (2)   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in §§ 6366
and 6366.1 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code;
      (3)   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
subchapter;
      (4)   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this subchapter;
      (5)   For the purposes of divisions (3) and (4) above, storage, use, or
other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over,
tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a
contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or
lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon
notice, whether or not such right is exercised;
      (6)   Except as provided in division (7) below, a retailer engaged in
business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers
the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale
of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the
order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in
the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor,
subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer;
      (7)   “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Division 3 of the Cal. Vehicle Code,
aircraft licensed in compliance with § 21411 of the Cal. Public Utilities Code,
or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840)
of the Cal. Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax
from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft
at an address in the city.
   (D)   Any person subject to use tax under this subchapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code with respect to the sale to the
person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the use tax.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.126 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this subchapter to Part 1
of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code relating to sales and use taxes and
which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of
the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, shall automatically become a part of this
subchapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to
affect the rate of tax imposed by this subchapter.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
§ 35.127 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN. 
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this subchapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. 667, passed 3-3-20)
CHAPTER 36: EMERGENCY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
36.01   Purpose
   
36.02   Definition
   
36.03   Disaster Council; membership
   
36.04   Disaster Council; powers and duties
   
36.05   Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services
   
36.06   Powers and duties of Director and Assistant Director
   
36.07   Emergency Organization
   
36.08   Emergency Plan
   
36.09   Expenditures
   
36.10   Violations
 
   
36.99   Penalty
§ 36.01 PURPOSE.
   The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the
city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the Emergency Organization;
and the coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other
public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons.
('65 Code, § 4-3.01) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - )
§ 36.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, EMERGENCY shall mean the actual or
threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the
safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air
pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other
conditions, including conditions resulting from war or the imminent threat of
war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which
conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services,
personnel, equipment and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces
of other political subdivisions to combat.
('65 Code, § 4-3.02) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - )
§ 36.03 DISASTER COUNCIL; MEMBERSHIP.
   The Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:
   (A)   The Mayor, who shall be Chairperson;
   (B)   The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be Vice-Chairperson;
   (C)   The Assistant Director of Emergency Services;
   (D)   Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current
Emergency Plan of the city adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
and
   (E)   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional
or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility as may be
appointed by the Director with the advice and consent of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 4-3.03) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - )
§ 36.04 DISASTER COUNCIL; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to
develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council emergency and mutual aid
plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and
regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The
Disaster Council shall meet upon the call of the Chairperson or, in his absence
from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the Vice-
Chairperson.
('65 Code, § 4-3.04) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - )
§ 36.05 DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services.
The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.
   (B)   There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency
Services, who shall be appointed by the Director.
('65 Code, § 4-3.05) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - )
§ 36.06 DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Director is hereby empowered to:
      (1)   Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a “local emergency” if the City Council is in session, or to issue
such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local
emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to
ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter, or the proclamation shall
have no further force or effect;
      (2)   Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in
the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to
cope with the emergency;
      (3)   Control and direct the effort of the Emergency Organization of the
city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
      (4)   Direct cooperation between, and coordination of, the services and
staff of the Emergency Organization of the city and resolve questions of
authority and responsibility which may arise between them;
      (5)   Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies
on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter; and
      (6)   In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency, as provided
in this subsection, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or
the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a
“state of war emergency,” the Director is hereby empowered:
         (a)   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;
provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be confirmed at the
earliest practicable time by the City Council;
         (b)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties
found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, to bind the
city for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to commandeer
the same for public use;
         (c)   To require the emergency services of any city officer or
employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the
county or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as
many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his
duties; such persons shall be entitled to all the privileges, benefits and
immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service
workers;
         (d)   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city
department or agency; and
         (e)   To execute all of his ordinary powers as City Manager, all of
the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter, or by resolution, or by
the Emergency Plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, and all powers
conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City
Council, and by any other lawful authority.
   (B)   The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of
succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is
unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an
emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.
   (C)   The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director
and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans,
manage the emergency programs of the city, and have such other powers and
duties as may be assigned by the Director.
('65 Code, § 4-3.06) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - )
§ 36.07 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.
   All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and
persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed
into service under the provisions of §
36.06(A)(6)(c) of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the
protection of life and property in the city during such emergency shall
constitute the Emergency Organization of the city.
('65 Code, § 4-3.07) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - )
§ 36.08 EMERGENCY PLAN.
   The Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the city
Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all
of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition
constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency,
and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff
of the Emergency Organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by
resolution of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 4-3.08) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - )
§ 36.09 EXPENDITURES.
   Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including
mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city.
('65 Code, § 4-3.09) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - )
§ 36.10 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, during an emergency, to:
   (A)   Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the Emergency
Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by
virtue of this chapter;
   (B)   Do any act forbidden by a lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to
this chapter, if such act is of a nature as to give or be likely to give
assistance to the enemy or imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the
city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof;
   (C)   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification
specified by the emergency agency of the state, the county, county district or
any city in the County of Los Angeles.
   (D)   Violate any curfew or other emergency order or regulation established
by any lawful rule, regulation, order or directive issued pursuant to this
chapter. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of a curfew order
that a person was traveling to or from work or school, was homeless, or was
seeking medical treatment.
('65 Code, § 4-3.10) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 400-C.S., passed - -
)
Penalty, see § 36.99
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of § 36.10 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or by
imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
('65 Code, § 4-3.10) (Ord. 108-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 400-C.S., passed - -
)
CHAPTER 37: CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Fees, charges, and taxes made a civil debt
   
37.02   Liability, property and workers' compensation insurance.
Ambulance Services
   
37.15   Fire Department emergency services; charges
   
37.16   Fire Department emergency services; charges a debt to city
Mission Playhouse
   
37.30   Rental authorized
   
37.31   Rental contracts
   
37.32   Rental fees; general uses
   
37.33   Publicity and advertising
   
37.34   Accounting procedure
   
37.35   Deposit of funds from municipal uses
Use of Police Personnel at Loud or Unruly Assemblages
   
37.55   Notice of personal liability for cost of special security assignment
   
37.56   Fees and costs for special security assignments
   
37.57   Collection of costs not exclusive remedy
   
37.58   Notice and hearing to determine reasonableness of charge
   
37.59   Appeal process
Cross-reference:
   
Hazardous materials; assumption of administrative responsibility, see § 96.40
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 FEES, CHARGES, AND TAXES MADE A CIVIL DEBT.
   The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax of any
nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this code shall be deemed a civil
debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in
any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any
such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license or tax,
together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by the code. The
remedy prescribed by this section shall be accumulative, and the use of an
action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the
use of any other remedy provided by this code or by law for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions thereof.
('65 Code, § 1-2.07)
§ 37.02 LIABILITY, PROPERTY AND WORKERS' COMPENSATION INSURANCE.
   The City Manager shall promulgate administrative regulations specifying the
amounts and kinds of coverage for liability, property and workers' compensation
insurance that must be provided in compliance with provisions of this code or
any bid specification, permit, request for proposals, or contract.
AMBULANCE SERVICES
§ 37.15 FIRE DEPARTMENT EMERGENCY SERVICES; CHARGES.
   The Council shall, from time to time, by ordinance or resolution, fix
charges for emergency ambulance services rendered by the Fire Department and
shall have and retain the authority to exempt residents and other taxpayers
from such charges.
('65 Code, § 6-1.01) (Ord. 836, passed - - )
§ 37.16 FIRE DEPARTMENT EMERGENCY SERVICES; CHARGES A DEBT TO CITY.
   The amount of any charge fixed by the Council by ordinance or resolution for
emergency ambulance services to any person receiving the same shall be deemed a
debt due to the city, and such person, and/or his parent, guardian or other
person liable for the cost of his medical, surgical, hospital or ambulance
service, by contract or otherwise, shall be liable to the city for the amount
of such charge, together with costs of suit.
('65 Code, § 6-1.02) (Ord. 836, passed - - )
MISSION PLAYHOUSE
§ 37.30 RENTAL AUTHORIZED.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized to contract for the rental of the
Mission Playhouse on behalf of the city.
('65 Code, § 2-2.02) (Ord. 504, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 87-C.S., passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
§ 37.31 RENTAL CONTRACTS.
   (A)   The City Attorney is hereby authorized to prepare a form of contract
for the rental of the Mission Playhouse and its equipment.
   (B)   Every such contract shall bear upon its face the approval of the City
Manager as to substance and his signature or the signature of his designated
representative.
('65 Code, § 2-2.03) (Ord. 504, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 87-C.S., passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
§ 37.32 RENTAL FEES; GENERAL USES.
   Rental fees to be charged for the various uses of the Mission Playhouse
shall be established by the Council from time to time by resolution.
('65 Code, § 2-2.04) (Ord. 160-C.S, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-
16)
§ 37.33 PUBLICITY AND ADVERTISING.
   All publicity and advertising used, displayed, or distributed by the lessee
in connection with any lease or use of the Mission Playhouse shall be submitted
to, and approved by, the Auditorium Manager before being used, displayed or
distributed.
('65 Code, § 2-2.05) (Ord. 504, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 87-C.S., passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 160-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
§ 37.34 ACCOUNTING PROCEDURE.
   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to set up and maintain an
appropriate accounting system and procedure and to note therein all credits and
debits and to keep a separate account of the receipts and disbursements of all
funds which accrue to or from the operation of the Mission Playhouse, as
provided by law.
('65 Code, § 2-2.06) (Ord. 504, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 87-C.S., passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 160-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
§ 37.35 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS FROM MUNICIPAL USES.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the use
of the Mission Playhouse, or any part thereof, for local municipal purposes;
provided, however, when admission is charged or revenues accrue from
concessions or other uses or privileges of any character, the entire gross
receipts thereof shall be deposited with the City Treasurer, and all funds
derived shall accrue to the city.
('65 Code, § 2-2.07) (Ord. 504, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 87-C.S., passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 160-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
USE OF POLICE PERSONNEL AT LOUD OR UNRULY ASSEMBLAGES
§ 37.55 NOTICE OF PERSONAL LIABILITY FOR COST OF SPECIAL SECURITY ASSIGNMENT.
   (A)   When any loud or unruly assemblage occurs or is held and the city's
law enforcement agency is required to respond to the scene in response to
citizen complaints, and the senior police officer at the scene determines that
there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, then
that senior officer shall notify the owner of the premises or the person in
charge of the premises or the person responsible for the assemblage that
person, or if that person is a minor, that the parents and guardians of that
person, will be held personally liable for the costs of providing police
personnel on special security assignment over and above the normal services
provided by the Police Department to those premises.
   (B)   Such person or persons shall be given a first warning in the form of
notification by the police officer that the police response shall be deemed to
be the normal police services provided.
   (C)   The police personnel utilized after the first warning to control the
threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed
to be on special security assignment over and above the normal services
provided.
   (D)   The accounting and billing procedures as set forth in §
37.56 shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-30.01) (Ord. 317-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Police Department, see §§ 32.50 through 32.52
§ 37.56 FEES AND COSTS FOR SPECIAL SECURITY ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   The cost of the special security assignment described in §
37.55 shall include personnel and equipment costs expended during the second
and any subsequent returns to the premises. Fees and costs shall be established
by resolution of the City Council, and shall not exceed the reasonable cost of
providing such services. In addition, such cost may include damages to city
property and/or injuries to city personnel.
   (B)   All fees and charges levied for city services described in §
37.55 shall be due and payable upon presentation.
   (C)   All fees and charges for such services shall constitute a valid and
subsisting debt in favor of the city and against the person to whom such
services are rendered, and an immediate cause for action shall accrue to the
city for collection thereof in any court of competent jurisdiction.
('65 Code, § 5-30.02) (Ord. 317-C.S., passed - - )
§ 37.57 COLLECTION OF COSTS NOT EXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
   Collection pursuant to this subchapter is not intended to be the exclusive
remedy, either criminal or civil, available to the city relating to the
circumstances which gave rise to the need for police response under this
subchapter.
('65 Code, § 5-30.03) (Ord. 317-C.S., passed - - )
§ 37.58 NOTICE AND HEARING TO DETERMINE REASONABLENESS OF CHARGE.
   (A)   The person or persons charged pursuant to this subchapter shall have
five days after service of the bill to file a written request with the Police
Chief for a hearing to determine the reasonableness of the charge.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such a request, the Police Chief or his/her duly
authorized representative shall give to the requesting party or parties not
less than seven days written notice of the time and place of the hearing to
determine the reasonableness of the fees and charges.
   (C)   The hearing shall be conducted by the Police Chief or his/her duly
authorized representative, who shall act as the hearing officer. That
authorized representative shall consider all relevant evidence, including but
not limited to applicable staff reports. He/she shall give any interested
person a reasonable opportunity to be heard in conjunction therewith. Based
upon the evidence so presented, the Police Chief or his/her duly authorized
representative shall determine the reasonableness of the fees and charges
imposed.
   (D)   The decision of the Police Chief or his/her duly authorized
representative shall be final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal as
provided in this subchapter.
   (E)   The Police Chief or the duly authorized representative shall, within
five working days of the decision, give written notice of the decision to the
person or persons who requested the hearing and to any other person requesting
such notice.
('65 Code, § 5-30.04) (Ord. 317-C.S., passed - - )
§ 37.59 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   The person or persons charged shall have the right of appeal to the
City Council.
   (B)   The appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 10 days following
receipt of notice of the decision of the Police Chief. The appeal shall be in
writing and shall state the grounds for the appeal.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall set the matter for a de novo hearing before the
Council at a date and time not less than ten nor more than 30 days following
the filing of the appeal. The City Clerk shall notify the appellant, by mail,
of the date and time of the hearing. The City Council may continue the hearing
date where necessary.
   (D)   The Council may, by resolution from time to time, establish a fee for
the processing of an appeal.
   (E)   At the time and place set for such hearing, the City Council shall
review the decision of the Police Chief or the duly authorized representative
and shall afford the appellant a reasonable opportunity to be heard in
connection therewith.
   (F)   The Council shall, by resolution, establish rules of procedure for the
conduct of hearing appeals.
   (G)   A copy of the Council's order shall be mailed to the appellant, and to
any other person requesting the same, by the City Clerk within five working
days after the adoption thereof. The Council's decision shall be final and
conclusive.
('65 Code, § 5-30.05) (Ord. 317-C.S., passed - - )
CHAPTER 38: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
Civil Service
   
38.01   Civil Service System; Civil Service Commission
   
38.02   Commission; members, terms, officers and proceedings
   
38.03   Civil service rules and regulations
Grand Jury Appearances
   
38.15   Duty to appear
   
38.16   Failure to testify
CIVIL SERVICE
§ 38.01 CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM; CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   A Civil Service System is hereby created for the city and the appointment of
a board of five Commissioners authorized, to be known and designated as the
Civil Service Commission.
(Ord. 424-C.S., passed 5-3-94)
§ 38.02 COMMISSION; MEMBERS, TERMS, OFFICERS AND PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Members. The members of the Civil Service Commission shall be
appointed by the City Council. The members shall be residents of the city
during their respective terms. In the event that a member ceases to be a
resident of the city, his or her term shall terminate 30 days from the date
residency is terminated, or at the conclusion of his or her term, whichever is
sooner.
   (B)   Terms of office. The members of the Civil Service Commission shall
hold office for a period of two years and may be appointed for additional two-
year terms. Following expiration of his or her term of office, a member shall
continue to serve until a successor is appointed and takes office; however, if
no successor is appointed and takes office within 30 days, the extended period
shall terminate and the office shall be deemed vacant.
   (C)   Compensation. The members of the Civil Service Commission shall serve
without compensation.
   (D)   Officers. The members of the Civil Service Commission shall organize
by electing one of their number the Chairperson who shall act as presiding
officer. They shall also appoint a suitable person of their membership or a
person from the city staff as Secretary of the Commission, who shall act and
hold office at the pleasure of the Commission.
   (E)   Records, rules, and regulations. The Civil Service Commission shall
keep a record of its proceedings and shall provide rules and regulations for
the keeping of service records and for the classification of employees.
(Ord. 424-C.S., passed 5-3-94; Am. Ord. 513-C.S., passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 602-
C.S., passed 7-2-13)
Cross-reference:
   
Departments and Commissions, see Ch. 32 and 33
§ 38.03 CIVIL SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The City Council may, by resolution, adopt and from time to time amend, such
civil service rules and regulations as may be necessary for the complete and
efficient operation of the Civil Service System.
(Ord. 424-C.S., passed 5-3-94)
GRAND JURY APPEARANCES
§ 38.15 DUTY TO APPEAR.
   It shall be the duty of any employee of the city, whether in the classified
civil service status or otherwise, who may be subpoenaed by a legally
constituted grand jury in and for the county, to appear before the grand jury
and specifically to answer under oath any questions propounded by any member of
the counsel of the grand jury relating to:
   (A)   The crime of bribery or attempted bribery of any officer or employee
of the city; or
   (B)   Wilful or corrupt misconduct in office of any public officer or
employee of the city.
('65 Code, § 2-3.201) (Ord. 673, passed - - )
§ 38.16 FAILURE TO TESTIFY.
   Any employee of the city who fails or refuses to answer under oath, on any
ground whatsoever, any such question propounded by any member or counsel of the
grand jury with respect to any matter set forth in § 38.15 of this chapter
shall be guilty of insubordination and of violating the provisions of this
subchapter. At the discretion of the Council, any such employee may be
suspended and/or dismissed from his employment in the manner provided by law,
notwithstanding any policy established by the Civil Service Commission to the
contrary or the provisions of §§
38.01 through
38.03 creating a Civil Service Commission and providing regulations therefor to
the contrary.
('65 Code, § 2-3.202) (Ord. 673, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 39: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
39.01   Purpose
   
39.02   Findings
   
39.03   Authorized activities
   
39.04   Severability
§ 39.01 PURPOSE.
   The declared purpose of this chapter is to authorize the city to undertake
an economic development activities that include, but are not limited to, the
purpose of improving residential value and affordable housing options,
improving retail and commercial options, increasing commercial/industrial
activity, increasing visitation and visitor spending, improving entertainment
options, preserving historic and cultural resources, enriching cultural
experiences, improving recreational options, and expanding the city’s tax base
which increases the city’s ability to provide municipal services to its
residents and businesses.
(Ord. 599-C.S., passed 5-7-13)
§ 39.02 FINDINGS.
   The Council of the city finds, determines and declares that:
   (A)   The city is a general law city, and the Council is vested under
California law with the power to make and enforce ordinances and regulations
with respect to all municipal affairs, to the extent that said actions are not
in conflict with the general laws of the State of California.
   (B)   Economic growth within the city aids in the promotion of the health
and welfare of the inhabitant residents and businesses in the city, and is a
general benefit to them by and through the provision of improved residential
value and housing options, improved retail and commercial success, increased
commercial/industrial opportunity, increased visitation and visitor spending,
improved entertainment options, enriched cultural experiences, improved
recreational options, and an expanded tax base which aids the city in providing
municipal services to its inhabitant residents and businesses.
   (C)   Use of city funds and resources for economic development activities
serves a public purpose because economic development is a municipal affair with
a clear benefit to the city’s inhabitants and businesses.
   (D)   Creation of an economic development ordinance is consistent with the
goals of the General Plan of the City of San Gabriel in that the provisions of
the Economic Development Chapter of the General Plan specifically provides for
the creation of implementation tools needed to carry out the intent of the
element.
   (E)   The Council authorizes economic development activity pursuant to an
Economic Development Program for the benefit of the city and its inhabitants.
(Ord. 599-C.S., passed 5-7-13)
§ 39.03 AUTHORIZED ACTIVITIES.
   In order that the purpose of this chapter be accomplished, the Council, the
City Manager, or his or her designee if directed or delegated to by the
Council, is authorized to perform the following activities:
   (A)   Marketing and promotion. Undertake the promotion of city’s natural
resources, historic and cultural resources, commercial and residential real
estate value and housing options, recreation and entertainment options, retail
and commercial opportunities, convention and visitors bureau activities, and
other attractions that generate interest in and visitation to the city via
marketing including, but not limited to, branding campaigns, public outreach
and special events.
   (B)   Business attraction and retention. Undertake a vigorous business
retention and attraction program that includes assistance in the form of
grants, loans, fee abatements and discounts, payments of insurance premiums,
tax rebates, tax credits authorized under state or federal law, and other
assistance to assist in the attraction or retention of qualifying commercial,
mixed-use, industrial or other suitable activity in the city.
   (C)   Infrastructure development. Development of infrastructure determined
by the Council to be necessary for the satisfactory generation of economic
growth and maintenance of a healthy business climate.
   (D)   Permitting processes and improvements. Development of tools and
technologies necessary to improve and expedite permitting and approval
processes for economic activities that provide broad public benefit through
infrastructure, manufacturing, export dollars, job creation, fiscal benefits,
increased visitor spending, and the direct and indirect infusion of dollars in
the local economy.
   (E)   Cultural resource protection, conservation, preservation, enhancement,
and interpretation. The Council recognizes that San Gabriel’s economic health
is tied in part to its many historical attractions. Activities that preserve
and protect threatened or fragile cultural and historical resources including
historically or culturally significant buildings, landscapes, engineering
features, landmarks, heritage trees, paleontological and archaeological
resources as provided by state law and this code.
   (F)   Property acquisition and land assembly. Purchase, lease, obtain option
(s) upon, acquire by gift, grant, bequest, devise, or otherwise, any real or
personal property, any interest in property, and any improvements on it,
including repurchase of developed property previously owned by the city.
   (G)   Disposal of real property. Dispose of real and personal property for
fair market value or less than fair market value (fair reuse value), so long as
the disposition is found to aid in the purposes of this chapter.
   (H)   Site preparation. Provide for site preparation work, including but not
limited to demolition, clearing, grubbing, archaeological review and artifact
recovery, and hazardous substance remediation, for public or private
developments.
   (I)   Property improvement. Improve, maintain, or repair improvements to
real property in anticipation of use, disposal, or lease of the property to a
private or public entity.
   (J)   Funding. Seek and accept grants, agreements, and other forms of
financial assistance from public or private sources for the purpose of engaging
in economic development activities for the general benefit of the inhabitants
of the city.
   (K)   Bonding and debt. Issue bonds or other forms of debt, consistent with
the requirements of state law, and limited to programs not secured by a pledge
of general fund revenues.
   (L)   Assessment districts. Provide for the establishment of community
benefit or other assessment districts to benefit the inhabitants of said
communities or districts, including where appropriate the establishment of
business improvement districts, in the manner otherwise provided by law.
   (M)   Participation in joint powers agreements. Allow for joint powers
agreements, and other forms of collaboration with other governments and
agencies to develop and fund regional economic development plans and
activities, to the extent these are not otherwise expressly prohibited by law.
   (N)   Affordable housing. Develop, or assist the development, of affordable
housing as an ancillary aspect of economic development activities such as mixed
use development, live-work projects, or other housing that is directly tied to
economic development opportunities.
   (O)   Economic development agency. Allow for the formation of a local
economic development agency to carry out the economic development activities.
   (P)   Environmental review and remediation. Conduct environmental review and
remediation activities consistent with the relevant provisions of state and
federal law.
   (Q)   Other activities. Take such other actions as the city finds necessary
and appropriate to encourage economic development with the city for the
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 599-C.S., passed 5-7-13)
§ 39.04 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the validity of the remaining
provisions and the applicability of such provisions shall not be affected
thereby.
(Ord. 599-C.S., passed 5-7-13)
CHAPTER 40: ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS
AND STATEMENTS OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS
Section
   
40.01   Electronic filing procedure
§ 40.01 ELECTRONIC FILING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any elected officer, candidate, commission, committee, or other person
required to file statements, reports, or other documents required by Cal. Gov’t
Code Chapter 4 - Political Reform Act (commencing with § 84100) shall file
those statements, reports, or other documents online or electronically with the
City Clerk. Elected officers, candidates, or committees required to file
statements must file such statements using the City Clerk's online system,
unless exempt from the requirement to file online pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §
84615(a) because the officer, candidate, or committee receives less than $2,000
in contributions and makes less than $2,000 in expenditures in a calendar year.
All other individuals required to file statements of economic interests
according to the city's adopted Code of Conflict of Interest must file
electronically using the City Clerk's online system.
   (B)   Any person holding a position listed in Cal. Gov’t Code § 87200 or
designated in the city's local conflict of interest code adopted pursuant to
Cal. Gov’t Code § 87300, shall file any required Statement of Economic
Interests reports (Form 700) online or electronically with the City Clerk.
   (C)   In any instance in which an original statement, report or other
document must be filed with the California Secretary of State and a copy of
that statement, report or other document is required to be filed with the City
Clerk, the filer may, but is not required to, file the copy electronically.
   (D)   The online filing system shall ensure the integrity of the data
transmitted and shall include safeguards against efforts to tamper with,
manipulate, alter, or subvert the data.
   (E)   The online filing system shall only accept a filing in the
standardized record format that is developed by the California Secretary of
State pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 84602(a)(2) and that is compatible with the
Secretary of State's system for receiving an online or electronic filing.
   (F)   The online filing system shall include a procedure for filers to
comply with the requirement that they sign statements and reports under penalty
of perjury pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 81004.
   (G)   Any elected officer, candidate, or committee who has electronically
filed a statement using the City Clerk's online system is not required to file
a copy of that document in paper format with the City Clerk.
   (H)   The City Clerk shall issue an electronic confirmation that notifies
the filer that the statement was received, the notification shall include the
date and the time that the statement was received and the method by which the
filer may view and print the data received by the City Clerk. The date of
filing for a statement filed online shall be the day that it is received by the
City Clerk.
   (I)   If the City Clerk's system is not capable of accepting a statement due
to technical difficulties, an elected officer, candidate, or committee shall
file that statement in paper format with the City Clerk.
   (J)   The online filing system shall enable electronic filers to complete
and submit filings free of charge.
   (K)   The City Clerk's system shall make all campaign finance forms filed
available on the city's webpage in an easily understood format that provides
the greatest public access. The data shall be made available free of charge and
within 72 hours after receipt. The data made available on the city's webpage
shall not contain the street name and building number of the persons or entity
representatives listed on the electronically-filed forms or any bank account
number required to be disclosed by the filer. The City Clerk Department shall
make a complete, unredacted copy of the statement, including any street names,
building numbers, and bank account numbers disclosed by the filer, available to
any person upon request.
   (L)   The City Clerk Department shall maintain, for a period of at least ten
years commencing from the date filed, a secured, official version of each
online or electronic statement which shall serve as the official version of
that record for purpose of audits and any other legal purpose.
(Ord. 691, passed 9-5-23)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND RECYCLING
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WATER, GAS AND OTHER UTILITIES
      
53.   STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION PREVENTION
         
54
.   DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND RECYCLING
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Legislative policy
   
50.002   Definitions
   
50.003   Dumping rubbish in public or private places prohibited
   
50.004   Solid waste accumulation and disposal
   
50.005   Burying solid waste prohibited
   
50.006   Storage of solid waste
   
50.007   Other storage prohibited; private property composting
   
50.008   Duration of storage
   
50.009   Collection responsibility
   
50.010   Franchise; solid waste collection charges
   
50.011   Liability for fees and charges for solid waste removal and disposal or
diversion
   
50.012   Containers; duties of householders and commercial customers
   
50.013   Sale or gift of recyclable materials
   
50.014   Collection by unauthorized person prohibited
   
50.015   Separation of “greenwaste” for removal
Mandatory Organic Waste Disposal Regulations
   
50.025   Findings and intent
   
50.026   Effective date and preemption
   
50.027   Definitions
   
50.028   Residential collection and recycling; mandatory organic waste disposal
single-family generators
   
50.029   Commercial/industrial collections; mandatory organic waste disposal
requirement - commercial generators
   
50.030   Waivers for generators
   
50.031   Requirements for commercial edible food generators
   
50.032   Requirements for food recovery organizations and services
   
50.033   General requirements for haulers and facility operators
   
50.034   Requirements for facility operators and community composting
operations
   
50.035   General self-hauler requirements
   
50.036   Construction and demolition waste recycling program effective
threshold for covered projects
   
50.037   Compliance with CalGreen recycling requirements
   
50.038   Inspections and investigations by the city
   
50.039   Enforcement
 
   
50.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 LEGISLATIVE POLICY.
   The City Council finds and determines that the storage, accumulation,
collection and disposal of garbage, trash, rubbish, debris and other discarded
matter, goods and materials is a matter of great public concern, in that
improper control of such matters can lead to air pollution, fire hazards,
insect breeding and rat infestation and other problems affecting the health,
welfare and safety of the residents of this and surrounding cities. The City
Council further declares that the regulations provided in this chapter are
designed to eliminate or alleviate such problems.
('65 Code, § 6-4.101) (Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00)
§ 50.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm, business or corporation with whom the city may
have a contract or to whom the city has granted a franchise for the collection,
removal and disposal of garbage, waste or rubbish in the city.
   GREENWASTE. Grass clippings, leaves and tree trimmings. Tree trimmings
larger than six inches in diameter and palm fronds are not considered yard
waste or greenwaste.
   HOUSEHOLDER. A person owning, renting or otherwise holding and occupying a
house or place of abode, including a trailer, apartment or motel unit with
kitchen, singly or with his or her family.
   MISCELLANEOUS DEBRIS. Includes any and all trash, rubbish, debris or other
abandoned or discarded materials not otherwise provided for under the foregoing
definitions, or as expressly excepted therefrom, except dead small animals,
animal excreta and garbage.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Any one or more of the following categories of
materials collected and recycled from within the city:
      (1)   Newspaper;
      (2)   Aluminum, tin and other metal food and beverage containers;
      (3)   Glass; and
      (4)   High density polyethylene (H.D.P.E.), polyethylene terephthalate
(P.E.T.) and polyvinyl chloride (P.V.C.) plastic materials; and
      (5)   Other materials as specified by the City Council.
   SOLID WASTE. Collectively, garbage, trash, rubbish, miscellaneous debris and
any combination thereof.
   STORAGE. Includes the accumulating, maintaining, dumping, abandoning,
storing, collecting or other gathering, stacking or piling, other than in a
commercial building or in a dwelling unit, which latter places shall be
regulated by the fire prevention code.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00)
§ 50.003 DUMPING RUBBISH IN PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PLACES PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person
to dump, discard, abandon or otherwise deposit any garbage, combustible or
noncombustible rubbish, miscellaneous debris, combined rubbish or chemical
compound in or upon any public or private property within the city, including
any vacant lot or in, on or upon any public street, alley, parkway, park or
other public place or in or upon any flood water channel, any channel or
structure tributary to any flood water channel, any easement or right-of-way
for flood water channel purposes, or in or upon any place in the city where the
natural flow of stormwater might carry the same to any such flood water channel
or structure.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.004 SOLID WASTE ACCUMULATION AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Accumulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate any
solid waste on his or her property in the city, which accumulation shall, in
the opinion of the Fire Chief, constitute a fire hazard or be dangerous to the
public peace, safety or health of the people of the city. In the event the
accumulation constitutes a fire hazard in the opinion of the Fire Chief, he
shall notify the owner, occupant, operator or other person responsible for the
accumulation and that person shall immediately arrange for collection and
disposal in an authorized manner. The costs of such disposal shall be paid by
the owner, occupant, operator or other person responsible for the accumulation.
('65 Code, § 6-4.104)
   (B)   Disposal.
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of every person to dispose of all
solid waste before it constitutes a fire hazard or becomes dangerous to the
public peace, safety or health of the people of the city. The disposal shall be
by one of the following means:
         (a)   Through regular, at least weekly, collection service by the
city's authorized contractor; or
         (b)   By personal transportation of the solid waste to a licensed
public or private landfill or disposal site. ('65 Code, § 6-4.105)
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.005 BURYING SOLID WASTE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to place in any hole or excavation, or to
bury, any solid waste.
('65 Code, § 6-4.107) (Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.006 STORAGE OF SOLID WASTE.
   Solid waste unless accumulated or stored in containers, shall be stored or
accumulated only in stacks or piles not in excess of two cubic yards total,
which:
   (A)   Shall be separated from any other stack or pile and from any building,
structure or other combustible material by a sufficient distance so as not to
create a fire hazard, provided that in any event such separation shall at all
times be not less than five feet;
   (B)   Shall not be located in any street, alley, parkway or other public
place, or in or upon any vacant or unimproved lot; and
   (C)   Shall be located only in the rear or side yards of improved lots in a
place shielded from winds which may scatter the same and also shielded from the
view of neighboring properties and public rights of way.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.007 OTHER STORAGE PROHIBITED; PRIVATE PROPERTY COMPOSTING.
   Other than as hereinabove set forth, it is unlawful for any person to dump
or otherwise dispose of or to store or accumulate any solid waste on any
private property in the city, except that the storage of leaves, grass
clippings and the like may be permitted for the purpose of composting. The
following rules and regulations are prescribed as health and safety precautions
for composting, and violation of any such rules or regulations shall be deemed
to constitute a misdemeanor.
   (A)   Location. Composting shall be located in rear or side yards of
improved lots only, and shall not be located in any street, alley, parkway or
other place, or in or upon any private unimproved lot, unless such lot adjoins
the improved property of the owner thereof.
   (B)   Contents. Composting shall consist only of organic waste materials
such as leaves, small twigs, grass clippings and other vegetable matter except
garbage.
   (C)   Receptacles. Composting shall be contained and maintained in either:
      (1)   A pit, hole or other earth depression excavated for such purpose;
in which case the contents shall always be maintained below natural surrounding
ground level;
      (2)   Shall be maintained in metal or wood containers not in excess of
three feet in height. Such receptacles or pits shall not be maintained within
five feet of any property line or structure. Composting may also be maintained
in open stacks or piles not in excess of three feet in height but only in the
event such stacks or piles are maintained not less than fifty (50) feet from
any property line or structure.
   (D)   Covering and maintenance. Composting must at all times be covered with
at least one-half inch of soil, or other non-organic or chemical covering,
first approved by the Health Officer, designed to prevent the harboring of
rodents, the breeding of flies and the emission of odors. All composting must
be kept moist at all times until decomposition is completed.
   (E)   Miscellaneous rules. No hardwood branches, second season growth, or
other twigs, limbs or branches in excess of one-fourth inch in diameter or two
feet in length shall be permitted in any composting.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.008 DURATION OF STORAGE.
   It is unlawful for any person to store or accumulate any solid waste, in any
container or at any location other than as hereinabove set forth, or for any
length of time other than as follows:
   (A)   Solid waste including garbage shall not be accumulated or stored for a
period of time in excess of:
      (1)   Commercial and Industrial zoned areas (C-1, C-3, M-1 and MD): 48
hours. (Sundays and holidays excepted.)
      (2)   All other areas: one week.
   (B)   Solid waste other than garbage shall not be stored or accumulated for
a period of time in excess of one week.
   (C)   The above periods of time which end in any week in which a holiday
occurs shall be extended one additional day.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.009 COLLECTION RESPONSIBILITY.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person
other than the contractor, as defined in this chapter, or the city to gather,
collect or remove any solid waste, greenwaste or recyclable materials from any
commercial, business, industrial or residential premises within the city or to
tamper with, injure, destroy or remove any bin, container, or any other
equipment used for refuse storage.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.010 FRANCHISE; SOLID WASTE COLLECTION CHARGES.
   (A)   The city may from time to time enter into contracts or exclusive
franchise agreements regarding the collection of solid waste, greenwaste and
recyclable materials from commercial, business, industrial and residential
property. So long as any such contract or franchise agreement remains in force,
collection of the materials provided for therein may be made only in accordance
with the terms and conditions thereof. Householders and commercial customers
must comply with the collection terms and conditions agreed to by the city and
the contractor.
   (B)   There are imposed by the city fees and charges for the collection,
removal and disposal of garbage, rubbish, greenwaste and recyclable materials
within the city. Such fees and charges for such collection, removal and
disposal services shall be those which the City Council may from time to time
hereafter determine, fix,and establish by official action or by the terms and
conditions of a franchise agreement approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.011 LIABILITY FOR FEES AND CHARGES FOR SOLID WASTE REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OR
DIVERSION.
   The City Council hereby finds that the periodic collection of solid waste,
greenwaste and recyclable materials from all places in the city benefits all
owners and occupants of places and premises in the city, and therefore, all
owners and occupants are hereby made liable for all fees and charges for such
removal and disposal or diversion as set forth in the city's exclusive
franchise agreement. Such fees shall be a civil debt owing to the contractor
from the owner and occupant of all premises served by the contractor.
('65 Code, § 6-4.127) (Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.012 CONTAINERS; DUTIES OF HOUSEHOLDERS AND COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of householders and commercial customers to
utilize the appropriate containers (solid waste or greenwaste) as provided by
the city's contractor except for large, bulky items placed for collection per
the terms of the franchise agreement. Except when placed for collection as
otherwise provided herein, no container shall be placed in any area, street,
parkway or other public place or upon any private lot or parcel of land other
than in the rear or side yard of improved lots. Such containers so set out or
placed by the householder or commercial customer not earlier than six p.m. of
the day preceding collection and such containers shall be removed by the
householder from the collection place not later than eight p.m. on the day of
collection.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of householders to set out or place containers as
follows:
      (1)   When the householder's property is contiguous to a public alley,
all containers shall be placed at the alley property line in one and the same
location.
      (2)   When the householder's property is not contiguous to a public
alley, all containers shall be placed in the public parkway or at the curb line
in one and the same location.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of commercial customers to set out or place
containers as follows:
      (1)   When the rear or side of the establishment is accessible to
contractor's equipment and when personal injury or property damage is unlikely
to result from the operation of contractor's equipment, all containers and
articles for collection shall be placed at the rear or, when appropriate, at
the side of the establishment in one and the same location.
      (2)   When the rear or side of the establishment is inaccessible to
contractor's equipment or when personal injury or property damage is likely to
result from the operation of contractor's equipment, all containers and
articles for collection shall be placed in the public parkway or curbside at
one and the same location.
   (D)   The city's contractor is the exclusive franchised provider and the
only hauler authorized to provide regularly scheduled and one-time special
container (bin or roll-off) service to any residence or business or
construction site requesting such service, provided, however, that any
contractor or other person may haul, in their own trucks, and properly dispose
of any debris from a jobsite in the city. If the contractor or other person
utilizes a waste hauling service, he shall utilize the services of the city's
franchisee.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.013 SALE OR GIFT OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit any person or
commercial business from selling recyclable materials or giving recyclable
materials away to persons or entities other than the city's contractor,
provided, however, in either instance:
      (1)   The recyclable materials must be segregated from and not mixed with
solid waste; and
      (2)   The seller/donor may not pay the buyer/donee any consideration or
consulting fee for recycling services or for collecting, processing or
transporting such recyclable materials. A discount or reduction in price for
collection, disposal and/or recycling services for any form of unsegregated or
segregated solid waste is not a qualifying sale or donation of recyclable
materials per this exception.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall inhibit, regulate or restrict any
recycling center, nonprofit drop-off program or recycling processor as
permitted by state law.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.014 COLLECTION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSON PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, business or other entity not otherwise
excepted by the provisions of this chapter, or by state or federal law, to
collect recyclable materials in the city; provided, however, the collection of
segregated recyclable materials with the intent to recycle all such materials
collected by one who has an arrangement to and does recycle all such materials
collected shall not be prohibited. This section shall not apply to charitable
entities including any organization or other entity maintained for community
service, education or the public good, including service clubs, scouting
organizations, religious and educational organizations and recognized
charities. ('65 Code, § 6-4.411(a))
   (B)   From the time of placement of recyclable materials at curbside or
other appropriate designated collection locations or in any container used for
collection provided by city's contractor, said recyclable materials shall be
and become the property of the contractor. It is unlawful for any person,
business or other entity other than the city's contractor to remove recyclable
materials from a collection container provided by the city's contractor. ('65
Code, § 6-4.411(b))
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.015 SEPARATION OF "GREENWASTE" FOR REMOVAL.
   Householders shall separate greenwaste and place it in the appropriate
container for collection.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00) Penalty, see §
50.999
MANDATORY ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL REGULATIONS
§ 50.025 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   State recycling law, Assembly Bill 939 of 1989, the California
Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 40000,
et seq., as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time to time),
requires cities and counties to reduce, reuse, and recycle (including
composting) solid waste generated in their jurisdictions to the maximum extent
feasible before any incineration or landfill disposal of waste, to conserve
water, energy, and other natural resources, and to protect the environment.
   (B)   State recycling law, Assembly Bill 341 of 2011 (approved by the
Governor of the State of California on October 5, 2011, which amended Cal.
Public Resources Code §§ 41730, 41731, 41734, 41735, 41736, 41800, 42926,
44004, and 50001 of, and added §§ 40004, 41734.5, and 41780.01 and Chapter 12.8
(commencing with § 42649) to Part 3 of Division 30 of, and added and repealed
Cal. Public Resources Code § 41780.02, as amended, supplemented, superseded and
replaced from time to time), places requirements on businesses and multi-family
property owners that generate a specified threshold amount of solid waste to
arrange for recycling services and requires jurisdictions to implement a
mandatory commercial recycling program.
   (C)   State organics recycling law, Assembly Bill 1826 of 2014 (approved by
the Governor of the State of California on September 28, 2014, which added Cal.
Public Resources Code Chapter 12.9 (commencing with § 42649.8) to Part 3 of
Division 30, relating to solid waste, as amended, supplemented, superseded, and
replaced from time to time), requires businesses and multi-family property
owners that generate a specified threshold amount of solid waste, recycling,
and organic waste per week to arrange for recycling services for that waste,
requires jurisdictions to implement a recycling program to divert organic waste
from businesses subject to the law, and requires jurisdictions to implement a
mandatory commercial organics recycling program.
   (D)   SB 1383, the Short-lived Climate Pollutant Reduction Act of 2016,
requires CalRecycle to develop regulations to reduce organics in landfills as a
source of methane. The regulations place requirements on multiple entities
including jurisdictions, residential households, commercial businesses and
business owners, commercial edible food generators, haulers, self-haulers, food
recovery organizations, and food recovery services to support achievement of
statewide organic waste disposal reduction targets.
   (E)   SB 1383, the Short-lived Climate Pollutant Reduction Act of 2016,
requires jurisdictions to adopt and enforce an ordinance or enforceable
mechanism to implement relevant provisions of SB 1383 regulations. This
subchapter will also help reduce food insecurity by requiring commercial edible
food generators to arrange to have the maximum amount of their edible food,
that would otherwise be disposed, be recovered for human consumption.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.026 EFFECTIVE DATE AND PREEMPTION.
   This subchapter and all of the regulations contained herein, shall become
effective on January 1, 2022 and shall remain effective until otherwise
repealed by the City Council. Any current terms or regulations in Title 5 which
are in conflict with provisions of this subchapter shall be preempted by this
subchapter as of the effective date.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.027 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter:
   BLACK CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(28) and
shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of black container
waste.
   BLACK CONTAINER WASTE. Solid waste that is collected in a black container
that is part of a two-container waste collection service that prohibits the
placement of organic waste in the black container as specified in 14 CCR §
18984.1(a) and (b), or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(6.5).
   C&D. Construction and demolition debris including discarded materials
generally considered to be not water soluble and non-hazardous in nature,
including but not limited to steel, copper, aluminum, glass, brick, concrete,
asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, and lumber from the construction or
destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project or
from the renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, including rocks, soils,
tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from
land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction
project; and remnants of new materials, including but not limited to:
cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from any construction and/or
landscape project.
   CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS or CCR. The State of California Code of
Regulations. CCR references in this subchapter are preceded with a number that
refers to the relevant Title of the CCR (e.g., "14 CCR" refers to Title 14 of
CCR).
   CALRECYCLE. California's Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery,
which is the Department designated with responsibility for developing,
implementing, and enforcing SB 1383 regulations on jurisdictions (and others).
   CITY ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The City Manager, county administrative official,
chief operating officer, executive director, or other executive in charge or
their authorized designee(s) who is/are partially or wholly responsible for
enforcing the ordinance. See also REGIONAL OR COUNTY AGENCY ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIAL.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL. A firm, partnership, proprietorship,
joint-stock company, corporation, or association, whether for-profit or
nonprofit, strip mall, industrial facility, or a multifamily residential
dwelling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(6). A multi-family
residential dwelling that consists of fewer than five units is not a commercial
business for purposes of implementing this subchapter.
   COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. Includes a tier one or a tier two
commercial edible food generator as defined in this section, "tier one
commercial edible food generator" and "tier two commercial edible food
generator" definitions of this subchapter or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(73) and (a)(74). For the purposes of this definition, food recovery
organizations and food recovery services are not commercial edible food
generators pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   COMMUNITY COMPOSTING. Any activity that composts green material,
agricultural material, food material, and vegetative food material, alone or in
combination, and the total amount of feedstock and compost on-site at any one
time does not exceed 100 cubic yards and 750 square feet, as specified in 14
CCR § 17855(a)(4); or as otherwise defined by 14 CCR § 18982(a)(8).
   COMPLIANCE REVIEW. A review of records by the city to determine compliance
with this subchapter.
   COMPOST. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 17896.2(a)(4), which stated, as
of the effective date of this subchapter, that COMPOST means the product
resulting from the controlled biological decomposition of organic solid wastes
that are source separated from the municipal solid waste stream, or which are
separated at a centralized facility.
   COMPOSTABLE PLASTICS or COMPOSTABLE PLASTIC. Plastic materials that meet the
ASTM D6400 standard for compostability, or as otherwise described in 14 CCR §
18984.1(a)(1)(A) or 18984.2(a)(1)(C).
   CONTAINER CONTAMINATION or CONTAMINATED CONTAINER. A container, regardless
of color, that contains prohibited container contaminants, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(55).
   DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY. As defined in 14 CCR §
18982(14.5), means a solid waste facility that accepts a source separated
organic waste collection stream as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)(26.6) and
complies with one of the following:
      (1)   The facility is a TRANSFER/PROCESSOR as defined in 14 CCR § 18815.2
(a)(62), that is in compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR §
18815.5(d), and meets or exceeds an annual average source separated organic
content recovery rate of 50% between January 1, 2022 and December 31, 2024 and
75% on and after January 1, 2025 as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR § 18815.5(f)
for organic waste received from the source separated organic waste collection
stream.
         (a)   If a transfer/processor has an annual average source separated
organic content recovery rate lower than the rate required in division (1) of
this definition for two consecutive reporting periods, or three reporting
periods within three years, the facility shall not qualify as a DESIGNATED
SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY.
      (2)   The facility is a COMPOSTING OPERATION or COMPOSTING FACILITY as
defined in 14 CCR § 18815.2(a)(13), that pursuant to the reports submitted
under 14 CCR § 18815.7 demonstrates that the percent of the material removed
for landfill disposal that is organic waste is less than the percent specified
in 14 CCR § 17409.5.8(c)(2) or 17409.5.8(c)(3), whichever is applicable, and,
if applicable, complies with the digestate handling requirements specified in
14 CCR § 17896.5.
         (a)   If the percent of the material removed for landfill disposal
that is organic waste is more than the percent specified in 14 CCR § 17409.5.8
(c)(2) or 17409.5.8(c)(3), for two consecutive reporting periods, or three
reporting periods within three years, the facility shall not qualify as a
DESIGNATED SOURCE SEPARATED ORGANIC WASTE FACILITY. For the purposes of this
subchapter, the reporting periods shall be consistent with those defined in 14
CCR § 18815.2(a)(49).
   DESIGNEE. An entity that the city contracts with or otherwise arranges to
carry out any of the city's responsibilities of this chapter as authorized in
14 CCR § 18981.2. A designee may be a government entity, a hauler, a private
entity, or a combination of those entities.
   EDIBLE FOOD. Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(18). For the purposes of this subchapter or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(18), EDIBLE FOOD is not solid waste if it is
recovered and not discarded. Nothing in this subchapter or in 14 CCR, Division
7, Chapter 12 requires or authorizes the recovery of edible food that does not
meet the food safety requirements of the Cal. Retail Food Code.
   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. An action of the city, or its designee to address non-
compliance with this subchapter including, but not limited to, issuing
administrative citations, fines, penalties, or using other remedies.
   EXCLUDED WASTE. Hazardous substance, hazardous waste, infectious waste,
designated waste, volatile, corrosive, medical waste, infectious, regulated
radioactive waste, and toxic substances or material that facility operator(s),
which receive materials from the city and its generators, reasonably believe(s)
would, as a result of or upon acceptance, transfer, processing, or disposal, be
a violation of local, state, or federal law, regulation, or ordinance,
including: land use restrictions or conditions, waste that cannot be disposed
of in Class III landfills or accepted at the facility by permit conditions,
waste in cities, or its designee's reasonable opinion would present a
significant risk to human health or the environment, cause a nuisance or
otherwise create or expose the city or its designee, to potential liability;
but not including de minimis volumes or concentrations of waste of a type and
amount normally found in single-family or multi-family solid waste after
implementation of programs for the safe collection, processing, recycling,
treatment, and disposal of batteries and paint in compliance with Cal. Public
Resources Code §§ 41500 and 41802.
   FOOD DISTRIBUTOR. A company that distributes food to entities including, but
not limited to, supermarkets and grocery stores, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(22).
   FOOD FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in Cal. Health and Safety Code §
113789.
   FOOD RECOVERY. Actions to collect and distribute food for human consumption
that otherwise would be disposed, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(24).
   FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION. 
      (1)   An entity that engages in the collection or receipt of edible food
from commercial edible food generators and distributes that edible food to the
public for food recovery either directly or through other entities or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25), including, but not limited to:
         (a)   A food bank as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113783;
         (b)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 113841; and
         (c)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113842.
      (2)   A food recovery organization is not a commercial edible food
generator for the purposes of this subchapter and implementation of 14 CCR,
Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
      (3)   If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(25) for food recovery
organization differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(25) shall apply to this subchapter.
   FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE. A person or entity that collects and transports
edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food recovery
organization or other entities for food recovery, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(26). A food recovery service is not a commercial edible food
generator for the purposes of this subchapter and implementation of 14 CCR,
Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   FOOD SCRAPS. All food such as, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, meat,
poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones, rice, beans, pasta, bread, cheese, and
eggshells. Food scraps excludes fats, oils, and grease when such materials are
source separated from other food scraps.
   FOOD SERVICE PROVIDER. An entity primarily engaged in providing food
services to institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations of
others based on contractual arrangements with these types of organizations, or
as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(27).
   FOOD-SOILED PAPER. Compostable paper material that has come in contact with
food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper plates, paper
coffee cups, napkins, pizza boxes, and milk cartons.
   FOOD WASTE. Food scraps, food-soiled paper, compostable plastics like 100%
fiber based compostable dinnerware.
   GREEN CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(29) and
shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated
green container organic waste, including clean lumber and food waste.
   GROCERY STORE. A store primarily engaged in the retail sale of canned food;
dry goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and poultry; and any
area that is not separately owned within the store where the food is prepared
and served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood departments, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(30).
   HAULER ROUTE. The designated itinerary or sequence of stops for each segment
of the city's collection service area, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(31.5).
   HIGH DIVERSION ORGANIC WASTE PROCESSING FACILITY. A facility that is in
compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR § 18815.5(d) and meets or
exceeds an annual average mixed waste organic content recovery rate of 50%
between January 1, 2022 and December 31, 2024, and 75% after January 1, 2025,
as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR § 18815.5(e) for organic waste received from
the “mixed waste organic collection stream" as defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a)
(11.5); or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(33).
   INSPECTION. A site visit where the city, or its designee reviews records,
containers, and an entity's collection, handling, recycling, or landfill
disposal of organic waste or edible food handling to determine if the entity is
complying with requirements set forth in this subchapter, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(35).
   LARGE EVENT. An event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event or a
flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a local agency,
and serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals per day of operation of
the event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a public,
nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street system, or
other open space when being used for an event. If the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(38) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(38) shall apply to this subchapter.
   LARGE VENUE. A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an
average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the facility per
day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this subchapter and
implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a venue facility includes,
but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or operated
stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or civic center,
zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts center,
fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For purposes
of this chapter and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a site
under common ownership or control that includes more than one large venue that
is contiguous with other large venues in the site, is a single large venue. If
the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) differs from this definition, the
definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(39) shall apply to this subchapter.
   LOCAL EDUCATION AGENCY. A school district, charter school, or county office
of education that is not subject to the control of city or county regulations
related to solid waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(40).
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING or MULTI-FAMILY. 
      (1)   Means of, from, or pertaining to residential premises with five or
more dwelling units; or any building, structure, lot or real property parcel
containing two or more residential dwelling units which the City Manager
determines must receive solid waste handling services through the use of a
shared bin(s) as such units may not reasonably receive individualized solid
waste handling services through the use of carts or resident provided
containers. Multi-family premises do not include hotels, motels, or other
transient occupancy facilities, which are considered commercial businesses.
      (2)   The foregoing notwithstanding, residential dwelling units which are
part of a PLANNED DEVELOPMENT as the term is defined under Cal. Civil Code §
1351 shall not be considered multi-family premises but instead shall be
considered residential premises. For purposes of illustration, MULTI-FAMILY
PREMISES include but are not necessarily limited to any apartment building or
apartment structure containing five or more residential units; or any single,
exclusively residential high-rise/mid-rise building or structure. For purposes
of this subchapter, MULTI-FAMILY PREMISES do not include MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS
as defined in the San Gabriel Municipal Code or any residential portion of a
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT.
   MWELO. Refers to the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO), 23
CCR, Division 2, Chapter 2.7.
   NON-COMPOSTABLE PAPER. Includes but is not limited to paper that is coated
in a plastic material that will not breakdown in the composting process, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(41).
   NON-LOCAL ENTITY. Means the following entities that are not subject to the
city's enforcement authority, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(42):
      (1)   Special district(s) located within the boundaries of the city;
      (2)   Federal facilities, including any military installations, located
within the boundaries of the city;
      (3)   Prison(s) located within the boundaries of the city;
      (4)   Facilities operated by the state park system located within the
boundaries of the city;
      (5)   Public universities (including community colleges) located within
the boundaries of the city;
      (6)   County fairgrounds located within the boundaries of the city; and
      (7)   State agencies located within the boundaries of the city.
   NON-ORGANIC RECYCLABLES. Non-putrescible and non-hazardous recyclable wastes
including but not limited to bottles, cans, metals, plastics and glass, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(43).
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV). A notice that a violation has occurred that
includes a compliance date to avoid an action to seek penalties, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(45) or further explained in 14 CCR §
18995.4.
   ORGANIC WASTE. Solid wastes containing material originated from living
organisms and their metabolic waste products, including but not limited to
food, green material, landscape and pruning waste, organic textiles and
carpets, lumber, wood, paper products, printing and writing paper, but excludes
manure, biosolids, digestate, and sludges or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(46). Biosolids and digestate are as defined by 14 CCR § 18982(a).
   ORGANIC WASTE GENERATOR. A person or entity that is responsible for the
initial creation of organic waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(48).
   PAPER PRODUCTS. Include, but are not limited to, paper janitorial supplies,
cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, hanging files, corrugated boxes,
tissue, and toweling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(51).
   PRINTING AND WRITING PAPERS. Include, but are not limited to, copy,
xerographic, watermark, cotton fiber, offset, forms, computer printout paper,
white wove envelopes, manila envelopes, book paper, note pads, writing tablets,
newsprint, and other uncoated writing papers, posters, index cards, calendars,
brochures, reports, magazines, and publications, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(54).
   PROHIBITED CONTAINER CONTAMINANTS.
      (1)   Three container collection service. PROHIBITED CONTAINER
CONTAMINANTS means the following:
         (a)   Discarded materials placed in the blue container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated recyclable materials for the city's
blue container;
         (b)   Discarded materials placed in the green container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated green container organic waste for the
city's green container;
         (c)   Discarded materials placed in the gray container that are
acceptable source separated recyclable materials and/or source separated green
container organic wastes to be placed in city's green container and/or blue
container; and
         (d)   Excluded waste placed in any container.
      (2)   Two container collection service. PROHIBITED CONTAINER CONTAMINANTS
means the following:
         (a)   Discarded materials placed in a green container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated green container organic waste for the
city's green container;
         (b)   Discarded materials placed in the black container that are
identified as acceptable source separated green container organic waste, which
are to be separately collected in city's green container; and
         (c)   Excluded waste placed in any container.
   RECOVERED ORGANIC WASTE PRODUCTS. Products made from California, landfill-
diverted recovered organic waste processed in a permitted or otherwise
authorized facility, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(60).
   RECOVERY. Any activity or process described in 14 CCR § 18983.1(b), or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(49).
   RECYCLED-CONTENT PAPER. Paper products and printing and writing paper that
consists of at least 30%, by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(61).
   REGIONAL AGENCY. Regional agency as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code §
40181.
   REGIONAL OR COUNTY AGENCY ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. A regional or county agency
enforcement official, which the city may designate with responsibility for
enforcing the ordinance in conjunction or consultation with the city's
enforcement official.
   REMOTE MONITORING. The use of the internet of things (IoT) and/or wireless
electronic devices to visualize the contents of black containers or green
containers for purposes of identifying the quantity of materials in containers
(level of fill) and/or presence of prohibited container contaminants.
   RENEWABLE GAS. Gas derived from organic waste that has been diverted from a
California landfill and processed at an in-vessel digestion facility that is
permitted or otherwise authorized by 14 CCR to recycle organic waste, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(62).
   RESTAURANT. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
and drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(64).
   ROUTE REVIEW. A visual inspection of containers along a hauler route for the
purpose of determining container contamination and may include mechanical
inspection methods such as the use of cameras, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(65).
   SB 1383. Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor on September 19,
2016, which added Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7, and
39730.8, and added Cal. Public Resources Code Chapter 13.1 (commencing with §
42652) to Part 3 of Division 30, establishing methane emissions reduction
targets in a statewide effort to reduce emissions of short-lived climate
pollutants as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time to
time.
   SB 1383 REGULATIONS or SB 1383 REGULATORY. Means or refers to, for the
purposes of this subchapter, the short-lived climate pollutants: organic waste
reduction regulations developed by CalRecycle and adopted in 2020 that created
14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 and amended portions of regulations of 14 CCR
and 27 CCR.
   SELF-HAULER. A person who hauls organic waste, C&D debris, recyclable
material, or other garbage he or she has generated to another person, provided
such hauling is undertaken through the use of the self-hauler's own equipment
and employees. SELF-HAULING does not include the contracting or subcontracting
of hauling services with any third party, including, but not limited to, any
solid waste enterprise that is not franchised to perform any variety of solid
waste handling services within the city of San Gabriel. Self-hauler also
includes a person who back-hauls waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(66). Back-haul means generating and transporting organic waste to a
destination owned and operated by the generator using the generator's own
employees and equipment, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(66)(A).
   SINGLE-FAMILY - RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Means of, from, or pertaining to any
residential premises with fewer than five units; or any single building,
structure, lot or real property parcel containing four or fewer residential
dwelling units, except to the extent the City Manager determines the
residential dwelling units within such dwellings, buildings or structures must
receive solid waste handling services through the use of a shared bin(s) as
such units may not reasonably receive individualized solid waste handling
services through the use of carts or resident-provided containers; or each
residential dwelling unit which is part of a "planned development" as the term
is defined under Cal. Civil Code § 1351; or any single-family residential
dwelling unit attached to one or more single-family residential dwelling units
by a common vertical wall(s), with each dwelling unit located on a separate
lot; or any second unit/granny flat. A residential premises which either has
been or is unlawfully used or improved with more than four residential dwelling
units shall not by virtue of this definition or such unlawful improvement
become a commercial premises or a multi-family premises but shall remain
residential premises.
   SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code §
40191, which defines solid waste as all putrescible and non-putrescible solid,
semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish,
ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned
vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances,
dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous
waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other
discarded solid and semisolid wastes, with the exception that solid waste does
not include any of the following wastes:
      (1)   Hazardous waste, as defined in the Cal. Public Resources Code §
40141.
      (2)   Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the State Radiation Control
Law (Cal. Health and Safety Code Chapter 8 (commencing with § 114960) of Part 9
of Division 104).
      (3)   Medical waste regulated pursuant to the State Medical Waste
Management Act (Cal. Health and Safety Code Part 14 (commencing with § 117600)
of Division 104). Untreated medical waste shall not be disposed of in a solid
waste landfill, as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code § 40195.1. Medical
waste that has been treated and deemed to be solid waste shall be regulated
pursuant to Cal. Public Resources Code Division 30.
   SOURCE SEPARATED. Materials, including commingled recyclable materials, that
have been separated or kept separate from the solid waste stream, for the
purpose of additional sorting or processing those materials for recycling or
reuse in order to return them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
material for new, reused, or reconstituted products, which meet the quality
standards necessary to be used in the marketplace, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 17402.5(b)(4).
   SOURCE SEPARATED GREEN CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE. 
      (1)   In the residential sector, source separated organic wastes that can
be placed in a green container that is limited to the collection of those
organic wastes and non-organic recyclables as defined in § 18982(a)(43), or as
otherwise defined by § 17402(a)(18.7). In the commercial and multi-family
sectors, source separated organic wastes that is limited to the collection of
those organic wastes and non-organic recyclables as defined in § 18982(a)(43),
or as otherwise defined by § 17402(a)(18.7) for mixed waste processing. This
excludes any materials that would not be permitted for composting, including
contaminated lumber, manure, digestate, biosolids and sludges.
      (2)   Source separated organic waste that can be placed in a green
container that is specifically intended for the separate collection of organic
waste by the generator, excluding carpets, non-compostable paper, contaminated
lumber, manure, digestate, biosolids, sludges and textiles.
   SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Source separated non-organic
recyclables and source separated green container organic waste.
   SUPERMARKET. A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales
of $2,000,000, or more, and which sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or
nonfood items and some perishable items, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(71).
   TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. 
      (1)   A commercial edible food generator that is one of the following:
         (a)   Supermarket;
         (b)   Grocery store with a total facility size equal to or greater
than 10,000 square feet;
         (c)   Food service provider;
         (d)   Food distributor; or
         (e)   Wholesale food vendor.
      (2)   If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73) of tier one commercial
edible food generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(73) shall apply to this subchapter.
   TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR.
      (1)   A commercial edible food generator that is one of the following:
         (a)   Restaurant with 250 or more seats, or a total facility size
equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet;
         (b)   Hotel with an on-site food facility and 200 or more rooms;
         (c)   Health facility with an on-site food facility and 100 or more
beds;
         (d)   Large venue;
         (e)   Large event;
         (f)   A state agency with a cafeteria with 250 or more seats or total
cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet; or
         (g)   A local education agency facility with an on-site food facility.
      (2)   If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(74) of tier two commercial
edible food generator differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(74) shall apply to this subchapter.
   UNCONTAINERIZED GREEN WASTE AND YARD WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE or
UNCONTAINERIZED SERVICE. A collection service that collects green waste and
yard waste that is placed in a pile or bagged for collection on the street in
front of a generator's house or place of business for collection and transport
to a facility that recovers source separated organic waste, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 189852(a)(75).
   WHOLESALE FOOD VENDOR. A business or establishment engaged in the merchant
wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits and vegetables) is
received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a retailer, warehouse,
distributor, or other destination, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 189852
(a)(76).
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.028 RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION AND RECYCLING; MANDATORY ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL
SINGLE-FAMILY GENERATORS.
   (A)   All single-family organic waste generators:
      (1)   Shall be automatically enrolled in the city's two container organic
waste collection services with a minimum source separated recyclable materials
service level of 35 gallons per week and with a minimum source separated green
container organic waste service level of 35 gallons per week, approved by the
Public Works Director. The city or designee shall have the authority to change
these minimum required levels of service over time. The city or its designee
shall have the right to review the number, size, and location of a generator's
containers to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of
collection service for proper separation of materials and containment of
materials; and generator shall adjust its service level for its collection
services as requested by the city and/or its designee.
      (2)   Shall participate in the city's two-container system for source
separated recyclable materials, source separated green container organic waste
and black container waste collection services. Generator participation in the
collection programs requires that generators place source separated green
container organic waste, including food waste, in the green container; source
separated recyclable materials in the green container; and black container
waste in the black container. Generators shall not place materials designated
for the black container into the green container.
      (3)   Nothing in this section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing organic waste on site, and/or using a
community composting site pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c).
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.029 COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL COLLECTIONS; MANDATORY ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL
REQUIREMENT - COMMERCIAL GENERATORS.
   (A)   Commercial businesses, which includes multi-family residential
dwellings, shall:
      (1)   Except commercial businesses that meet the self-hauler requirements
in this subchapter, be automatically enrolled in the city's two-container
organic waste collection services and with a source separated green container
organic waste service level of 64 gallons, approved by the Public Works
Director. The city or its designee shall have the authority to change the
minimum required service levels over time. The commercial business' source
separated green container organic waste service level must be sufficient for
the amount of source separated green container organic waste generated by the
commercial business. The city or its designee shall have the right to review
the number, size, and location of a generator's containers and frequency of
collection to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of
collection service for proper separation of materials and containment of
materials; and commercial business shall adjust its service level for its
collection services as requested by the city, or by the hauler.
      (2)   Except for commercial businesses that meet the self hauler
requirements in this subchapter participate in and comply with the city's two-
container collection service by placing designated materials in designated
containers as described below. Generator shall place source separated green
container organic waste, including food waste, in the green container; and
black container waste in black container. Generators shall not place materials
designated for the black container into the green container.
      (3)   Supply and allow access to adequate number, size, type and location
of collection containers with sufficient labels or colors (conforming with
divisions (A)(4)(a) and (b) below), for employees, contractors, tenants and
customers, consistent with city's blue container, green container, and gray
container collection service.
      (4)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, provide containers
for the collection of source separated green container organic waste, in all
indoor and outdoor areas where disposal containers are provided for customers,
for materials generated by that business. Such containers do not need to be
provided in restrooms. If a commercial business does not generate any source
separated container organic waste then the business does not have to provide
that particular container. In all areas where disposal containers are provided
for customers pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b), the containers provided by the
business shall have either:
         (a)   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by the city or its designee with either
lids conforming to the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color
requirements or both lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A
commercial business is not required to replace functional containers, including
containers purchased prior to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the
requirements of the subsection prior to the end of the useful life of those
containers, or prior to January 1, 2036, whichever comes first.
         (b)   Container labels that include language or graphic images or both
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container. Pursuant 14 CCR § 18984.8, the container labels are required on new
containers commencing January 1, 2022.
      (5)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, prohibit employees
from placing materials in a container not designated for those materials per
the city's organic waste, non-organic recyclables, and non-organic waste
collection service to the extent practical through education, training,
inspection, and/or other measures.
      (6)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, quarterly inspect
green and black containers for contamination and inform employees if containers
are contaminated and of the requirements to keep contaminants out of those
containers pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b)(3).
      (7)   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants,
and customers about organic waste recovery requirements and about proper
sorting of source separated green container organic waste.
      (8)   Provide education information before or within 14 days of
occupation of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements to keep
source separated green container organic waste separate from gray container
waste (when applicable) and the location of containers and the rules governing
their use at each property.
      (9)   Provide or arrange access for the city or its designee to their
properties during all inspections conducted in accordance with § 50.038 to
confirm compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.
      (10)   Accommodate and cooperate with city's remote monitoring program
for inspection of the contents of containers for prohibited container
contaminants, which may be implemented at a later date, to evaluate generator's
compliance with these regulations. The remote monitoring program shall involve
installation of remote monitoring equipment on or in all the containers, as
applicable.
      (11)   At commercial business' option and subject to any approval
required from the city, implement a remote monitoring program for inspection of
the contents of its blue containers, green containers, and gray containers, as
applicable, for the purpose of monitoring the contents of containers to
determine appropriate levels of service and to identify prohibited container
contaminants. Generators may install remote monitoring devices on or in all the
containers, as applicable, subject to written notification to an approval by
the city or its designee.
      (12)   If a commercial business wants to self-haul, meet the self-hauler
requirements in section of this subchapter.
      (13)   Nothing in this section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing organic waste on site, or using a community
composting site pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c).
      (14)   Commercial businesses that are tier one or tier two commercial
edible food generators shall comply with food recovery requirements, pursuant
to the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.030 WAIVERS FOR GENERATORS.
   (A)   De minimis waivers. The city may waive a commercial business'
obligation (including multi-family residential dwellings) to comply with some
or all of the organic waste requirements of this subchapter if the commercial
business provides documentation that the business generates below a certain
amount of organic waste material as described in division (A)(2) below.
Commercial businesses requesting a de minimis waiver shall:
      (1)   Submit an application specifying the services that they are
requesting a waiver from and provide documentation as noted in division (A)(2)
below.
      (2)   Provide documentation that:
         (a)   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
less than two cubic yards per week and organic waste subject to collection is
less than in a gray container or green container comprises less than ten
gallons per week per applicable container of the business' total waste;
         (b)   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
less than two cubic yards per week and organic waste subject to collection
comprises less than ten gallons per week per applicable container of the
business' total waste.
         (c)   Notify the city if circumstances change such that commercial
business's organic waste exceeds threshold required for waiver, in which case
waiver will be rescinded.
         (d)   Provide written verification of eligibility for de minimis
waiver every five years, if the city has approved de minimis waiver.
   (B)   Physical space waivers. The city may waive a commercial business' or
property owner's obligations (including multi-family residential dwellings) to
comply with some or all of the organic waste collection service requirements if
the city has evidence from the hauler, licensed architect, or licensed
engineer, or other reliable sources, demonstrating that the premises lacks
adequate space for the collection containers required for compliance with the
organic waste collection requirements of this section.
      (1)   Commercial business or property owner may request a physical space
waiver through the following process:
         (a)   Submit an application form specifying the type(s) of collection
services for which they are requesting a compliance waiver.
         (b)   Provide documentation that the premises lacks adequate space for
green containers including documentation from its hauler, licensed architect,
or licensed engineer.
         (c)   Provide written verification to the city that it is still
eligible for physical space waiver every five years, if the city has approved
application for a physical space waiver.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.031 REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS.
   (A)   Tier one commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this section commencing January 1, 2022, and tier two
commercial edible food generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024,
pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3.
   (B)   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services but
allowing for food to be provided by others shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   (C)   Commercial edible food generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed.
      (2)   Contract with or enter into a written agreement with food recovery
organizations or food recovery services for:
         (a)   The collection of edible food for food recovery; or
         (b)   Acceptance of the edible food that the commercial edible food
generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization for food recovery.
      (3)   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service.
      (4)   Allow the city's designated enforcement entity or designated third
party enforcement entity to access the premises and review records pursuant to
14 CCR § 18991.4.
      (5)   Keep records that include the following information, or as
otherwise specified in 14 CCR § 18991.4:
         (a)   A list of each food recovery service or organization that
collects or receives its edible food pursuant to a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b).
         (b)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
14 CCR § 18991.3(b).
         (c)   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            1.   The name, address and contact information of the food recovery
service or food recovery organization.
            2.   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to
the food recovery service or food recovery organization.
            3.   The established frequency that food will be collected or self-
hauled.
            4.   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
      (6)   No later than February 1 of each year commencing no later than
February 1, 2023 for tier one commercial edible food generators and February 1,
2025 for tier two commercial edible food generators, those generators shall
provide an annual food recovery report to the city that includes all records
required in division (C)(5) of this section. In addition, the report shall
include the amount and type of edible food that was not accepted by food
recovery organizations or services for donation.
   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to limit or conflict
with the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation
Act of 2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food
donation guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017 (approved by the Governor
of the State of California on September 25, 2017, which added Cal. Education
Code Article 13 [commencing with § 49580] to Chapter 9 of Part 27 of Division 4
of Title 2, and to amend Cal. Health and Safety Code § 114079, relating to food
safety, as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from time to time).
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.032 REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATIONS AND SERVICES.
   (A)   Food recovery services collecting or receiving edible food directly
from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following records, or
as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(1):
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the service collects edible food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each
commercial edible food generator per month.
      (3)   The quantity in pounds of edible food transported to each food
recovery organization per month.
      (4)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
organization that the food recovery service transports edible food to for food
recovery.
   (B)   Food recovery organizations collecting or receiving edible food
directly from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following
records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR § 18991.5(a)(2):
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the organization receives edible food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food received from each commercial
edible food generator per month.
      (3)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
service that the organization receives edible food from for food recovery.
   (C)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services shall inform
generators about California and Federal Good Samaritan Food Donation Act
protection in written communications, such as in their contract or agreement
established under 14 CCR § 18991.3(b).
   (D)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services that have their
primary address physically located in the city and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more commercial edible food generators pursuant
to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) shall report to the city it is located in the total
pounds of edible food recovered and the amount and type of edible food not
accepted by food recovery organizations and food recovery services in the
previous calendar year from the tier one and tier two commercial edible food
generators they have established a contract or written agreement with pursuant
to 14 CCR § 18991.3(b) no later than each February 1.
   (E)   In order to support edible food recovery capacity planning assessments
or other studies conducted by the county, city, special district that provides
solid waste collection services, or its designated entity, food recovery
services and food recovery organizations operating in the city shall provide
information and consultation to the city, upon request, regarding existing, or
proposed new or expanded, food recovery capacity that could be accessed by the
city and its commercial edible food generators. A food recovery service or food
recovery organization contacted by the city shall respond to such request for
information within 60 days, unless a shorter timeframe is otherwise specified
by the city.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.033 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR HAULERS AND FACILITY OPERATORS.
   (A)   Effective January 1, 2022, exclusive franchised hauler providing
residential, commercial, or industrial organic waste collection services to
generators within the city's boundaries shall meet the following requirements
and standards as a condition of approval of a contract, agreement, or other
authorization with the city to collect organic waste:
      (1)   Through written notice to the city annually on or before January
31, identify the facilities to which they will transport organic waste
including facilities for source separated recyclable materials, source
separated green container organic waste.
      (2)   Transport source separated recyclable materials, source separated
green container organic waste and any other eligible waste to a facility,
operation, activity, or property that recovers organic waste as defined in 14
CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, hauler
shall not be required to transport any containers with prohibited container
contaminants to a facility, operation, activity, or property that recovers
organic waste.
   (B)   Effective January 1, 2022, exclusive franchised hauler's authorization
to collect organic waste shall comply with education, equipment, signage,
container labeling, container color, contamination monitoring, reporting, and
other requirements contained within its franchise agreement, permit, and
license entered into with the city.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.034 REQUIREMENTS FOR FACILITY OPERATORS AND COMMUNITY COMPOSTING
OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Owners of facilities, operations, and activities that recover organic
waste, including, but not limited to, compost facilities, in-vessel digestion
facilities, and publicly-owned treatment works shall, upon the city's request,
provide information regarding available and potential new or expanded capacity
at their facilities, operations, and activities, including information about
throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes. Entities
contacted by the city shall respond within 60 days.
   (B)   Community composting operators, upon the city's request, shall provide
information to the city to support organic waste capacity planning, including,
but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of organic waste anticipated to
be handled at the community composting operation. Entities contacted by the
city shall respond within 60 days.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.035 GENERAL SELF-HAULER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All self-haulers shall source separate all recyclable materials and
organic waste (materials that city otherwise requires generators to separate
for collection in the city's organics and recycling collection program)
generated on-site from solid waste in a manner consistent with 14 CCR §§
18984.1 and 18984.2 or shall haul organic waste to a high diversion organic
waste processing facility as specified in 14 CCR § 18984.3.
   (B)   Self-haulers shall haul their source separated recyclable materials to
a facility that recovers those materials; and haul their source separated green
container organic waste to a solid waste facility, operation, activity, or
property that processes or recovers source separated organic waste.
Alternatively, self-haulers may haul organic waste to a high diversion organic
waste processing facility.
   (C)   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multi-family
residential dwellings) shall keep a record of the amount of organic waste
delivered to each solid waste facility, operation, activity, or property that
processes or recovers organic waste; this record shall be subject to inspection
by the city. The records shall include the following information:
      (1)   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste.
      (2)   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity.
      (3)   If the material is transported to an entity that does not have
scales on-site, or employs scales incapable of weighing the self-hauler's
vehicle in a manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials
received, the self-hauler is not required to record the weight of material but
shall keep a record of the entities that received the organic waste.
   (D)   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multi-family
self-haulers) shall provide information collected in this section to the city
each quarter. The due date shall be 30 days after the end of each quarter.
   (E)   A residential organic waste generator that self-hauls organic waste is
not required to record or report information in this section.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.036 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE RECYCLING PROGRAM EFFECTIVE
THRESHOLD FOR COVERED PROJECTS.
   (A)   All projects within the city shall be considered covered projects and
shall meet the diversion requirement and comply with all provisions of this
chapter. For the purposes of determining whether a project meets the foregoing
thresholds, all phases of a project and all related projects taking place on a
single or adjoining parcel, as determined by the compliance official, shall be
deemed a single project.
   (B)   All projects undertaken by the city shall be considered covered
projects and shall meet the diversion requirement and comply with all
provisions of this chapter. The city or its designee shall submit a Waste
Management Plan (WMP) to the compliance official prior to beginning any
construction or demolition activities and shall be subject to all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Demolition-only projects within the city shall be considered covered
projects and shall comply with this chapter.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.037 COMPLIANCE WITH CALGREEN RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Persons applying for a permit from the city for new construction
and building additions and alternations shall comply with the requirements of
this section and all required components of the California Green Building
Standards Code, 24 CCR, Part 11, known as CALGreen, as amended, if its project
is covered by the scope of CALGreen or more stringent requirements of the city.
If the requirements of CALGreen are more stringent than the requirements of
this section, the CALGreen requirements shall apply.
      (2)   Project applicants shall refer to city's building and/or planning
code for complete CALGreen requirements.
   (B)   For projects covered by CALGreen or more stringent requirements of the
city, the applicants must, as a condition of the city's permit approval, comply
with the following:
      (1)   Where five or more multi-family dwelling units are constructed on a
building site, provide readily accessible areas that serve occupants of all
buildings on the site and are identified for the storage and collection of blue
container and green container materials, consistent with the three- or two-
container collection program offered by the city, or comply with provision of
adequate space for recycling for multi-family and commercial premises pursuant
to §§ 4.408.1, 4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of the California Green Building
Standards Code, 24 CCR, Part 11 as amended provided amended requirements are
more stringent than the CALGreen requirements for adequate recycling space
effective January 1, 2020.
      (2)   New commercial construction or additions resulting in more than 30%
of the floor area shall provide readily accessible areas identified for the
storage and collection of blue containers and green container materials,
consistent with the three-, three-plus, or two-container collection program
offered by the city, or shall comply with provision of adequate space for
recycling for multi-family and commercial premises pursuant to §§ 4.408.1,
4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of the California Green Building Standards Code,
24 CCR, Part 11 as amended provided amended requirements are more stringent
than the CALGreen requirements for adequate recycling space effective January
1, 2020.
      (3)   Comply with CALGreen requirements and applicable law related to
management of C&D, including diversion of organic waste in C&D from disposal.
Comply with the city's C&D ordinance, Chapter 54 of the San Gabriel Municipal
Code, and all written and published city policies and/or administrative
guidelines regarding the collection, recycling, diversion, tracking, and/or
reporting of C&D.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.038 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS BY THE CITY.
   (A)   City representatives and/or its designated entity, including designees
are authorized to conduct inspections and investigations, at random or
otherwise, of any collection container, collection vehicle loads, or transfer,
processing, or disposal facility for materials collected from generators, or
source separated materials to confirm compliance with this subchapter by
organic waste generators, commercial businesses (including multi-family
residential dwellings), property owners, commercial edible food generators,
self-haulers, food recovery services, and food recovery organizations, subject
to applicable laws. This section does not allow city to enter the interior of a
private residential property for inspection. For the purposes of inspecting
commercial business containers for compliance with division (B) of this
section, city may conduct container inspections for prohibited container
contaminants using remote monitoring, and commercial businesses shall
accommodate and cooperate with the remote monitoring pursuant to division (B)
(2) of this section.
   (B)   Entities regulated by division (A) above shall provide or arrange for
access during all inspections (with the exception of residential property
interiors) and shall cooperate with the city's employee or its designated
entity/designee during such inspections and investigations. Such inspections
and investigations may include confirmation of proper placement of materials in
containers, edible food recovery activities, records, or any other requirement
of this subchapter described herein. Failure to provide or arrange for: (i)
access to an entity's premises; (ii) installation and operation of remote
monitoring equipment; or (iii) access to records for any inspection or
investigation is a violation of this ordinance and may result in penalties
described.
      (1)   Any records obtained by the city during its inspections, remote
monitoring, and other reviews shall be subject to the requirements and
applicable disclosure exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in Cal.
Gov’t Code §§ 6250 et seq.
      (2)   City representatives, its designated entity, and/or designee are
authorized to conduct any inspections, remote monitoring, or other
investigations as reasonably necessary to further the goals of this subchapter,
subject to applicable laws and reasonable notice in non-urgent circumstances.
      (3)   The city shall receive written complaints from persons regarding an
entity that may be potentially non-compliant with SB 1383 Regulations,
including receipt of anonymous complaints.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.039 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this subchapter shall constitute grounds
for issuance of a Notice of Violation and assessment of a fine by a city
enforcement official or representative. Enforcement actions under this
subchapter are issuance of an administrative citation and assessment of a fine.
The city's procedures on imposition of administrative fines are hereby
incorporated in their entirety, as modified from time to time, and shall govern
the imposition, enforcement, collection, and review of administrative citations
issued to enforce this subchapter and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
to this subchapter, except as otherwise indicated in this subchapter.
   (B)   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. The city may pursue civil actions in
the California courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations. The
city may choose to delay court action until such time as a sufficiently large
number of violations, or cumulative size of violations exist such that court
action is a reasonable use of city staff and resources.
   (C)   Responsible entity for enforcement.
      (1)   Enforcement pursuant to this subchapter may be undertaken by the
city's enforcement official, which may be the City Manager or their designated
entity, legal counsel, or combination thereof.
      (2)   Enforcement may also be undertaken by a regional or county agency
enforcement official, designated by the city, in consultation with the city
enforcement official.
         (a)   City enforcement official(s) will interpret ordinance; determine
the applicability of waivers, if violation(s) have occurred; implement
enforcement actions; and, determine if compliance standards are met.
         (b)   City enforcement official(s) may issue Notices of Violation(s).
   (D)   Process for enforcement.
      (1)   City enforcement officials and/or their designee will monitor
compliance with the ordinance randomly and through compliance reviews, route
reviews, investigation of complaints, and an inspection program (that may
include remote monitoring).
      (2)   The city may issue an official notification to notify regulated
entities of their obligations under the ordinance.
      (3)   For jurisdictions assessing contamination processing fines/
penalties. For incidences of prohibited container contaminants found in
containers, the city and/or designee will issue a Notice of Violation to any
generator found to have prohibited container contaminants in a container. Such
notice will be provided via a cart tag or other communication immediately upon
identification of the prohibited container contaminants or within two days
after determining that a violation has occurred. If the city and/or their
designee observes prohibited container contaminants in a generator's containers
on more than three consecutive occasion(s), the city and/or their designee may
assess contamination processing fines or contamination penalties on the
generator on the third such occasion.
      (4)   With the exception of violations of generator contamination of
container contents addressed under §
50.038(B)(2), the city and/or their designee shall issue a Notice of Violation
requiring compliance within 60 days of issuance of the notice.
      (5)   (a)   Absent compliance by the respondent within the deadline set
forth in the Notice of Violation, the code enforcement official(s) and/or their
designee shall commence an action to impose penalties, via an administrative
citation and fine, pursuant to city code.
         (b)   Notices shall be sent to "owner" at the official address of the
owner maintained by the tax collector for the city or if no such address is
available, to the owner at the address of the dwelling or commercial property
or to the party responsible for paying for the collection services, depending
upon available information.
      (6)   In addition to the foregoing, for incidences of prohibited
container contaminants found by a hauler in containers, hauler will issue a
notice of contamination to any generator found to have prohibited container
contaminants in a container. Such notice will be provided via a cart tag or
other communication immediately upon identification of the prohibited container
contaminants or within two days after determining that a violation has
occurred. If a hauler observes prohibited container contaminants in a
generator's containers on more than two occasion(s) every calendar year
starting January 1, the hauler shall have the right to assess a contamination
service charge on the generator to cover the additional costs of processing
contaminated containers per the current franchise hauler rate schedule. The
foregoing contamination service charge shall not be considered an
administrative fine or penalty. Any disputes arising from the assessment of a
contamination service charge shall be adjudicated pursuant to the customer
complaint resolution process provided under the terms of any contract,
agreement, or similar contractual authorization between the hauler and the city
to collect organic waste.
   (E)   Penalty amounts for types of violations. The penalty levels are as
follows:
      (1)   For a first violation, the amount of the base penalty shall not
exceed $100 per violation.
      (2)   For a second violation, the amount of the base penalty shall not
exceed $200 per violation.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, the amount of the base penalty
shall not exceed $500 per violation.
   (F)   Factors considered in determining penalty amount.
      (1)   The nature, circumstances, and severity of the violation(s).
      (2)   The violator's ability to pay.
      (3)   The willfulness of the violator's misconduct.
      (4)   Whether the violator took measures to avoid or mitigate violations
of this chapter.
      (5)   Evidence of any economic benefit resulting from the violation(s).
      (6)   The deterrent effect of the penalty on the violator.
      (7)   Whether the violation(s) were due to conditions outside the control
of the violator.
   (G)   Compliance deadline extension considerations. The city may extend the
compliance deadlines set forth in a Notice of Violation issued in accordance
with this chapter, if it finds that there are extenuating circumstances beyond
the control of the respondent that make compliance within the deadlines
impracticable, including the following:
      (1)   Acts of God such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding, and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
      (2)   Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government
agency approvals; or
      (3)   Deficiencies in organic waste recycling infrastructure or edible
food recovery capacity and the city is under a corrective action plan with
CalRecycle pursuant to 14 CCR § 18996.2 due to those deficiencies.
   (H)   Appeals process. Persons receiving an administrative citation
containing a penalty for an uncorrected violation may request a hearing to
appeal the citation. A hearing will be held only if it is requested within the
time prescribed and consistent with the city's procedures in the city's codes
for appeals of administrative citations. Evidence may be presented at the
hearing. The city will appoint a hearing officer who shall conduct the hearing
and issue a final written order.
   (I)   Education period for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2022 and
through December 31, 2023, the city will conduct inspections, remote
monitoring, route reviews or waste evaluations, and compliance reviews,
depending upon the type of regulated entity, to determine compliance, and if
the city determines that organic waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one
commercial edible food generator, food recovery organization, food recovery
service, or other entity is not in compliance, it shall provide educational
materials to the entity describing its obligations under this subchapter and a
notice that compliance is required by January 1, 2022, and that violations may
be subject to administrative civil penalties starting on January 1, 2024.
   (J)   Civil penalties for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2024, if the
city determines that an organic waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one
or tier two commercial edible food generator, food recovery organization, food
recovery service, or other entity is not in compliance with this subchapter, it
shall document the noncompliance or violation, issue a Notice of Violation, and
take enforcement action pursuant to this section, as needed.
(Ord. 680, passed 11-2-21)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or imprisonment for not to exceed six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §
50.014 by engaging in the unauthorized collection or removal of recyclable
materials is guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a penalty as
provided in §
10.99. Any such unauthorized collections from one or more locations within the
city shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. ('65 Code, § 6-4.411(c))
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Connection with public sewer required; certain cesspools excepted
   
51.03   Deposits of industrial wastes and solids
   
51.04   Dilution and neutralization of acids and corrosive liquids
   
51.05   Draining stormwater
   
51.06   Draining swimming pools; permit required
   
51.07   Automobile wash racks; sand traps required
   
51.08   Cellar drains and showers; sand traps required
   
51.09   Restaurants and automobile wash racks; grease traps required
   
51.10   Discharges from safe waste piping
   
51.11   Exhaust steam and blowoffs
   
51.12   Construction work; compliance with specifications
   
51.13   Alteration work; compliance with regulations
   
51.14   Inspections
   
51.15   Certificate of inspection
   
51.16   Damages; removal, opening and entering facilities
Connections
   
51.25   Dedication of property a prerequisite for connection
   
51.26   Location of connections
   
51.27   Materials, testing and approval
   
51.28   Tapping
Sewer Permits
   
51.40   Public works permits and fees
   
51.41   Expiration; renewal
Pipe Layers
   
51.55   Certificate of registration required
Discharges by Food Service Establishments
   
51.60   Prevention and reduction of fats, oils, and grease discharges by food
service establishments
   
51.61   FOG discharge prohibition
   
51.62   Best management practices required
   
51.63   FOG pretreatment required
   
51.64   Required maintenance of pretreatment devices
   
51.65   Record maintenance required
   
51.66   Inspection and right of entry
   
51.67   Notice of noncompliance
   
51.68   Recovery of imposed fines or penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERATIONS. Any change or addition.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Any program, technology, process, criteria,
operational methods, schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, or
engineered systems, which have been determined to prevent or reduce the
discharge of FOG to the sewer system to the maximum extent practicable.
   CHANGE IN OPERATIONS. Any change in ownership, food types, or operational
procedures that have the potential to increase the amount of FOG generated or
discharged by a food service establishment and may cause or create a potential
for sanitary sewer overflows.
   CHIEF ENGINEER. The Chief Engineer of the County Sanitation District, or his
authorized deputy, agent, representative or inspector.
   DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director, or his or her duly authorized
representative.
   FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG). Any substance such as a vegetable or animal
product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation
process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in
temperature or other conditions.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any room, building, or place or portion thereof,
located within the boundaries of the City of San Gabriel, which is maintained,
used or operated by any profit or nonprofit entity engaged in activities of
storing, preparing, serving, manufacturing, packaging, transporting, salvaging
or otherwise handling and distributing food and beverages (including
prepackaged items) for the purpose of making food available for consumption by
the public, and include, but are not limited to, facilities such as
restaurants, commercial kitchens, lunch counters, refreshment stands, bars,
hotels, schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, health care institutions,
community centers, clubhouses, and fire stations. These establishments use one
or more of the following food preparation activities: cooking by frying (all
methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking,
broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching.
Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food
preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a
receptacle that requires washing.
   GREASE INTERCEPTOR. A multi-compartment device constructed in different
sizes and generally required to be located, according to the most recent
edition of the California Plumbing Code, underground between a food service
establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily
use gravity to separate and eliminate FOG from the wastewater discharged from a
facility.
   GREASE TRAP. A grease control device located under sink fixtures, which is
designed to have limited effect, and is used to serve up to four individual
fixtures in those cases where the use of a grease interceptor or other
pretreatment device is determined to be impossible or impracticable.
   HOUSE CONNECTION SEWER. That part of the horizontal piping beginning 12
inches from the exterior wall of the building and extending to its connection
with the public sewer.
   LOT. Any piece or parcel of land bounded, defined or shown upon a plat or
deed recorded in the office of the County Recorder and in accordance with the
boundaries of such lot as bounded, defined or shown upon the recorded map, plat
or deed; provided, however, in the event any building or structure covers more
area than a lot, as defined in this section, the term LOT shall mean and
include all such pieces or parcels of land upon which such buildings are wholly
or partly located.
   NPDES. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; the permit
issued to control the discharge of liquids or other substances or solids to
surface waters of the United States as detailed in Public Law 92-500, section
402.
   PRETREATMENT DEVICE. Any grease interceptor, grease trap, clarifier or other
equipment, device or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater
plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap, treat or collect
FOG from a waste stream prior to it being discharged into the sanitary sewer
system; it may include any other proven method to separate and remove FOG
subject to the approval of the Director.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Any sewer, other than a house connection sewer, which has been
accepted by the Community Development Director or by the Chief Engineer.
   REPAIRS. The reconstruction or renewal of any existing part of a structure
or of its fixtures or appurtenances.
   SEWER SYSTEM. The network of pipes, manholes, pumps, wells and siphons owned
or operated by the city.
('65 Code, § 6-8.101) (Ord. 410, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-
13)
§ 51.02 CONNECTION WITH PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED; CERTAIN CESSPOOLS EXCEPTED.
   All plumbing affecting the sanitary condition of any building or other
structure located within the boundaries of any lot in the city shall be
connected with, and drained into, a public sewer, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, construct or maintain any cesspool in the city; provided,
however, on premises where a cesspool is being maintained, the owner or
occupant thereof shall not be required to connect with the public sewer so long
as the cesspool is sufficient and adequate to serve the premises.
('65 Code, § 6-8.102) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.03 DEPOSITS OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES AND SOLIDS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw or deposit, or
cause or permit to be placed, thrown or deposited, in any public or house
connection sewer any dead animal, offal or garbage, or to place, throw, deposit
or discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, thrown, deposited or discharged,
in any such sewer any fish, fruit or vegetable waste, or other solid matters,
or materials or obstructions of any kind whatever of such nature as shall clog,
obstruct or fill such sewer, or which shall interfere with or prevent the
effective use or operation thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to be deposited
or discharged into any such sewer any water, sewage or liquid waste of any kind
containing chemicals, greases, oil, tar or other matters in solution, which
may, by reason of precipitation, clog, obstruct or fill the same, or which may
in any way interfere with or prevent the effective use thereof, or which may
necessitate or require the frequent repair, cleaning or flushing of such sewer
to render the same operative.
('65 Code, § 6-8.121) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.04 DILUTION AND NEUTRALIZATION OF ACIDS AND CORROSIVE LIQUIDS.
   In no case shall acids or corrosive liquids liable to destroy or injure a
public or house connection sewer be discharged into the sewer without being
fully diluted and neutralized by passing through a properly constructed
dilution and neutralizing sink or tank. The sink or tank shall be automatically
provided with a sufficient intake of water or neutralizing medium so as to make
its contents noninjurious before being discharged.
('65 Code, § 6-8.122) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.05 DRAINING STORMWATER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any roof conductor, yard
drain or other conduit used for carrying off rain or surface water with any
sanitary sewer of the city or with any house connection sewer leading thereto.
('65 Code, § 6-8.123) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.06 DRAINING SWIMMING POOLS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any swimming pool or tank to
any public sewer of the city or house connection sewer leading thereto except
by special permit from the Community Development Director.
('65 Code, § 6-8.124) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.07 AUTOMOBILE WASH RACKS; SAND TRAPS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Trap required. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating
a private or public automobile or carriage wash rack to permit any water or
effluent therefrom to flow into any public or house connection sewer unless
such structure shall be trapped by a sand trap constructed according to
approved building and engineering standards.
   (B)   Inspections; cleaning. Such sand traps shall be inspected daily when
in use and shall be cleaned as often as necessary for their efficient
operation.
('65 Code, § 6-8.125) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.08 CELLAR DRAINS AND SHOWERS; SAND TRAPS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any cellar drain or shower in
basements or in yards directly with the soil or waste pipe, but such cellar
drain or shower shall be trapped by a sand trap constructed according to
approved building and engineering standards.
('65 Code, § 6-8.126) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.09 RESTAURANTS AND AUTOMOBILE WASH RACKS; GREASE TRAPS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating an establishment serving
100 or more meals per day, or for any person owning or operating a private or
public automobile or carriage wash rack to permit the wastes from the kitchen
sinks or wash racks to flow directly into any public sewer of the city or house
connection sewer leading thereto without first passing the same through grease
traps approved by the Community Development Director.
   (B)   Grease traps with a guaranteed minimum capacity of 20 pounds of pure
grease shall be installed with each kitchen sink outlet wasting into any public
sewer for establishments serving 100 to 300 meals per day. Grease traps with a
guaranteed minimum capacity of 60 pounds of pure grease shall be installed for
any establishment where more than 300 meals are served per day and for the
operation of any private or public wash rack as referred to in this section.
('65 Code, § 6-8.127) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.10 DISCHARGES FROM SAFE WASTE PIPING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any safe waste pipe from any
establishment directly to any public sewer of the city or to any house
connection sewer leading thereto. Such safe waste pipe shall discharge into a
water-supplied sink or outside the building.
('65 Code, § 6-8.128) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.11 EXHAUST STEAM AND BLOWOFFS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, or permit the exhaust
from any engine or the blowoff from any boiler to be connected directly to any
public sewer of the city or to any house connection sewer leading thereto. Such
exhaust or blowoff shall first connect with a watertight sump which may in turn
be connected to the public sewer.
('65 Code, § 6-8.129) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.12 CONSTRUCTION WORK; COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS.
   All material used for the work required by the provisions of this chapter
shall be equal in quality to, and the manner of construction shall meet, all
the requirements prescribed by the specifications for public sewers in the city
which may be adopted from time to time as the Standard Specifications for the
Construction of Sanitary Sewers and Appurtenances thereto by the Council. All
such work shall be constructed or installed in accordance therewith before a
certificate of final inspection shall be granted by the Community Development
Director.
('65 Code, § 6-8.130) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.13 ALTERATION WORK; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   Upon the renewal or alteration of any public or house connection sewer, or
upon the making of any repairs or additions thereto, if any material is placed
in the sewer, either in the original or in the altered, repaired, or added part
thereof, every such new part shall be properly connected with and attached to
the original part of the sewer, and, if any materials are to be reset either in
the old or new part of the public or house connection sewer, both the original
and the new additional parts, and any altered parts whatever, shall be made to
conform in all respects to the rules and regulations prescribed in this
chapter.
('65 Code, § 6-8.131) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.14 INSPECTIONS.
   All work done pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
inspection. Notice in writing to the Community Development Director shall be
given by the person doing such work, or causing the same to be done,
immediately after the work is ready for inspection. Up to the time of the
inspection, all work shall be uncovered and convenient for the inspector's
examination, and every facility shall be given the inspector to make a thorough
examination. If any pipes are enclosed or covered in any way whatsoever, so as
to tend to obstruct a thorough inspection of the drainage system, such
obstruction shall be removed upon notice so to do from the Community
Development Director before an inspector shall be required to inspect the work.
When, upon examination by the inspector, it appears that any such work is
defective, either in its construction or material, the same shall be removed or
repaired to conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 6-8.132) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.15 CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION.
   When it shall appear to the satisfaction of the Community Development
Director that any work required by the provisions of this chapter has been
constructed according to, and meets the requirements of, all the provisions of
this chapter, and all fees for the inspection thereof have been paid, the
Community Development Director shall cause to be issued to the person
constructing such work a certificate of final inspection. The certificate shall
recite that such work as is covered by the permit has been constructed
according to the laws of the city and that such work is in a sanitary
condition. The Community Development Director shall not issue the certificate
of inspection unless the requirements of this chapter have been adhered to.
('65 Code, § 6-8.133) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
§ 51.16 DAMAGES; REMOVAL, OPENING AND ENTERING FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed, or
injure, or cause to be injured, any portion of any public sewer, flush tank,
flushing manhole or manhole, or to open or enter, or cause to be opened or
entered, any public sewer, flush tank, flushing manhole or manhole, or to use,
or cause to be used, or to take, or cause to be taken, any water from any
flushing apparatus for any use whatever without first obtaining a permit from
the Community Development Director to do so.
('65 Code, § 6-8.134) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CONNECTIONS
§ 51.25 DEDICATION OF PROPERTY A PREREQUISITE FOR CONNECTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect, or cause to be connected,
any sewer which has been, or may hereafter be, constructed in any street,
alley, right-of-way, or other public place prior to the dedication and
acceptance of such street, alley, right-of-way, or other public place by the
Council, on behalf of the public, with any public sewer of the city unless such
sewer first mentioned shall have been laid under the supervision and to the
satisfaction of the Community Development Director or the Chief Engineer and in
accordance with the standard specifications and plans and profiles approved by
the Community Development Director or the Chief Engineer.
('65 Code, § 6-8.117) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.26 LOCATION OF CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No connection from any building or structure shall be made to any
public sewer, which connection, or any portion thereof, shall be in, under, or
upon any lot other than the lot on which such building or structure is located.
   (B)   All buildings constituting a house-court may be connected to the
public sewer by means of one private sewer located upon the lot or parcel of
land upon which such house-court is situated.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)    HABITATION. A room or combination of rooms used, or designed to be
used, for the occupancy of human beings.
      (2)    STRUCTURE. This term shall include the group of buildings of a
house-court, which is hereby defined to be a parcel or area of land upon which
are grouped three or more habitations used, or designed to be used, for
occupancy by families, and upon which parcel or area the vacant or unoccupied
portion thereof surrounding or abutting upon such habitations is used, or
intended to be used, in common by the inhabitants thereof.
('65 Code, § 6-8.118) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.27 MATERIALS, TESTING AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or maintain, or cause to
be made or maintained, any connection with any public sewer of the city until a
permit therefor shall have been obtained from the Community Development
Director, or to make, or cause to be made, any such connections pursuant to any
such permit at any place other than that designated therein.
   (B)   Every connection made with any public sewer of the city shall be made
in the following manner and with such materials as are designated:
      (1)   Pipe. All pipe shall be first-class, vitrified, salt glazed, socket
pipe or standard cast iron soil pipe not less than six inches in internal
diameter, for that portion extending from the street sewer to the property
line, and not less than four inches in internal diameter for that portion
extending from the property line to the house or building for house connection
sewers serving 20 persons or less, and not less than six inches in internal
diameter for all portions of house connection sewers serving more than 20
persons.
      (2)   Clean outs. A clean out shall be placed in every house connection
sewer at the junction with the soil pipe at the building and at all changes in
alignment and grade. The clean out shall be made by inserting a Y branch in the
line with a cap of the same material as the house connection sewer pipe tightly
cemented in the bell end of the portion of the Y branch which will be used to
gain access to the connection.
      (3)   Grades; joints.
         (a)   All vitrified clay pipe shall be laid upgrade on an unyielding
foundation and with the socket ends of the pipe upgrade. A narrow gasket of
oakum, hemp, or equivalent shall be caulked into each joint, after which the
compound shall be introduced therein. The entire annular space in all pipe
joints between the exterior of the spigot and the interior of the socket shall
be completely and carefully filled with hot poured C.P.I. (sulphur silica)
compound or approved equal, and the connection shall be watertight when
completed.
         (b)   When the condition of the trench is such that it is impossible
to secure a watertight mortar joint, a sewer joint compound which shall meet
the requirements of the standard specifications for public sewers shall be
used.
         (c)   All joints of standard cast iron soil pipe shall be made with
pig lead and oakum and shall be thoroughly caulked.
         (d)   The grade shall be straight from the property line to the public
sewer and shall have a fall of not less than one foot in 50 feet toward the
public sewer, except where otherwise permitted by a special permit in writing
from the Community Development Director.
         (e)   Vitrified clay piping shall not be placed closer than 12 inches
to the exterior wall of any building or closer than 12 inches to the surface of
the ground at any point of its course.
      (4)   Depth. Where laid within the limits of a public street, no
connection shall be laid less than three feet below the established grade of
the same or below the surface, where no grade is established, except by a
special permit in writing from the Community Development Director.
      (5)   Pressure. Every house connection sewer outside of any building
shall be constructed in such a manner as to withstand a pressure of not less
than four pounds per square inch without leaking at any point when filled with
water.
      (6)   Testing.
         (a)   Every such house connection sewer shall be tested, before being
approved, in that portion extending from the property line to the upper
terminus thereof by a standing test which shall consist of filling the line
with water and carrying the level of the column of such water to a height
sufficient to develop a pressure of four pounds per square inch at the lower
terminus thereof, and in no event to a height of less than four inches above
the top of the upper terminal end of such sewer. In lieu of such standing test,
a pump test may be made which shall consist of filling the line with water,
capping or sealing each upper terminus thereof, and applying an air pump at the
property line in such a manner as to furnish an aggregate pressure of four
pounds per square inch in such sewer at such lower terminus.
         (b)   Where, by reason of excessive fall in any such house connection
sewer, the static pressure in a standing test will exceed four pounds per
square inch, such line shall be tested in sections of such length that no such
section, nor any portion thereof, will be subjected to a pressure greater than
four pounds per square inch.
         (c)   In the event any joints of any house connection sewer are
cemented with portland cement mortar, no test shall be made thereof until the
expiration of not less than 24 hours after such cement joints are made.
      (7)   Approval.
         (a)   No such house connection sewer shall be approved if any portion
thereof, including any fittings, material, work, or construction, fails to
withstand the test provided for in this subsection without leaking at any
point.
         (b)   No sewer connection shall be covered or concealed in any way
until it has been inspected and approved by the Community Development Director.
('65 Code, § 6-8.119) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.28 TAPPING.
   Whenever it becomes necessary to connect a house connection sewer to a
public sewer at a point where no special Y or T branch has been installed in
the public sewer, the connection shall be made in the presence of an inspector
and in the following manner:
   (A)   In all public sewers 12 inches or less in internal diameter and ten
feet or less in depth, the connection shall be made by removing a section of
the existing sanitary sewer and inserting a Y branch.
   (B)   In public sewers from eight inches to 12 inches, inclusive, in
internal diameter and more than ten feet in depth, it shall be permissible to
cut the existing pipe and insert a standard saddle. The saddle shall be fitted
snugly against the exterior wall of the public sewer pipe and fastened in place
by heavy galvanized asphalt paint coated wire, which shall be bound around the
main line pipe. A foundation of cement concrete shall then be placed under and
around the saddle as may be directed by the inspector.
('65 Code, § 6-8.120) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
PERMITS
§ 51.40 PUBLIC WORKS PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   Connections outside the city. Charges shall be established by Council
resolution for connecting to the sewer system outside the corporate limits of
the city.
   (B)   Patching and repairing street improvements. Charges shall be
established by Council resolution and collected by the Community Development
Director for the patching or replacement of street improvements torn up or
damaged by any person.
   (C)   Applicability of provisions. The provisions of this section shall be
applicable to any person damaging or making excavations in the public streets
of the city for any purpose, including, but not limited to, sewer construction,
the installation of pipe lines, conduits, poles, or appurtenant facilities, or
connecting with any sewer system.
('65 Code, § 6-8.114) (Ord. 410, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 625, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 902, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - )
§ 51.41 EXPIRATION; RENEWAL.
   If the work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 60 days from
the date of its issuance, or if the work authorized by the permit and commenced
thereunder shall be suspended or abandoned for a period of 60 days, the permit
shall thenceforth be null and void, and, before such work can be recommenced, a
new permit shall be taken out, and the same fees fixed for the original permit
shall be paid therefor.
('65 Code, § 6-8.116) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
PIPE LAYERS
§ 51.55 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, or to engage in or carry on the
business of laying, sewers on private premises within the city unless such
person shall have first obtained a city business license.
('65 Code, § 6-8.103) (Ord. 410, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
DISCHARGES BY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 51.60 PREVENTION AND REDUCTION OF FATS, OILS, AND GREASE DISCHARGES BY FOOD
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   
51.61 - FOG discharge prohibition.
   
51.62 - Best management practices required.
   
51.63 - FOG pretreatment required.
   
51.64 - Required maintenance of pretreatment devices.
   
51.65 - Record maintenance required.
   
51.66 - Inspection and right of entry.
   
51.67 - Notice of noncompliance.
   
51.68 - Recovery of imposed fines or penalties.
(Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 51.61 FOG DISCHARGE PROHIBITION.
   It is unlawful for any food service establishment to discharge FOG into the
sanitary sewer or allow, cause, or contribute to, the discharge of FOG into the
sanitary sewer in any manner that is in violation of any condition set forth in
this subchapter.
(Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 51.62 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every food service establishment shall develop and implement a program
for the control of FOG in its operation in order to minimize the discharge of
FOG to the sanitary sewer. Such program must include the implementation of best
management practices. Best management practices shall include, at a minimum,
installation of drain screens, segregation and collection of waste cooking
grease, proper disposal of food waste into trash receptacles and not in sinks,
maintenance of kitchen exhaust filters, employee training program on proper
disposal of food waste and grease, and kitchen signage.
   (B)   All food service establishments shall provide employee training within
180 days of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this subchapter, to
all new employees within ten days of their employment, and to all employees
twice each calendar year, on the best management practices including but not
limited to the following subjects:
      (1)   How to “dry wipe” pots, pans, dishware, and work area before
washing to remove grease.
      (2)   How to properly dispose of food waste and solids in enclosed
plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking
and odors.
      (3)   The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer
baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped.
      (4)   How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment
into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling.
   (C)   Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained
indicating each employee’s attendance and understanding of the practices
reviewed. Training records shall be available for review upon request by the
city.
   (D)   A written copy of the best management practices program must be
submitted to the Director. If, in the opinion of the Director, the food service
establishment continues to adversely impact the sewer system, the Director may
require additional FOG pretreatment.
(Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 51.63 FOG PRETREATMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Application of requirements. The requirements of this section shall
apply to:
      (1)   All new food service establishments including, but not limited to,
restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools,
grocery stores, caterers, manufacturing plants and any other dischargers who
introduce FOG into the sanitary sewer;
      (2)   Any existing food service establishment upon the sale or transfer
of operational control thereof;
      (3)   Any existing food service establishment upon renovation of the
plumbing system or addition of any equipment that may increase discharge of FOG
to the sewer system, regardless of valuation; or any material renovation of the
establishment with a building permit valuation of $50,000 or more; and
      (4)   Any existing food service establishment, which has caused or
contributed to a grease-related blockage in the sanitary sewer, or which, based
on inspection or sampling, has been determined by the Director to be
discharging FOG in significant quantities sufficient to adversely impact the
sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Grease interceptor requirement. All food service establishments
specified in division (A) of this section shall install, operate and maintain
an approved type, adequately sized and readily accessible grease interceptor
necessary to maintain compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Grease
interceptor sizing and installation shall meet the minimum standards of the
most recent edition of the California Plumbing Code. Grease interceptors shall
have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention
and shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the San Gabriel
Municipal Code, subject to the review and approval of the Director and the
Building Official.
   (C)   Variance of grease interceptor requirement. A food service
establishment may obtain a variance from the grease interceptor requirement, if
a request is submitted in writing to the Director, to allow the installation
and maintenance of an alternative pretreatment device in lieu of a grease
interceptor provided that such alternative pretreatment device is equally as
effective in controlling the FOG discharge. Alternative pretreatment devices,
including, but not limited to, grease traps and other separation and holding
devices, must be appropriately sized and approved by the Director and the
Building Official. The food service establishment must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Director that the grease interceptor installation and
operation is physically not feasible or not warranted to fulfill discharge
requirements at the site and that the alternative pretreatment device is
equivalent to a grease interceptor in controlling the food service
establishment’s FOG discharge.
   (D)   Conditional waiver of interceptor requirement. An existing food
service establishment may obtain a conditional waiver from installing a grease
interceptor if the food service establishment can demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Director that it has a negligible FOG discharge and an
insignificant impact on the sewer system. Any waiver granted by the Director
shall be voided by the food service establishment making changes in its
operations that significantly affect FOG discharge, including, but not limited
to, changes in food preparation activities, renovations of the plumbing system,
and increased discharges to the sewer system. The waiver shall remain valid
until the expiration date specified in the waiver, provided that the food
service establishment remains in compliance with the waiver’s terms and
conditions. A waiver may be revoked at any time when any of the terms and
conditions for its issuance is not satisfied or if the justification for the
waiver no longer exists.
   (E)   Sanitary fixtures. Toilets, urinals, and other similar sanitary
fixtures shall not discharge through the grease interceptor unless specifically
approved, in writing, by the Director.
(Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 51.64 REQUIRED MAINTENANCE OF PRETREATMENT DEVICES.
   (A)   All pretreatment devices shall be maintained in efficient operating
condition at all times by periodic removal of the full contents of such
devices, which includes wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge
and solids. The maintenance frequency shall be adequate to comply with the
design capacity of the pretreatment device. In maintaining the pretreatment
device, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal, by
appropriate means, of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates, amounts and means of disposal, all of which is subject to review by the
Director.
   (B)   Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a
frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed
25% of the total hydraulic capacity of the grease interceptor calculated by
volume or depth, whichever is more stringent. At the minimum, all grease
interceptors shall be maintained not less than once every six months. Grease
interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned quarterly when the
maintenance frequency has not been established. The Director may change the
maintenance frequency at any time to reflect changes in actual operating
conditions in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. If the grease
interceptor, at any time, contains FOG and solids accumulation that does not
meet the requirements of this chapter, the food service establishment shall be
required to have the grease interceptor serviced immediately such that all
fats, oils, grease, sludge, and other materials are completely removed from the
grease interceptor.
   (C)   Additives that reduce FOG, such as bacteria, may be used in addition
to the regular maintenance program for grease interceptors, but shall not
impinge on grease interceptor sizing or maintenance frequency. The use of
additives is subject to approval by the Director. The introduction of
emulsifying agents, such as chemicals or solvents, either directly or
indirectly into the grease interceptor, other than what is considered typical
business operational practices such as dishwashing or sanitation, is strictly
prohibited.
   (D)   Wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge solids, and
other waste materials removed from the grease interceptor shall be properly
disposed off site by waste haulers in accordance with federal, state and local
laws. All pumping of grease pretreatment facilities and tallow bin hauling by
private contractors must be tracked by a manifest to confirm the pumping and
hauling of waste. Food service establishments are required to obtain and
maintain a copy of the waste hauler’s documentation which must include:
      (1)   The name and address of the hauling company;
      (2)   The name and signature of operator performing the pump out;
      (3)   Documentation of full pump out with volume of water and FOG removed
(e.g., 1,500 gallons);
      (4)   Documentation of the level of floating FOG and settable solids;
      (5)   Documentation of any repairs to the grease interceptor; and
      (6)   Identification of the facility where the waste hauler is planning
to dispose of the waste.
(Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 51.65 RECORD MAINTENANCE REQUIRED.
   Every food service establishment shall maintain a compliance record of all
manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal
from pretreatment devices, hauling and disposal of waste, and cleaning of
pretreatment facilities, such as grease traps, by facility employees. The
compliance record must log the date and time of cleaning, the name of the
employee who performed the cleaning, and the volume removed. All compliance
records must be retained on site by the food service establishment for a period
of not less than three years. The food service establishment shall, upon
request, make the compliance record available to the Director.
(Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 51.66 INSPECTION AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   When required for the purposes of this chapter, the food service
establishment shall provide, operate and maintain safe and accessible
monitoring facilities (such as a suitable sampling port or manhole) at all
times to allow observation, inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the
building sewer or internal drainage systems. There shall be ample room in or
near such monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples for analysis.
   (B)   Persons authorized by the Director may inspect and sample the
wastewater discharges of any food service establishment to ascertain whether
the conditions of this chapter are being met and the discharger is complying
with all requirements. Such authorized persons shall have access to any food
service establishment premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of
inspecting the food service establishment’s grease interceptor or pretreatment
devices, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the
cleaning and maintenance of pretreatment devices, and allow observation,
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal
drainage systems, in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 51.67 NOTICE OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   In the event that the Director determines that a food service
establishment is not in compliance with any condition of this chapter, or the
terms, conditions and limitations of any waiver or agreement between the city
and the food service establishment with respect to the discharge of FOG into
the sanitary sewer, the Director may issue a notice of noncompliance, whereby
the food service establishment shall comply with all directives, conditions and
requirements therein within the time prescribed by the notice. Such notice may
contain terms and conditions including, but not limited to, installation of
pretreatment devices and grease interceptors, payment of noncompliance charges,
submittal of drawings or technical reports, limits on rate and time of
discharge, or any other provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Any food service establishment determined to be in noncompliance with
the terms and conditions of this chapter, or the terms and conditions of any
waiver or agreement between the city and the food service establishment, may be
required to pay a noncompliance charge. The noncompliance charge shall be
determined by the Director on a case-by-case basis to compensate the city for
estimated and actual costs of additional inspection and follow-up, sampling,
monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment, disposal, administrative processing
incurred, and any fines imposed on the city by other regulatory agencies as a
result of such noncompliance.
(Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 51.68 RECOVERY OF IMPOSED FINES OR PENALTIES.
   In the event that the city is subject to the payment of fines or penalties
pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement
agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or its permits, and said
violation can be established by the city, as having been caused by the
discharge of any food service establishment which is in violation of any
provision of this chapter, the city shall then be entitled to recover from the
food service establishment all costs and expenses, including, but not limited
to, the full amount of said fines or penalties to which it has been subjected.
(Ord. 605-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
CHAPTER 52: WATER, GAS AND OTHER UTILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
Connections
   
52.10   Connections required prior to street improvements
   
52.11   Notice that compliance is required
   
52.12   Publication of notice; service to property owner and utilities
   
52.13   Improvements not ordered
   
52.14   Protests; filing and hearing, decision
   
52.15   Time of commencement by owner
   
52.16   Failure of owner to perform work
   
52.17   Requirements
   
52.18   Liens
   
52.19   Expenses; payment
   
52.20   Validity of proceedings
   
52.21   Deposits and fees required
Improvements
   
52.35   Permit required; maps and plats
   
52.36   Bond and deposits required
   
52.37   Supervision of work; conformance with specifications
   
52.38   Notice of inspection readiness
   
52.39   Return of deposits; deductions
   
52.40   Water mains and pipelines
Underground Utilities
   
52.50   Definitions
   
52.51   Public hearing and report
   
52.52   Authority of Council to designate Underground Utility Districts
   
52.53   Unlawful acts
   
52.54   Exception; emergency or unusual circumstances
   
52.55   Additional exceptions
   
52.56   Notice to property owners and utility companies
   
52.57   Responsibility of utility companies
   
52.58   Responsibility of property owners and occupants
   
52.59   Responsibility of city
   
52.60   Extension of time
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONNECT. To install lateral service connections between a main in a street
and the property line of real property abutting thereon in accordance with the
specifications contained in this chapter.
   IMPROVEMENT. The grading, regrading, paving, repaving, macadamizing,
remacadamizing, oiling or re-oiling of any street.
   LOT. Any parcel of continuous real property, fronting upon a street to be
improved, owned by any person, firm, or corporation, irrespective of
subdivision maps or records.
('65 Code, § 6-8.201) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
CONNECTIONS
§ 52.10 CONNECTIONS REQUIRED PRIOR TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   Whenever a contract is let for the construction of a public sewer in any
street, or whenever the Council adopts a resolution or ordinance of intention
to improve any street in which there is a public sewer, water main, or gas
main, or in which a water main or gas main is to be laid, the Council may, by
motion, direct the Community Development Director to immediately give notice to
all owners of real property fronting on the portions of such streets intended
to be improved to connect their premises with a lateral sewer connection, water
main, or gas main on such street, either before the improvement is made or as a
part thereof, where such premises are not so connected at the time of giving
the notice.
('65 Code, § 6-8.202) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.11 NOTICE THAT COMPLIANCE IS REQUIRED.
   The notice referred to in §
52.10 shall state the fact of the passage of the resolution or ordinance of
intention and shall state that unless such premises shall be connected with the
sewer, water main, or gas main in the manner provided in this chapter, the
Community Development Director will connect such premises at the expense of the
property owner as provided in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 6-8.203) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.12 PUBLICATION OF NOTICE; SERVICE TO PROPERTY OWNER AND UTILITIES.
   (A)   Service to property owner. The Community Development Director shall
cause such notice to be published in two successive issues in the newspaper
published and circulated in the city in which the official advertising of the
city is published and, where the premises abutting upon the streets affected
are occupied, shall serve, or cause to be served, upon the occupants thereof a
copy of the notice. Where such premises are not occupied, a copy of the notice
shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon each parcel of property fronting on
the streets affected. The service of the notice upon such occupants of the
property affected, and the posting thereon, shall be completed before the
expiration of the time of publication in the official newspaper. The affidavit
of publication in the official newspaper and the affidavit of the Director or
of the person posting and serving the notices shall be filed in the office of
the Community Development Director and shall be prima facie evidence of due and
proper publication and service of the notice. Personal service of the notice
upon the owner of any property affected shall dispense with the necessity of
further notices to him. ('65 Code, § 6-8.204)
   (B)   Service to utility. The Community Development Director, at the time of
serving the notices required, shall also cause to be served upon the person,
firm, or corporation maintaining the gas or water main in the street a notice
that all owners of property fronting on the street, or portion thereof,
proposed to be improved are required to connect their property with such gas or
water mains before the improvement is made. The notice shall be served by
delivering a copy of the same to the manager or any clerk employed in the
office of the utility, whether inside or outside the city. ('65 Code, § 6-
8.205)
(Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.13 IMPROVEMENTS NOT ORDERED.
   In the event the improvements specified in the resolution or ordinance of
intention are not ordered at the time of the service of the notice, the notice
shall be inoperative, but the provisions of this section shall not prevent the
Community Development Director from thereafter giving the notice at any time
subsequent to the adoption of the resolution or ordinance directing the
improvement.
('65 Code, § 6-8.206) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.14 PROTESTS; FILING AND HEARING, DECISION.
   (A)   Filing and hearing. Within ten days of the date of the last
publication of the notice, the owner of any real property affected thereby may
file with the City Clerk a written protest against being required to make the
connection required of him by such notice. At the regular meeting of the
Council next succeeding the date of the expiration of the time within which
such protests may be filed, or at any time to which the matter may be
continued, the Council shall hear the protests. ('65 Code, § 6-8.207)
   (B)   Decision. The Council, at the time of such hearing, or at any regular
meeting held thereafter to which such hearing is continued, may sustain or
overrule such protests, may order that connections be made at different
intervals than as specified in this chapter, may order that connections be made
of a different size than as specified in this chapter, and may fix times other
than those specified within which such connections shall be commenced and
completed by the owners of abutting property. The determination of the Council
shall be evidenced by motion if no protests are filed. The Council may, at the
first meeting after the expiration of the time within which protests may be
filed, or at a subsequent meeting to which the matter may be regularly
continued, make a determination regarding the matters set forth in this section
in the same manner and to the same effect as if made after protest. In either
case such determination shall be final and conclusive. A copy of the motion by
which the determination is evidenced shall be posted for two days in a
conspicuous place on or near the office of the City Clerk. The Council may
thereafter, by motion, extend the time for commencing and completing such
connections. ('65 Code, § 6-8.208)
(Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.15 TIME OF COMMENCEMENT BY OWNER.
   Within ten days after the expiration of the time for filing protests or, if
such time shall be extended by the Council, then within such time as may be
fixed by the Council, it shall be the duty of each owner of real property
fronting on a street affected by proceedings taken pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter to commence in good faith the work of making the connections
required and to diligently prosecute such work to completion.
('65 Code, § 6-8.209) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.16 FAILURE OF OWNER TO PERFORM WORK.
   At the expiration of ten days the Community Development Director shall make,
or cause to be made, the connections required to be made by the provisions of
this subchapter if the work has not been commenced and diligently prosecuted in
good faith by the owner within the time permitted by §
52.15 of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 6-8.210) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.17 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Gas.
      (1)   Lateral connections with gas mains shall be made to the property
line of the property connected. Each such lateral pipe shall be of such
capacity as to provide an ample supply of gas to the property connected.
      (2)   Lateral gas connections shall be installed from the gas main to
each lot. Where a lot has more than 50 feet of street frontage upon the street
to be improved, one lateral gas connection shall be installed for each 50 feet,
or fraction thereof, of street frontage; provided, however, the Council may,
upon its own motion, permit fewer connections than specified in this division
in the case of any lot which the Council may deem adequately provided with gas
laterals.
   (B)   Water.
      (1)   Lateral connections with water mains shall be made to the property
line of the property connected. Such connection pipes shall conform to the
requirements and specifications of the city and shall be of a size not less
than one inch in diameter unless otherwise ordered by the Council as provided
in §
52.14(B) of this chapter.
      (2)   Lateral water connections shall be installed from the water main to
each lot. Where a lot has more than 50 feet of street frontage upon the street
to be improved, one lateral water connection shall be installed for each 50
feet, or fraction thereof, of street frontage; provided, however, upon petition
of any property owner or upon its own motion, the Council may permit fewer
connections than specified in this division in the case of any lot which the
Council may deem adequately provided with water laterals.
('65 Code, § 6-8.211) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.18 LIENS.
   (A)   Records. The Community Development Director shall provide a suitable
record book entitled Liens for Lateral Service Connections. Such book shall
have appropriate headings wherein may be entered the name of each street in
which lateral connections shall be made pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter. Under such headings, columns shall be provided in which may be
entered the name of the owner of the property with which connections are made,
if known, a description of such property, the connections made, the date of
completion of the connections, the expenses incurred by the city in making each
such connection, the date of delinquency, the penalty for delinquency, the
total amount chargeable against the property at the date of sale, the date of
sale, the name of the purchaser, the date of redemption, by whom redeemed, the
amount paid to redeem, and the date of the deed to the city. When lateral
connections are made, the Community Development Director shall enter in such
book under the name of the street where such work was done, the name of each
owner of real property with which connections were made, if known, and, if not
known, the words “unknown owner,” a brief description of the property
connected, the connections made, the date of each such connection, and the
expenses incurred by the city in making or causing to be made each such
connection. No error in the name of the property owner, and no error in the
description of the property, shall affect the validity of the lien provided for
in this section provided the description is such that the property referred to
may be identified therefrom. ('65 Code, § 6-8.212)
   (B)   Publication. When the entries in such book have been made by the
Community Development Director, he shall cause to be published notice thereof
for three successive issues in the newspaper published and circulated in the
city in which the official advertising of the city is published. ('65 Code, §
6-8.213)
   (C)   Protests. Any property owner affected by proceedings taken pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter and feeling aggrieved by any act or
determination of the Community Development Director or the Council in relation
thereto, or who may claim that the connections, or any thereof, have not been
made in a safe and workmanlike manner, or having any objection to the
correctness or legality of the entries in the record book of the Community
Development Director may, within 30 days of the date of the first publication
of the notice provided for in division (B) of this section, file with the City
Clerk an objection in writing which shall briefly specify the ground of his
objection or protest. All such objections and protests shall be heard at the
regular meeting of the Council next succeeding the expiration of the time for
filing the same, or the Council may at such meeting fix a time and place
therefor. Upon such objection or protest, the Council may remedy or correct any
error or informality in the proceedings, revise and correct any of the acts or
determinations of the Community Development Director relative to such work,
confirm, amend, set aside, alter, modify, or correct the charges entered in the
book in such manner as to it shall seem just, require such work to be completed
according to the directions of the Council, and may instruct and direct the
Community Development Director to correct the entries in the book to conform to
the decision of the Council in relation thereto. The decisions and
determinations of the Council in such matters shall be final and conclusive
upon all persons entitled to object or protest pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. ('65 Code, § 6-8.214)
   (D)   Foreclosure. Subject to the powers of the Council to correct and
modify, as provided in division (C) of this section, the amount of the charges
entered against each parcel of property shall become a lien against such
property in such amount as of the date of entry in the book entitled Liens for
Lateral Service Connections and shall thereupon become due and payable. No such
lien shall be extinguished until the amount thereof is paid in full or until a
valid deed of the property subject thereto is given by the Community
Development Director. Commencing the first week of January and July of each
year, the Community Development Director shall cause to be published for five
successive issues in the newspaper published and circulated in the city in
which the official advertising of the city is published a list of all liens
remaining due and unpaid on the first day of the month in which such
publication is commenced. The list shall contain the name of each owner of each
parcel of property upon which there is due an assessment or, if the name of
such owner does not appear in the book, the fact that the lien is entered
against an unknown owner, a description of the property, the total amount
necessary to satisfy the lien if paid in full before noon on the first Monday
of the month next succeeding the month in which the list is published, that 10%
of the amount of each such lien shall be added thereto for delinquency, and
that upon the first Tuesday of the month next succeeding the month in which the
lien is published, each parcel of property against which a lien remains unpaid
will, at 10:00 a.m. at the office of the Community Development Director in the
city hall, by operation of law and the declarations of the Community
Development Director, be sold to the city for the amount of such lien and
delinquency penalty. The Community Development Director shall enter in the
record book the date of each of such sales, the amount for which sold, and that
the same was sold to the city. ('65 Code, § 6-8.215)
   (E)   Redemption of property. A redemption of any parcel of property sold
for delinquent assessment pursuant to the proceedings set forth in this chapter
may be made at any time within one year from the date of sale by paying to the
Community Development Director the amount for which the property is sold, and,
in addition thereto, 10% thereof, if paid within three months from the date of
sale; 20% percent if paid within six months; 30% if paid within nine months;
and 40% if paid within 12 months. When redemption is made, the Community
Development Director shall note that fact in the book entitled Liens for
Lateral Service Connections in an appropriate column, entering thereon the date
of redemption, the person by whom redeemed, and the amount paid. At the
expiration of 12 months from the date of sale, the Community Development
Director shall execute to the city a deed of the property sold, the name of the
owner thereof as it appears on such book, a statement that such property was
sold for a delinquent lien for making lateral connections, the amount for which
the property was sold, and the date of the sale. The deed of the Community
Development Director shall convey absolute title to the property therein
described and be prima facie evidence of all matters therein recited and the
regularity of all proceedings prior to the execution thereof. ('65 Code, § 6-
8.216)
(Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.19 EXPENSES; PAYMENT.
   All expenses incurred by the Community Development Director in making
lateral connections pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be paid
upon demands approved, audited and allowed as other demands against the city.
('65 Code, § 6-8.217) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.20 VALIDITY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that
its purposes may be affected. No error or informality in any act or proceeding
taken which does not substantially affect the rights of property owners shall
invalidate the proceedings taken or liens established in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Whenever such acts or proceedings are required to
be performed or done by the Community Development Director or by the Council,
such provisions respecting time shall be construed to be directory and not
mandatory.
('65 Code, § 6-8.218) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.21 DEPOSITS AND FEES REQUIRED.
   The provisions of this code relating to deposits for excavations in streets
and other public places in the city shall apply with respect to all excavations
made by property owners pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. In the
event the property owners do not make the connections required and the
Community Development Director shall make the same, there shall be included in
the expense of making each such connection an amount, determined by Council
resolution, which shall be in lieu of the deposits and charges provided to be
made for excavations. Nothing contained in this chapter shall affect the
provisions of this code respecting the inspection of sewer and other
connections and the payment of fees therefor. The fees provided by this code
shall be paid as in other cases and shall be considered when connections are
made by the city as a part of the expense of making such connections.
('65 Code, § 6-8.219) (Ord. 201, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Excavations, see §§ 100.045 through 100.072
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 52.35 PERMIT REQUIRED; MAPS AND PLATS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, as principal, agent, or employee, to
install or make any improvement set forth in this section in any street or
highway of the city, or upon any tract of land or portion thereof, in the city,
which street, highway, or tract of land is proposed to be dedicated as a street
or highway, unless permission is first secured from the Community Development
Director therefor and unless the deposit provided for is made. Such
improvements shall include public utilities, consisting of water and gas mains
and electric lines, and the necessary equipment to carry the same, and the
carrying and installing of water and gas services inside curbs to each lot or
parcel of land fronting on any and all such streets or highways. All maps or
plats of any proposed subdivision submitted by any person to the proper city
official for approval shall set forth and indicate the location of such
utilities in the proposed streets or highways to be dedicated by the map or
plat, as well as the location of the services to the inside of curbs of each
lot or parcel of land fronting on any such street or highway.
('65 Code, § 6-8.220) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.36 BOND AND DEPOSITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Bonds. Before any such permission shall be issued, there shall be
deposited with the Community Development Director for such improvements a bond
or undertaking in favor of the city, to be approved by the Community
Development Director, in the amount of 75% of the total cost of such proposed
improvements, as a guarantee that the improvements will be constructed in the
time and manner provided by law.
   (B)   Deposits.
      (1)   Before any such permission shall be issued, there shall be
deposited with the Community Development Director such sum of money as may be
estimated by him to be necessary to cover the costs of inspection and
supervision by the Department of Public Works for such improvements. Should the
amount required to be deposited prove to be insufficient to pay the costs and
charges of supervision and inspection, all work under the permit shall cease
until there has been deposited with the Community Development Director a
sufficient amount of money as estimated by him, to cover the necessary
remaining inspection and supervision charges.
      (2)   In addition, should it become necessary to procure the services of
the City Engineer to establish, fix, or correct any grades or levels in
connection therewith, the person making the improvement shall deposit with the
Community Development Director the costs and charges of the City Engineer for
such work so done by him.
('65 Code, § 6-8.221) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.37 SUPERVISION OF WORK; CONFORMANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS.
   Such improvements shall be made under the direction and to the satisfaction
of the Community Development Director and in accordance with the specifications
currently in effect. All such work shall conform to the lines and levels which
may, from time to time, be given by the City Engineer.
('65 Code, § 6-8.222) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.38 NOTICE OF INSPECTION READINESS.
   It shall be the duty of any person making such improvements to notify the
Community Development Director prior to the commencement thereof so that the
Community Development Director may assign an inspector to inspect the work.
('65 Code, § 6-8.223) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.39 RETURN OF DEPOSITS; DEDUCTIONS.
   Upon the acceptance of the work by the Community Development Director, he
shall deduct from the deposits made the costs to the city of the inspections
and supervision in connection with such improvements, and the remainder of such
deposits, if there be any, shall be returned to the person making the same upon
demand.
('65 Code, § 6-8.224) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 52.40 WATER MAINS AND PIPELINES.
   No person shall lay or install any water main pipeline or water main in or
upon any public street, road, lane, alley or highway in the city unless the
pipeline or water main shall be of a type of material approved by the Community
Development Director. The Community Development Director shall not approve the
laying or installing of any such water main pipeline or water main unless it is
of a type of material generally accepted for water main construction and for
the manufacture of which standards have been set by the American Water Works
Association. Any water main pipelines or water mains in or upon any public
street, road, lane, alley or highway in the city, which pipelines or water
mains shall be renewed or replaced, shall be renewed or replaced with the pipe
required by the provisions of this section.
('65 Code, § 6-8.225) (Ord. 444, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 901, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
§ 52.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The Public Utilities Commission of the state.
   PERSON. Means and includes individuals, firms, corporations and
partnerships, and their agents and employees.
   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES, and ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES. Poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a District
and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or
associated service.
   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT. That area in the city within which poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area
is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
52.52 of this subchapter.
   UTILITY. All persons or entities supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
('65 Code, § 6-8.301) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Utility service connection, see § 150.012
§ 52.51 PUBLIC HEARING AND REPORT.
   (A)   Public hearing by Council. The Council may from time to time call
public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or
welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation
of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners,
as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned by mail
of the time and place of the hearings at least 10 days prior to the date
thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued
from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given
an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and
conclusive.
   (B)   Report by Community Development Director. Prior to holding the public
hearing, the Community Development Director shall consult all affected
utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing,
among other information, the extent of the utilities' participation and
estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. The
report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete the
underground installation and removal of overhead facilities.
('65 Code, § 6-8.302) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
§ 52.52 AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL TO DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS.
   If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such
underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by
resolution, declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and
order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include
a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time
within which the removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and
within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground
service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for the removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and
equipment necessary for the removal and for the installation of the underground
facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
('65 Code, § 6-8.303) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
§ 52.53 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in §
52.52 of this subchapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to
erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the district after the
date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such
resolution, except such overhead facilities as may be required to furnish
service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by the
owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for the owner or occupant
to continue to receive utility service as provided in §
52.58 of this subchapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove such
facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided
in this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 6-8.304) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.54 EXCEPTION; EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this subchapter, overhead facilities may
be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed 30 days without
authority of the Council in order to provide emergency service. The Community
Development Director may grant special permission on such terms as he may deem
appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to
any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures.
('65 Code, § 6-8.305) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
§ 52.55 ADDITIONAL EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to the
provisions of §
52.52, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, shall not apply to the
following types of facilities:
   (A)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision
and to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director;
   (B)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   (C)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   (D)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;
   (E)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street;
   (F)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a
utility for furnishing communication services;
   (G)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts; and
   (H)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.
('65 Code, § 6-8.306) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
§ 52.56 NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.
   (A)   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted
pursuant to the provisions of §
52.52 of this subchapter, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities
and all persons owning real property within the district, and all persons
occupying real property within such district, created by such resolution, of
the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify the affected property
owners of the necessity that if they or any person occupying such property
desires to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated
service, they or the occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on
their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying
utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the
Commission.
   (B)   Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
52.52 of this subchapter, together with a copy of the provisions of this
subchapter, to affected property owners as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and to the affected utilities.
('65 Code, § 6-8.307) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
§ 52.57 RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES.
   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
52.52 of this subchapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of
the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by
it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the
Commission.
('65 Code, § 6-8.308) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.58 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a District shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in §
52.52 of this subchapter and the termination facility on or within such
building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any
person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to the
provisions of §
52.52 of this subchapter, the Community Development Director shall give notice
in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in
writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to
provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of
such notice.
   (B)   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given
either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of
such persons, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a
sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of
such premises at such premises, and the notice shall be addressed to the owner
thereof as the owner's name appears, and shall be addressed to the owner's last
known address as the same appears, on the last equalized assessment roll and,
when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of San Gabriel. If notice is
given by mail, the notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person
to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice
is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the
Community Development Director shall, within 48 hours after the mailing
thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by
ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises.
   (C)   The notice given by the Community Development Director to provide the
required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is
required to be done and shall state that if such work is not completed within
30 days after receipt of such notice, the Community Development Director will
provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and
expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a
lien upon the property.
   (D)   If, upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the required underground
facilities have not been provided, the Community Development Director shall
forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are
unoccupied and no electric or communication services are being furnished
thereto, the Community Development Director may, in lieu of providing the
required underground facilities, authorize the disconnection and removal of any
and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility
service to such property. Upon completion of the work by the Community
Development Director, he shall file a written report with the Council setting
forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and
the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against
which such cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and
place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of the work upon
such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.
   (E)   The Community Development Director shall forthwith, upon the time for
hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person
in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner
thereof, in the manner provided in this section for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place the Council
will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such
notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.
   (F)   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council
shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then
proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
   (G)   If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation
by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the
property against which the assessment is made by the Community Development
Director, and the Community Development Director is directed to turn over to
the Assessor and Tax Collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on
which the assessment has not been paid, and the Assessor and Tax Collector
shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes
levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The
assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are
due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at
the rate of 7½% per annum.
('65 Code, § 6-8.309) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
§ 52.59 RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.
   The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed by the provisions of this subchapter in ample time
to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time
specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of §
52.52 of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 6-8.310) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
§ 52.60 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   In the event any act required by this subchapter or by a resolution adopted
pursuant to the provisions of §
52.52 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of
materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances,
civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor,
then the time within which such act shall be accomplished shall be extended for
a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.
('65 Code, § 6-8.311) (Ord. 50-C.S., passed - - )
CHAPTER 53: STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION PREVENTION
Section
   
53.00   Title
   
53.01   Statutory authority
   
53.02   Purpose and intent
   
53.03   Definitions
   
53.04   Illicit discharges and non-stormwater discharges
   
53.05   Illicit connections
   
53.06   Reduction of pollutants in runoff
   
53.07   Control of pollutants from commercial facilities
   
53.08   Control of pollutants from industrial activities
   
53.09   Control of pollutants from other industrial facilities
   
53.10   Control of pollutants from state permitted construction activities
   
53.11   Control of pollutants from other construction activities
   
53.12   Control of pollutants from new developments/redevelopment projects
   
53.13   Enforcement
   
53.14   Violations constituting misdemeanors
   
53.15   Acts potentially resulting in violations of Federal Clean Water Act
and/or Porter-Cologne Act
   
53.16   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
53.17   Appeal
   
53.18   Disclaimer of liability
   
53.19   Low impact development standards
§ 53.00 TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Stormwater and
Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention Ordinance” of the City of San Gabriel and may
be referred to as such.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to protect and improve water
quality of receiving waters by:
      (1)   Reducing illicit discharges to the municipal stormwater system to
the maximum extent practicable.
      (2)   Eliminating illicit connections to the municipal stormwater system.
      (3)   Eliminating spillage, dumping, and disposal of pollutant materials
into the municipal stormwater system.
      (4)   Reducing pollutant loads in stormwater and urban runoff, from land
uses and activities identified in the municipal NPDES permit.
   (B)   Intent. The intent of this chapter is to enhance and protect the water
quality of the receiving waters of the United States in a manner that is
consistent with the Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or
supplementary thereto; applicable implementing regulations; the municipal NPDES
permit and any amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter concerning water quality
hereinafter set forth, the following words and phrases shall be construed to
have the meanings set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning is intended.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP. Any program, technology, process, siting
criteria, operating method, measure, or device which controls, prevents,
removes, or reduces pollutants in stormwater and non-stormwater runoff.
   COMMERCIAL FACILITY. Restaurants; automotive service facilities; automotive
dealerships, and retail gasoline station outlets or any other definition
provided in the municipal NPDES permit or Stormwater Quality Management Plan.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended, 33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Executive Officer of the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, Los Angeles.
   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any device through or by which an illicit discharge is
conveyed into the municipal stormwater system without a permit, including but
not limited to floor drains, pipes or any fabricated or natural conduits,
excluding roof drains which convey only stormwater.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. The entry of any material other than stormwater unless
such discharge is exempted under the municipal NPDES permit, is allowed under a
separate NPDES permit, including but not limited to a point source permit, a
General Industrial Activity Stormwater permit, or a General Construction
Activity Stormwater permit, or is allowed by the Executive Officer.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Any of the ten classifications of industrial facilities
specified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations § 122.26(b)(14), defined by
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and which is required to obtain a
NPDES permit, not including construction activities.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE. Within the context of BMP selection, choosing
effective BMPs, and rejecting applicable BMPs only:
      (1)   Where effective BMPs will serve the same purpose,
      (2)   The BMPs would not be technically feasible, or
      (3)   The cost would be prohibitive.
   MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT. California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los
Angeles Region, Order No. 01-182, NPDES Permit No. CAS004001, Waste Discharge
Requirements for Municipal Stormwater and Urban Runoff Discharges Within the
County of Los Angeles, and the Incorporated Cities Therein, Except the City of
Long Beach, and any amendment thereto or re-issuance thereof.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (herein referred to as MS4). Those
facilities within the city by which stormwater discharge is conveyed to waters
of the United States, including but not limited to flood control channels,
roads with drainage systems, alleys, streets, catch basins, grates, inlets,
curbs, gutters, ditches, storm drains, canals, pipes, and fabricated and
natural channels.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any fluid discharge to the storm drain system and/
or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater but may not
necessarily be an illicit discharge.
   NPDES or NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. A permit issued by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources
Control Board or a California Regional Water Quality Control Board, pursuant to
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., that authorizes discharges to waters of the
United States.
   OWNER. As applied to a building or real property, means any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by
the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or real property.
   PERSON. Within the context of this chapter, any natural person, firm,
association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, or
company.
   POLLUTANT. The same as it is defined in California Water Code § 13373 and
includes but is not limited to garbage, debris, lawn clippings, leaves, fecal
waste, biological waste, sediment, sludge, manure, fertilizers, pesticides,
oil, grease, gasoline, paints, solvents, cleaners, and any fluid or solid
containing toxic or non-toxic chemicals, metals, including batteries.
   RECEIVING WATERS. Rivers, lakes, oceans, or other bodies of water that
receive runoff.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Land-disturbing activity that result in the creation,
addition, or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface
area on an already developed site. REDEVELOPMENT includes, but is not limited
to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or replacement of a
structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of a routine
maintenance activity; and land-disturbing activities related to structural or
impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain
original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose or facility,
nor does include emergency construction activities required to immediately
protect public health and safety.
   REGIONAL BOARD. The appointed members of the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region.
   RUNOFF. The portion of rainfall or irrigation water or other water
activities also known as dry-weather flows that flow across the ground surface
and eventually to receiving waters. Runoff can pick up pollutants from the air
or the land and carry them to receiving waters.
   STATE BOARD. The State Water Resources Control Board of the California
Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter SWRCB).
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. Any surface water flow produced by rain or snow melt.
   STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM. The Los Angeles Countywide Stormwater
Quality Management Program, which includes descriptions of programs,
collectively developed by the permittees in accordance with provisions of the
NPDES permit, to comply with applicable federal and state law, as the same is
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.04 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall cause or allow an illicit discharge to enter the
municipal stormwater system.
   (B)   No person shall place, dump, litter, accumulate, maintain, discharge,
or cause to enter into the MS4 any pollutant or any foreign object such as
batteries, tires, waste receptacles, yard debris, refuse, rubbish, food waste,
chemicals, animal waste or oil cans - which are also considered illicit
discharges.
   (C)   Any person causing an illicit discharge to the MS4 may be required to
pay for the cost of clean-up and remediation.
   (D)   Any owner of any private property form which a non-stormwater
discharge is observed may be required to pay for the cost of collecting and
analyzing the discharge to determine if it is an illicit discharge.
   (E)   The following non-stormwater discharges are not considered illicit
discharges:
      (1)   Discharges determined by the Executive Officer not to be
significant sources of pollution, including but not limited to: natural springs
and rising ground water; flows form riparian habitats or wetlands; stream
diversions, permitted by the State Board; and uncontaminated ground water
infiltration [as defined by 40 CFR 35.2005 (20)]; reclaimed and potable
landscape irrigation runoff; potable drinking water supply and distribution
system releases (consistent with American Water Works Association guidelines
for dechlorination and suspended solids reduction practices); drains for
foundations, footings, and crawl spaces; air conditioning condensate;
dechlorinated/ debrominated swimming pool discharges; dewatering of lakes and
decorative fountains; non-commercial car washing by residents or by non-profit
organizations and sidewalk rinsing.
      (2)   Discharges specifically allowed under a separate NPDES permit,
including but not limited to, a General Industrial Stormwater Activity permit
or General Construction Stormwater Activity permit.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.05 ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall maintain or intentionally use a connection that
operates to convey an illicit discharge to the municipal stormwater system,
   (B)   Upon discovery of an illicit connection, the person owning or
operating such connection shall either remove it or render it incapable of
conveying an illicit discharge.
   (C)   If any person fails to eliminate an illicit connection after being
called upon by the city to do so, the City Manager or his/her designee shall
impose appropriate measures to remove or disable the illicit connection and may
recover such costs from the owner of the illicit connection.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.06 REDUCTION OF POLLUTANTS IN RUNOFF.
   No person shall cause or threaten to cause the discharge of pollutants to
the MS4 by exposing such pollutants to stormwater runoff.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.07 CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM COMMERCIAL FACILITIES.
   Subject commercial facilities shall implement BMPs prescribed by the
Regional Board or its Executive Officer, through programs or actions made
pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit, as more particularly described in the
city's Stormwater Quality Management Program, or any revisions made thereto.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.08 CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any industry in the city
that is subject to waste discharge requirements specified in the SWRCB Water
Quality Order No. 97-03-DWQ, Permit No. CAS00001, or any revision or a
reissuance thereof, to operate without a General Industrial Activities
Stormwater NPDES permit.
   (B)   Industries that require a General Industrial Activities Stormwater
NPDES permit shall retain on-site the following documents:
      (1)   A copy of the Notice of Intent for General Permit to Discharge
Stormwater Associated with Industrial Activity;
      (2)   A waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB; and/or
      (3)   A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan and Monitoring Program plan.
   (C)   Any industry in the city requiring a General Industrial Activities
Stormwater NPDES permit shall, upon reasonable request from a duly authorized
officer of the city, provide any of the documents described in paragraph (B) of
this section.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.09 CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM OTHER INDUSTRIAL FACILITIES.
   Industrial facilities not subject to the General Industrial Activities
Stormwater NPDES permit but are subject to pollution control requirements under
the municipal NPDES permit, shall implement BMPs prescribed by the Regional
Board or its Executive Officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to
the municipal NPDES permit.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.10 CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM STATE PERMITTED CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No person shall be granted a grading permit or shall commence or
continue any construction activity that is subject to a General Construction
Activity Stormwater NPDES permit without showing proof of having applied for
such permit.
   (B)   Any person engaged in a construction activity requiring an NPDES
General Construction Activity Stormwater NPDES permit construction permit shall
retain at the construction site the following documents:
      (1)   A copy of the Notice of Intent to Comply with Terms of the General
Permit to Discharge Water Associated with Construction Activity;
      (2)   A waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB;
      (3)   A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan and Monitoring Program Plan
for the construction activity requiring the construction permit; and
      (4)   Records of all inspections, compliance and non-compliance reports,
evidence of self-inspection and good housekeeping practices.
   (C)   Any person engaged in a construction activity in the city requiring an
NPDES General Construction Stormwater Activity permit shall, upon reasonable
request from a duly authorized officer of the city, provide any of the
documents specified in paragraph (B) of this section and shall retain said
documents for at least three years after completion of construction.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.11 CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM OTHER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   Any person engaged in a construction activity that is not subject to the
General Construction Stormwater Activity NPDES permit but is subject to the
municipal NPDES permit, shall be required to comply with requirements contained
therein as specified in the city's Stormwater Quality Management Program,
including any revisions made thereto.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.12 CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM NEW DEVELOPMENTS/ REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
   (A)   Prior to the construction of a new development or redevelopment
project, the subject project shall be evaluated for its potential to discharge
pollutants to the MS4, based on its intended land use and other considerations.
Such evaluation shall be conducted in accordance with development planning
requirements established by the Regional Board or its Executive Officer,
pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit, as specified in the city's Stormwater
Quality Management Program, including any revisions made thereto.
   (B)   Once a development or redevelopment project has been evaluated for its
potential to discharge pollutants to the MS4, the city shall require
appropriate BMPs to be installed during construction for implementation
following project completion. The prescription of such BMPs shall be in keeping
with development planning requirements established by the Regional Board or its
Executive Officer, pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit, as described more
particularly in the city's Stormwater Quality Management Program.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement officer has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any
premises a condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this
chapter, the officer may, in a manner authorized by law, enter such building or
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty
imposed upon the officer by this chapter.
   (B)   A violation of any provision of this chapter is declared to be a
public nuisance. Any such violation may be summarily abated by the authorized
enforcement officer in a manner authorized by law, and/or abated by the City
Attorney by means of a civil action.
   (C)   In any civil, criminal, or administrative hearing or action brought by
the city for violation of this chapter, the city shall be entitled to recover
from the defendant(s) in such action, its fees, including reasonable attorney
fees, costs of suit and any other costs of enforcement including, but not
limited to, inspection costs and clean up or abatement costs.
   (D)   The penalties and remedies established by this chapter shall be
cumulative.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.14 VIOLATIONS CONSTITUTING MISDEMEANORS.
   Unless otherwise specified, the violation of this chapter, or failure to
comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall constitute
a misdemeanor, except that notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, and such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may,
at the discretion of the City Prosecutor, be charged and prosecuted as an
infraction.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.15 ACTS POTENTIALLY RESULTING IN VIOLATIONS OF THE FEDERAL CLEAN WATER ACT
AND/OR PORTER-COLOGNE ACT.
   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, any provisions of
any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or
wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order,
prohibition, or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the Federal
Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions
of those Acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action
authorized under this chapter shall also include notice to the violator of such
potential liability.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.16 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   In addition to the penalties stated in this chapter, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated and/or restored by any
authorized enforcement officer, and/or civil actions to abate, enjoin or
otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the City
Attorney.
   (B)   The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner
of the property and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the owner of the
property. If the invoice is not paid within 60 calendar days, a lien shall be
placed upon and against the property.
   (C)   If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent
nuisance, the Community Development Director may so declare. Thereafter such
seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the
necessity of reconvening the initial process of public nuisance declaration and
cessation order by the city.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.17 APPEAL.
   Any person, firm, corporation or organization required to perform
monitoring, analyses, reporting and/or corrective activities by an authorized
enforcement officer and who is aggrieved by the decision of the authorized
enforcement officer may appeal such decision in writing to the Community
Development Director within ten calendar days following the effective date of
the decision. The Community Development Director shall request a report and
recommendation from the authorized enforcement officer and shall set the matter
for a hearing no later than 30 days following the filing of the appeal. At said
hearing, the Community Development Director may hear additional evidence and
may reject, affirm or modify the authorized enforcement officer's decision.
Such decision shall be final.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.18 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other
relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum
standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that
there will be no unauthorized discharge or pollutants into the waters of the
United States. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city,
any officer or employee thereof, for any damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 530-C.S., passed 8-20-02)
§ 53.19 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be known as the low impact development
ordinance of the City of San Gabriel.
   (B)   Adoptions by reference.
      (1)   Except as amended in the divisions below, Chapter 12.84 of the Los
Angeles County Code, which is entitled "Low Impact Development Standards," is
hereby incorporated in its entirety by reference and expressly incorporated
herein. Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby made a part of
this section as if, for all intents and purposes, fully set forth in this
section. This adoption by reference shall include any subsequent amendments to
Chapter 12.84 unless otherwise modified in this section.
      (2)   A certified copy of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is
on file in the office of the City Clerk for public record and inspection.
      (3)   If there is any inconsistency between any provisions of Chapter
12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code and other provisions of this municipal
code, such other provisions of this municipal code shall prevail.
   (C)   Amendments. Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby
amended as follows:
      (1)   Section 12.84.420 of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code
is hereby amended to amend the following definitions:
         COMMERCIAL MALLS. Any development on private land comprised of one or
more buildings forming a complex of stores which sell various merchandise, with
interconnecting walkways enabling visitors to easily walk from store to store,
along with parking area(s). A COMMERCIAL MALL includes, but is not limited to:
mini-malls, strip malls, mixed-use projects, other retail complexes, and
enclosed shopping malls or shopping centers.
         COUNTY. The City of San Gabriel.
         DEVELOPMENT. Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or
reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-
family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail
and other non-residential projects, including public agency projects; or mass
grading for future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to
maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of
facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to
immediately protect public health and safety.
         PUBLIC WORKS. The City of San Gabriel Department of Public Works.
         REDEVELOPMENT. Land-disturbing activity that results in the creation,
addition, or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface
area on an already developed site. REDEVELOPMENT includes, but is not limited
to: the expansion of a building footprint, addition or replacement of a
structure, replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of a routine
maintenance activity, and land disturbing activities related to structural or
impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain
original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility,
nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately
protect public health and safety.
         REGIONAL BOARD. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board,
Los Angeles Region.
      (2)   Section 12.84.430.E.2 of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County
Code is hereby amended to amend to read as follows:
         "2. Any development project for which a complete discretionary or
nondiscretionary permit application was filed with the City of San Gabriel
prior to June 28, 2015."
      (3)   Section 12.84.440.B of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code
is hereby amended to read as follows:
         "B. Low impact development plans shall be submitted in accordance with
the Low Impact Development Standards Manual issued by the County of Los Angeles
Department of Public Works, a copy of which shall be located in the San Gabriel
Public Works Department."
   (D)   Responsibility for administration. This chapter shall be administered
by the Director of Public Works of the City of San Gabriel.
(Ord. 624-C.S., passed 12-1-15)
CHAPTER 54: DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
Section
   
54.01   Purpose
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Requirements
   
54.04   Diversion security deposit required
   
54.05   Administrative fee
   
54.06   Exemptions
   
54.07   Information required before issuance of permit
   
54.08   On site practices
   
54.09   Deconstruction and salvage and recovery
   
54.10   Reporting
   
54.11   Determination of compliance and release of diversion security deposit
   
54.12   Violation of this chapter
   
54.13   Appeals
 
   
54.99   Penalty
§ 54.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to increase the recycling and reuse of
construction and demolition material, consistent with the goals of the
California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any individual, firm, limited liability company, association,
partnership,  political subdivision, industry, public or private corporation,
or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable
permits to undertake any construction, demolition, grading, or renovation
project within the city.
   CONSTRUCTION. All building, landscaping, remodeling, addition, removal or
destruction involving the use or disposal of designated recyclable and reusable
materials.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION (C&D) WASTES. 
      (1)   Discarded materials generally considered to be insoluble in water
and non-hazardous in nature, including but not limited to metal, steel, glass,
brick, concrete, asphalt, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, and lumber from the
construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or
demolition project or from the renovation of a structure and/or landscaping,
and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter
that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development
operations for a construction project, and from removal, installation or repair
of any paved surface;
      (2)   Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from any
construction, paving, and/or landscape project;
      (3)   Non-construction and demolition wood waste; or
      (4)   De-minimis amounts of other non-hazardous wastes that are generated
at construction or demolition projects provided such amounts are consistent
with best management practices of the industry.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a
contractor’s license of  any type under the laws of the State of California, or
who performs (whether as a contractor, a subcontractor or an owner-builder) any
construction, demolition, remodeling, or landscaping service relating to
buildings or accessory structures in the city.
   DECONSTRUCTION. A process to dismantle or remove useable materials from
structures in a manner that maximizes the recovery of building materials for
reuse and recycling and minimizes the amount of waste transported to landfills
for disposal.
   DEMOLITION. The razing, tearing down or wrecking of any structure, wall,
fence, or paving. whether in whole or in part, and whether interior or
exterior.
   DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE AND REUSABLE MATERIALS.
      (1)   Building materials including all products generally used in
construction including, but not limited to, asphalt, concrete, rock, stone and
brick;
      (2)   Wood materials including any and all dimensional lumber, fencing or
construction wood that is not chemically treated, creosoted, chromated copper
arsenate (CCA) pressure treated, contaminated or painted;
      (3)   Vegetative materials including trees, tree parts, shrubs, stumps,
logs, brush or any other type of plants that are cleared from a site for
construction or other use;
      (4)   Metals including all metal scrap such as, but not limited to,
pipes, siding, window frames, doorframes and fences;
      (5)   Roofing materials including wood shingles as well as asphalt, stone
and slate based roofing material;
      (6)   Asphaltic or concrete materials used in paving of parking lots,
roadways, and other structures; or
      (7)   Salvageable materials include all salvageable materials and
structures including, but not limited to wallboard, doors, windows, fixtures,
toilets, sinks, bathtubs, and appliances.
   DIVERSION SECURITY DEPOSIT. Any cash, check, cashier's check money order,
performance bond, or surety bond in a form acceptable to the city, submitted to
the city as pursuant to §
54.04.
   DIVERT or DIVERSION. The recycling or reuse of construction and demolition
wastes to avoid disposal in a landfill.
   PROJECT. Any proposal for new or changed use, or for new construction,
alterations, or enlargement of any structure, that requires a permit from the
City of San Gabriel.
   RECYCLING and REUSE. The process of collecting, sorting, treating, and
reconstituting construction and demolition wastes that would otherwise be
disposed of in a landfill for use as raw
material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet industry
standards.
   SALVAGE. The controlled removal of materials from a project, for the purpose
of reuse or storage for later reuse.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.03 REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all construction, deconstruction
and demolition work conducted within the City of San Gabriel, whether by public
or private entities:
   (A)   New construction-diversion. For every new construction and remodeling
project that requires a permit from the City of San Gabriel, and has a total
valuation of equal to or greater than $10,000, with the exception of the
project types listed in §
54.06, it is required that at least 50% of the construction and demolition
wastes generated be diverted from landfilling by using recycling, reuse or
other diversion programs.
   (B)   Demolition and grading- diversion. Additionally, for every demolition
and grading project that requires a permit from the City of San Gabriel,
irrespective of valuation, with the exception of the project types listed in §
54.06, it is required that at least 50% of the construction and demolition
wastes generated be diverted from landfilling, by using recycling, reuse or
other diversion programs.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.04 DIVERSION SECURITY DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   As a condition precedent to issuance of a permit for any construction
or demolition project that involves the generation of solid waste destined to
be delivered to a landfill, the applicant shall post a deposit in the form of
cash, check, cashier's check, or money order, in an amount equal to 3% of the
total project cost, or $10,000, whichever is less.
   (B)   The deposit, less the administrative fee (if applicable), shall be
returned, without interest, upon proof to the satisfaction of the Building
Official, or authorized designee, that no less than the required percentage of
the tons of wastes generated by the demolition and/or construction project have
been diverted from landfills and have been recycled or reused, and that no
other relevant provision of this chapter has been violated. The deposit shall
be returned in full if a building, demolition, or grading permit application is
withdrawn or cancelled before any work was begun.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.05 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
   As a condition precedent to issuance of any permit for a building,
demolition or grading project that involves the production of solid waste
destined to be delivered to a landfill, the applicant shall pay to the city a
cash fee sufficient to compensate the city for all expenses incurred in
administering the permit. This fee, the amount of which shall be determined in
accordance with the then current resolution of the City Council, shall be
deducted from the deposit, and will not be refunded to the applicant.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following project types are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:
   (A)   Work for which a building, demolition, or grading permit is not
required;
   (B)   New construction and remodeling projects with a total valuation of
less than $10,000;
   (C)   Roofing projects;
   (D)   Seismic tie-down projects;
   (E)   Projects for which only a plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permit
is required; and
   (F)   Immediate or emergency demolitions required to protect the public
health, safety, or welfare, as determined by the city's Building Official, or
authorized designee, prior to demolition.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.07 INFORMATION REQUIRED BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   In accordance with §
54.08, the city's franchised waste hauler must handle all construction and
demolition material generated on a project site. Use of the franchised hauler
shall waive the requirement for a "Waste Management and Recycling Plan."
   (B)   If an applicant chooses to use the services of an independent
recycling company, in accordance with §
54.08, then the applicant shall submit a properly completed "Waste Management
and Recycling Plan," on a form prescribed by the city, as a part of the
building, demolition, or grading permit application process.
   (C)   The Waste Management and Recycling Plan shall indicate the following:
      (1)   Applicant contact information;
      (2)   A description of the project which includes location, square
footage, estimated timeline for completion of the project, and any other
pertinent information;
      (3)   The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition
material, by material type, to be generated;
      (4)   The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition
material, by material type, to be recycled, reused and disposed;
      (5)   A calculation of the expected diversion rate; and
      (6)   A signature indicating that the applicant understands the
provisions of this chapter and is aware of the penalties described in §
54.99.
   (D)   Approval by the Building Official, or authorized designee, of the
Waste Management and Recycling Plan shall be a condition precedent to the
issuance of any building, demolition, or grading permit.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.08 ON SITE PRACTICES.
   (A)   Use of franchise waste hauler required.
      (1)   The city's franchised waste hauler must handle all construction and
demolition material generated on a project site. The applicant, or the
applicant's subcontractors, may not self-haul material to a disposal or
diversion facility. An applicant may, however, acquire the services of an
independent recycling company, so long as the recycling company does not charge
a fee for bins nor bin service.
      (2)   The city's franchised waste hauler shall be required to divert from
landfill at least 50% of the material received from a job site. If the
franchised waste hauler guarantees 50% diversion, use of that franchise waste
hauling service shall be deemed as complying with the 50% diversion requirement
and any receipt issued by the waste hauler to the applicant shall constitute
evidence of such diversion.
   (B)   Alternative hauler authorization. If the city's franchised waste
hauler is unable to meet the 50% diversion requirement, the applicant must
contact the Building Official immediately, and the Building Official can
consider authorizing the use of alternative waste hauler(s) or recycler(s) that
can meet the 50% diversion requirement.
   (C)   Record keeping. During the term of the demolition or construction
project, the applicant shall keep all invoices from the franchised hauler or a
record of all materials diverted and disposed in tonnage or in other
measurements that can be converted to tonnage.
   (D)   Evaluation of recycling, disposal and salvage. The Building Official,
or authorized designee, may monitor and evaluate all or selected projects to
gauge the percentage of materials recycled, salvaged and disposed. Diversion
will be measured separately with respect to the demolition segment and the
construction segment of a project where both demolition and construction are
involved.
   (E)   Separation standards. To the maximum extent feasible as determined by
the City Engineer, Building Inspector or designee on-site separation of scrap
wood and clean green waste in a designated debris box or boxes shall be
arranged in order to permit chipping and mulching for soil enhancement or land
cover purposes. In order to protect chipping and grinding machinery, metal and
other materials, which cannot be chipped or ground, shall not be placed in such
boxes.
   (F)   W allboard. On-site separation shall be undertaken for wallboard to
the extent feasible on new construction.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.09 DECONSTRUCTION AND SALVAGE AND RECOVERY.
   Contractors are encouraged to make every structure planned for demolition
available for deconstruction, salvage and recovery prior to demolition and to
recover the maximum feasible amount of salvageable recyclable and reusable
materials prior to demolition. Recovered and salvaged recyclable and reusable
materials from the deconstruction phase shall be counted towards the diversion
requirements of this chapter, provided it is accounted for in the Waste
Management and Recycling Plan.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.10 REPORTING.
   (A)   Within 60 days following the completion of the demolition phase of a
project, and again within 60 days following the completion of the construction
phase of a project, the applicant shall, as a condition precedent to final
inspection and to issuance of any certificate of occupancy or final approval of
project, submit documentation to the Building Official, or authorized designee,
that proves compliance with the requirements of §
54.03.
   (B)   The documentation shall consist of either receipts from the franchised
hauler, or a completed Recycling and Reuse Summary Report. The report shall
show actual data of tonnage or volume of materials recycled and diverted,
supported by originals or photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other
records of measurement from the hauling/recycling vendor(s) used. Receipts and
weight tags will be used to verify whether materials generated from the site
have been or are to be recycled, reused, salvaged or otherwise disposed.
   (C)   The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all
construction and demolition waste are weighed in compliance with all regulatory
requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For construction and demolition
waste for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other
considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of
volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized
conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.
   (D)   If a project involves both demolition and construction, the report and
documentation for the demolition project must be submitted and approved by the
Building Official, or authorized designee, before issuance of a building permit
for the construction phase of the project.
   (E)   Any deposit posted pursuant to §
54.04 shall be forfeited if the applicant does not meet the timely reporting
requirements of this section.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.11 DETERMINATION OF COMPLIANCE AND RELEASE OF DIVERSION SECURITY DEPOSIT.
   The Building Official shall review the information submitted under §
54.10 and determine whether the applicant has complied with the requirements of
this chapter as follows:
   (A)   Full compliance. If the Building Official determines that the
applicant has fully complied with the requirements of this chapter, the
Building Official shall authorize that the full Diversion Security Deposit,
less the administrative fee, if applicable, be released to the applicant.
   (B)   Noncompliance; but good faith effort. If the Building Official finds
that less than 50% of the project waste was diverted from disposal at a
landfill, the Building Official shall determine whether the applicant made a
good faith effort to comply with this chapter. When making this determination
the Building Official shall consider the availability of markets for the C&D
materials transported for disposal in a landfill, the size of the project, and
the documented efforts of the applicant to divert C&D materials. If the
Building Official determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to
comply with this chapter, the Building Official shall approve the release of
the diversion security deposit, or a portion thereof, to the applicant. Any
portion of the diversion security deposit not released to the applicant shall
be forfeited to the city and shall be used for the purposes of promoting
recycling within the city.
   (C)   Noncompliance. If the Building Official finds that less than 50% of
the project waste was diverted from disposal at a landfill, and if the Building
Official determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to
comply with this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation
required by §
54.10 within the required time period, then the diversion security deposit
shall be retained by the city.
   (D)   Refund. The Building Official shall authorize the refund of any
diversion security deposit if the building, demolition, or grading permit
application is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun.
   (E)   All diversion security deposits retained by the city shall be used
only for:
      (1)   Payment of diversion security deposit refunds;
      (2)   Costs of administration of the program established by this chapter;
and
      (3)   Costs of programs to achieve diversion of C&D materials required by
this chapter.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.12 VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to do any of the following:
   (A)   To willfully fail to comply with any provision of this chapter;
   (B)   To provide false or misleading information in any plan or report or
document required by this chapter; and
   (C)   To fail to meet the diversion requirements established by the approved
Waste Management and Recycling Plan.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.13 APPEALS.
   Determinations made subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be
appealable by the same methods and subject to the same fees as other provisions
of the city's development codes.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
§ 54.99    PENALTY.
   Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not
to exceed 6 months, or by fine not exceeding one $1,000, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a new and
separate offense.
(Ord. 557-C.S., passed 12-6-05)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
Traffic Control Devices
   
70.10   Authority to install
   
70.11   Obedience required
   
70.12   Hours of operation
   
70.13   Removal, relocation and discontinuance
   
70.14   Traffic signals; installation
   
70.15   Use of traffic signals to regulate speed
   
70.16   Lane marking
   
70.17   Distinctive roadway markings
   
70.18   Signs required
   
70.19   Painting street and curb surfaces
   
70.20   One-way streets and alleys
Administration and Enforcement
   
70.30   Traffic Division; establishment and duties
   
70.31   Annual traffic safety report
   
70.32   Traffic accidents; studies and reports
   
70.33   City Traffic Engineer; establishment of office; powers and duties
   
70.34   Authority of Police and Fire Department officers
   
70.35   Interfering with and obstructing officers and employees
   
70.36   Obedience by public employees
   
70.37   Removal of vehicles from streets
   
70.38   Authority of police officers in crowds
   
70.39   Exemption of certain vehicles
   
70.40   Authority to establish non-exclusive tow franchise agreements
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Whenever
any words or phrases used in this title are not defined herein but are defined
in the California Vehicle Code, such definitions are incorporated in this title
and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases when used in this title.
('65 Code, § 4-5.102)
   CURB. The lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb shall be marked
by curbing construction or be not so marked. For the purpose of this traffic
code, CURB shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from
parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of
public utility companies. (‘65 Code, § 4-5.104)
   DIVISIONAL ISLAND. A raised island located in the roadway and separating
opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. (‘65 Code, § 4-5.105)
   HOLIDAYS. This term means and includes January 1, February 12, the third
Monday in February, the last Monday in May, July 4, the first Monday in
September, the second Monday in October, November 11, Thanksgiving Day, and
December 25. If any of these holidays should fall upon a Sunday, the Monday
following shall be a holiday. (‘65 Code, § 4-5.106)
   LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (‘65 Code,
§ 4-5.107)
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this traffic
code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in the city. (‘65 Code, § 4-5.108)
   PARK. To stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, other
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading of passengers or materials.
   PARKWAY. That portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. (‘65
Code, § 4-5.109)
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (‘65
Code, § 4-5.110)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot. (‘65 Code, § 4-5.111)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations. (‘65 Code, § 4-5.112)
   PRIVATE BUS. Any bus, as defined in the California Vehicle Code, used or
maintained by or for a charter-party carrier of passengers for compensation or
profit, a passenger stage corporation, or any highway carrier of passengers
required to register with the California Public Utilities Commission.
   PUBLIC TRANSIT BUS.  Any bus owned or operated by a publicly owned or
operated transit system, or operated under contract with a publicly owned or
operated transit system, and used to provide to the general public, regularly
scheduled transportation for which a fare is charged.
   STOP OR STAND. When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official
traffic control device. (‘65 Code, § 4-5.113)
   VEHICLE CODE. The California Vehicle Code. (‘65 Code, § 4-5.114)
(Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 610-C.S., passed 4-1-14)
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.10 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL.
   (A)   The City Traffic Engineer shall have the power and duty to place and
maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, official traffic control
devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this traffic
code.
   (B)   Whenever the Vehicle Code requires, for the effectiveness of any
provision thereof, that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to
the public of the application of such law, the Traffic Engineer is hereby
authorized to install, or cause to be installed, the necessary devices subject
to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
   (C)   The Traffic Engineer may also place and maintain, or cause to be
placed and maintained, such additional traffic control devices as he may deem
necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he
shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering
principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards,
limitations and rules as may be set forth in this chapter or as may be
determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
('65 Code, § 4-5.401) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.11 OBEDIENCE REQUIRED.
   The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized
person, subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized
emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls.
('65 Code, § 4-5.402) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
Trains, see §§ 71.75, 71.76
§ 70.12 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which
any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in
those cases where such hours or days are specified in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 4-5.403) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.13 REMOVAL, RELOCATION AND DISCONTINUANCE.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or
discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically
required by the Vehicle Code or the provisions of this traffic code whenever he
shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or
required the installation no longer exist or obtain.
('65 Code, § 4-5.404) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.14 TRAFFIC SIGNALS; INSTALLATION.
   (A)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain
official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic
conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately
interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or
to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.
   (B)   The Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where
such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other
traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations therefrom shall
be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and
instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the
Division of Highways of the State Department of Public Works.
   (C)   Whenever the Traffic Engineer installs and maintains an official
traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at
such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from
all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and
are maintained at the intersection.
('65 Code, § 4-5.405) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.15 USE OF TRAFFIC SIGNALS TO REGULATE SPEED.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to regulate the timing of
traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe
manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable
within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
('65 Code, § 4-5.406) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.16 LANE MARKING.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane
lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by
vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the
highway. ('65 Code, § 4-5.407) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.17 DISTINCTIVE ROADWAY MARKINGS.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place and maintain
distinctive roadway markings, as described in the Vehicle Code, on those
streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or
other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side
of such markings or signs and markings. Such markings or signs and markings
shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the California
Department of Transportation pursuant to the provisions of the Vehicle Code.
('65 Code, § 4-5.408) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.18 SIGNS REQUIRED.
   No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this traffic code for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate
legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic
laws.
('65 Code, § 4-5.409) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.19 PAINTING STREET AND CURB SURFACES.
   No person, unless authorized by the city, shall paint any street or curb
surface; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to
the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with
the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of the city pertaining thereto.
('65 Code, § 4-5.410) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.20 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way
street or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs
giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
('65 Code, § 4-5.601) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Parallel parking on one-way street, see § 72.068
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.30 TRAFFIC DIVISION; ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established in the Police Department a
Traffic Division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by
and directly responsible to the Police Chief. ('65 Code, § 4-5.201)
   (B)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, with such aid as
may be rendered by other members of the Police Department, to enforce the
street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws
applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic
violations, to investigate traffic accidents, to cooperate with the City
Traffic Engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the
traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions,
and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the Traffic Division by
the provisions of this traffic code and the traffic laws of the city. ('65
Code, § 4-5.202)
(Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Police Department, see §§ 32.50 through 32.52
§ 70.31 ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.
   The Traffic Division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be
filed with the Council. The report shall contain information on traffic matters
in the city as follows:
   (A)   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data;
   (B)   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data
on the safety activities of the police; and
   (C)   The plans and recommendations of the Traffic Division for future
traffic safety activities.
('65 Code, § 4-5.203) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.32 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS; STUDIES AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Studies. Whenever the accidents at any particular location become
numerous, the Traffic Division shall cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer
in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. ('65
Code, § 4-5.204)
   (B)   Reports. The Traffic Division shall maintain a suitable system of
filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use
and information of the Traffic Engineer. ('65 Code, § 4-5.205)
(Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.33 CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER; ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Office established. The office of the City Traffic Engineer is hereby
established. The Community Development Director shall serve as Traffic Engineer
in addition to his other functions, and he shall exercise the powers and duties
as provided in this traffic code and in other traffic laws of the city.
Whenever the Traffic Engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain
official traffic control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or
signals to be placed or maintained. ('65 Code, § 4-5.206)
   (B)   Powers and duties. It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic
Engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of
traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic
accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic
investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials
in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to
carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the laws of the city.
Whenever, by the provisions of this traffic code, a power is granted to the
Traffic Engineer or a duty is imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or
the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him.
('65 Code, § 4-5.207)
(Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.34 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICERS.
   (A)   Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by
the Police Chief are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the
event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions to the contrary contained in this traffic code or the Vehicle Code.
('65 Code, § 4-5.301)
   (B)   No person other than an officer of the Police Department, or member of
the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the Police Chief, or a person
authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or
other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided in this
chapter, any mechanical push-button signal erected by order of the City Traffic
Engineer. ('65 Code, § 4-5.302)
(Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
Police Department, see §§ 32.50 through 32.52
§ 70.35 INTERFERING WITH AND OBSTRUCTING OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or
other officer or employee of the city in his enforcement of the provisions of
this traffic code. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark
or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or
officer of the city in connection with the enforcement of the parking
regulations of this traffic code shall, if done for the purpose of evading the
provisions of this traffic code, constitute such interference or obstruction.
('65 Code, § 4-5.303) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
Stopping, standing, and parking, see Ch. 72
§ 70.36 OBEDIENCE BY PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.
   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the operator of any
vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the
state and any county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such operator to
violate any of the provisions of this traffic code except as otherwise
permitted in this traffic code or by the Vehicle Code.
('65 Code, § 4-5.304) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.37 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM STREETS.
   Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department may
remove or cause to be removed:
   (A)   Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or
highway for 72 or more consecutive hours;
   (B)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is
prohibited by an ordinance or resolution of the city and signs are posted
giving notice of such removal; and
   (C)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway
where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for
the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the
installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or
highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the
normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway, or any
portion thereof, is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or
structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or
interfere with such use or movement; provided, however, signs giving notice
that such vehicle may be removed shall be erected or placed at least 24 hours
prior to the removal.
('65 Code, § 4-5.305) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.38 AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS IN CROWDS.
   At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or have
gathered, nothing in this traffic code shall be construed to prevent any police
officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or using any
street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any street or
sidewalk, and such police officer shall have authority to direct the parking of
vehicles in any reasonable manner, way or direction, and it is hereby declared
to be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey such police officer's
order, signal or command, regardless of any other provision of this traffic
code.
('65 Code, § 4-5.306) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 70.39 EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code regulating the operation, parking
and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the Police or
Fire Department, or to any public ambulance, or to any public utility vehicle
or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has
qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in
this subsection is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in
response to an emergency call.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) of this section shall not, however,
relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care
for the safety of others or the consequences of his wilful disregard of the
safety of others.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of
vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility
while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or to any vehicle
owned or operated by the United States Postal Service while in use for the
collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail.
('65 Code, § 4-5.307) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 70.40 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH NON-EXCLUSIVE TOW FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the City of San
Gabriel to grant non-exclusive towing franchises to one or more qualified tow
service operators, in accordance with § 12110 of the Vehicle Code and other
applicable law.
   (B)   Findings. The franchise services agreement applies to the Police
Department’s towing program and does not cover and has no effect on privately
requested tow services. The grant of a non-exclusive towing franchise to one or
more towing operators for towing vehicles on behalf of the city’s Police
Department is in the public interest.
   (C)   Approval and authorization.
      (1)   The City Council hereby authorizes the City Manager, or his or her
designee, to execute on behalf of the city and in accordance with the San
Gabriel Municipal Code, non-exclusive tow franchise agreements with eligible
tow operators.
      (2)   The City Manager shall use the tow franchise agreement form most
recently approved by duly adopted resolution by the City Council. The industry
standard form franchise agreement shall set forth the franchise fee,
performance standards for service adopted by the City Police Chief and other
terms and conditions that are consistent with the purpose and intent of this
section.
      (3)   The city shall prepare and release an RFQ to identify qualified
service operators that will detail tow operator eligibility and other
requirements that must be satisfied to be considered for award of a tow
franchise. The Police Chief will recommend eligible operators to the City
Manager for award of non-exclusive tow franchises, subject to review and
approval by the City Council.
      (4)   The city may collect franchise fees from tow franchisees in an
amount set by duly adopted City Council resolution, as amended from time to
time, pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code § 12110, Subdivision (b), provided that
such fees may not exceed the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its
actual and reasonable costs incurred in connection with the Police Department’s
towing program.
      (5)   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to adopt rules for towing
operators regarding standards for service, hours of operations, etc. to ensure
that the purposes of the grant of these non-exclusive franchises are achieved.
      (6)   The City Council may by duly adopted resolution approve and amend
tow franchise agreement forms and maximum rates that may be charged by tow
franchisees for services provided pursuant to the Police Department’s towing
program and this section.
(Ord. 664, passed 6-16-20)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Driving through funeral processions and parades
   
71.02   Commercial vehicles using private driveways
   
71.03   Riding or driving on sidewalks
   
71.04   Riding or driving on new pavement and markings
   
71.05   Obedience to barriers and signs
   
71.06   Obstructing traffic by entering intersections
   
71.07   Limited access roadways; entering and leaving
   
71.08   Use of freeways limited
   
71.09   Skateboard, rollerskate, and in-line skate regulations in the Mission
District
   
71.10   Skateboarding, rollerskating, and in-line skating prohibited where
posted; private property
Restricted Use of Certain Streets
   
71.20   Truck routes
   
71.21   Commercial vehicles prohibited on certain streets
   
71.22   Movement of heavy vehicles and equipment; permits required
   
71.23   Flange-wheeled machinery
Special Stops Required
   
71.35   Stop signs
   
71.36   Designation of through streets, stop intersections, and railroad grade
crossings
   
71.37   Emerging from alleys, driveways and buildings
Turning Movements
   
71.50   Turning markers; multiple lanes
   
71.51   Restricted turn signs
   
71.52   Right turns at signal-controlled intersections
   
71.53   Restricted turns onto public or private property between intersections
Pedestrians
   
71.65   Establishment, designation and maintenance of pedestrian crosswalks
   
71.66   Use of pedestrian crosswalks
Trains
   
71.75   Trains blocking streets and crossings
   
71.76   Speed of railroad engines and trains
Private Buses
   
71.80   Intent
   
71.81   Operation of private buses on public streets
   
71.82   License
   
71.83   Signs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS AND PARADES.
   No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral procession or a parade provided such vehicles are conspicuously so
designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which
such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders
of the Police Department.
('65 Code, § 4-5.801) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.02 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES USING PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across
any private driveway approach, sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the
consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or markings are in
place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, COMMERCIAL VEHICLE shall mean a
vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton.
('65 Code, § 4-5.802) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.03 RIDING OR DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle,
bicycle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently
constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary
purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided, further, the
sidewalk area shall be substantially protected in a manner prescribed by the
Community Development Director. The prohibitions of this provision shall not
apply to police officers in the performance of their official duties.
('65 Code, § 4-5.803) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - -; Am. Ord. 481-C.S., passed 9-2-
97)  
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.04 RIDING OR DRIVING ON NEW PAVEMENT AND MARKINGS.
   No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any
newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier,
sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to
drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in
place indicating that the street, or any portion thereof, is closed.
('65 Code, § 4-5.804) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.05 OBEDIENCE TO BARRIERS AND SIGNS.
   No person, public utility or department of the city shall erect or place any
barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the City Traffic
Engineer or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any
barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or
by any department of the city.
('65 Code, § 4-5.805) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
Traffic control devices, see §§ 70.10 through 70.20
§ 71.06 OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC BY ENTERING INTERSECTIONS.
   No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked
crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any
traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
('65 Code, § 4-5.806) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.07 LIMITED ACCESS ROADWAYS; ENTERING AND LEAVING.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established.
('65 Code, § 4-5.807) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.08 USE OF FREEWAYS LIMITED.
   No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or any
vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a
freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along
any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for the
use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such
restrictions.
('65 Code, § 4-5.808) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.09 SKATEBOARD, ROLLERSKATE, AND IN-LINe SKATE REGULATIONS IN THE MISSION
DISTRICT.
   (A)   No person shall ride, propel, or in any manner operate a skateboard,
rollerskates, or in-line skates on, along, or over any public street, sidewalk,
right-of-way, or other public property in the area designated as the Mission
District Zone in §§
153.300 through 153.308.
   (B)   Violation of this section is hereby declared to be an infraction and
is punishable as provided in § 10.99.
('65 Code, § 5-14.18) (Ord. 431-C.S., passed 9-6-94; Am. Ord. 447-C.S., passed
4-18-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Mission District Zone, see §§ 153.300 through 153.308
§ 71.10 SKATEBOARDING, ROLLERSKATING, AND IN-LINe SKATING PROHIBITED WHERE
POSTED; PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall ride, propel, or in any manner operate a skateboard,
rollerskates, or in-line skates on, along, or over any privately owned property
in the city where the owner, manager, or other person in charge has prohibited
the same.
   (B)   The prohibition set forth in division (A) above shall not apply until
notice has been provided in accordance with this section.
      (1)   Notices shall be provided in and about the area where the activity
is to be prohibited. Notices shall be placed in locations and in sufficient
numbers so that they are reasonably likely to be seen by those engaging in the
prohibited activities. Notices may be stenciled directly onto the private
walkways or other paved surface.
      (2)   Each notice shall provide in capital letters at least two inches
high which activities are prohibited, and underneath shall provide in print at
least one inch high, “San Gabriel Municipal Code § 71.10.”
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, PRIVATE PROPERTY shall be deemed to
include property owned by other public agencies within the city.
   (D)   Violations of this section are hereby declared to be infractions and
are punishable as such according to §
10.99.
('65 Code, § 5-14.19) (Ord. 447-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS
§ 71.20 TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes any
street, or portion thereof, as a street the use of which is permitted by any
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the City Traffic
Engineer is hereby authorized to designate such street by appropriate signs as
“Truck Routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight
limit of three tons.
   (B)   When any such truck routes are established and designated by
appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight
limit of three tons shall drive on such routes and none other; provided,
however, nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a “Truck Route”
having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when
necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and
merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted
streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and
bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or
structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has
previously been obtained therefor.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission of the state; or
      (2)   Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in
the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.
   (D)   Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the
Council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles
exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1301) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.21 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes any
street, or portion thereof, as a street the use of which is prohibited by any
commercial vehicle, the City Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain
appropriate signs on those streets affected by such resolution.
   (B)   Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the
Council are hereby declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by
any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of
the state.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1302) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.22 MOVEMENT OF HEAVY VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT; PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall move or operate upon any of the city streets any
vehicle with a load or loads in excess of those permitted by the Vehicle Code
without a written permit from the City Traffic Engineer.
   (B)   The City Traffic Engineer may, by written permit, authorize a load or
loads in excess of those allowed in the Vehicle Code if, in his judgment, the
streets upon which the vehicle is to be operated can safely withstand the
additional weight, or if the applicant will guarantee to the city that all
costs of repair to the streets or to the public property of the city damaged by
the movement of such load or loads will be paid in full. The permit shall be
granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bond as the City Traffic
Engineer in his discretion may require.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1303) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.23 FLANGE-WHEELED MACHINERY.
   No person shall operate over the city streets any vehicle, piece of
equipment or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges or other projections on
the wheels or tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or
corrugations, a filler block may be placed on each section so that a flat
bearing surface will be in contact with the pavement at all times.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1304) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 71.35 STOP SIGNS.
   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates and describes
any street, or portion thereof, as a through street, or any intersection at
which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any
railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the City
Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs on each and every street
intersecting such through street, or portion thereof, so designated, and at
those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required, and at any
railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not
be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance
is controlled by an official traffic control signal. Every such sign shall
conform with, and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code.
('65 Code, § 4-5.701) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Traffic control devices, see §§ 70.10 through 70.20
§ 71.36 DESIGNATION OF THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS, AND RAILROAD GRADE
CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the
Council are hereby declared to be through streets for the purposes of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply at one or more entrances
to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by
resolution of the Council.
   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply at those highway railway
grade crossings as established by resolution of the Council.
('65 Code, § 4-5.702) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Trains, see §§ 71.75, 71.76
§ 71.37 EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS AND BUILDINGS.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway.
('65 Code, § 4-5.703) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 71.50 TURNING MARKERS; MULTIPLE LANES.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place official traffic
control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The City Traffic Engineer
is hereby authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from
which drivers of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns, and the course to
be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by
law or ordinance.
('65 Code, § 4-5.501) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 71.51 RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U
turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such
turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other
hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or such
signs may be removed when such turns are permitted.
('65 Code, § 4-5.502) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 71.52 RIGHT TURNS AT SIGNAL-CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop
signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such
restriction as provided in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   The City Traffic Engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect
to the provisions of this section where he determines that the making of right
turns against traffic signal “stop” indications would seriously interfere with
the safe and orderly flow of traffic.
('65 Code, § 4-5.503) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 71.53 RESTRICTED TURNS ONTO PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY BETWEEN INTERSECTIONS.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those places
between intersections when, because of peak traffic periods or other causes, in
order to reduce traffic congestion and diminish hazard of collision, it is
reasonably necessary to restrict left turns or right turns from the street onto
public or private property. The making of such turns may be prohibited between
certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same
shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or such signs may be removed when such
turns are permitted.
('65 Code, § 4-5.504) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
PEDESTRIANS
§ 71.65 ESTABLISHMENT, DESIGNATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   The City Traffic Engineer shall establish, designate and maintain
crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway. Crosswalks shall only be installed based
upon a traffic analysis, except that crosswalks in place as of January 1, 1991,
may be maintained in place.
   (B)   Crosswalks shall only be installed at intersections, except where
special conditions indicate a need for a crosswalk at locations other than
intersections. Crosswalks located at other than intersections shall be at least
200 feet from an intersection.
('65 Code, § 4-5.901) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 348-C.S., passed - -
)
§ 71.66 USE OF PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway with more than two travel lanes except
at marked or unmarked crosswalks.
('65 Code, § 4-5.902) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 348-C.S., passed - -
)
Penalty, see § 10.99
TRAINS
§ 71.75 TRAINS BLOCKING STREETS AND CROSSINGS.
   No person shall cause or permit any railway train, railway cars or similar
vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to
prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time
longer than ten minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway
trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a
crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car
or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident.
('65 Code, § 4-5.809) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Designation of through streets, stop intersections, and railroad grade
crossings, see §
71.36
§ 71.76 SPEED OF RAILROAD ENGINES AND TRAINS.
   No engineer or other person in charge of a railroad engine or railroad train
shall run, operate or drive such railroad engine or railroad train, or part
thereof, in the city at a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1601) (Ord. 56-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
PRIVATE BUSES
§ 71.80 INTENT.
   Operators of private buses have from time to time been observed parking in a
manner that obstructs access to and from businesses, occupying multiple on-
street parking spaces or public transit bus zones, impairing sight distance for
other motorists and pedestrians, and idling engines for significant periods of
time. The operation of private buses in this manner creates unnecessary traffic
congestion, increases the likelihood of safety hazards, and raises the noise
and air pollution levels in the community. The city desires to regulate the
parking of these private buses in order to promote the health, safety and
welfare of its residents and visitors by prohibiting stopping, standing,
loading or unloading of private buses from all public streets in the city.
(Ord. 610-C.S., passed 4-1-14)
§ 71.81 OPERATION OF PRIVATE BUSES ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   Private buses shall only be operated on public streets for ingress to,
egress from, and traveling through the city.
   (B)   Private buses shall be prohibited from stopping or standing adjacent
to curbs or any other part of the public right-of-way within the city for any
purpose including loading and unloading passengers with the following
exceptions:
      (1)   Emergencies.
      (2)   Transporting passengers to and from specific cultural, educational,
or entertainment events at public facilities or parks within the city.
   (C)   The regulations imposed by this section shall not be effective until
such time as signs giving notice of such restrictions are conspicuously posted
on streets at the entrances to the city.
   (D)   Private bus operators violating this section shall be subject to a
fine as set forth in the City of San Gabriel Parking Penalty Schedule as
adopted by the City Council, and amended from time to time by resolution.
(Ord. 610-C.S., passed 4-1-14)
§ 71.82 LICENSE.
   All private bus operators who load and unload passengers in the city shall
have a business license issued by the city in accordance with §§
72.076 and
110.67 of this code.
(Ord. 610-C.S., passed 4-1-14)
§ 71.83 SIGNS.
   The City Engineer is authorized to post conspicuous signs giving notice of
the restrictions on using public streets by private buses.
(Ord. 610-C.S., passed 4-1-14)
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
72.001   Application of provisions
   
72.002   Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited
   
72.003   Maintenance of no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted
parking areas
   
72.004   No parking areas designated
   
72.005   Parking for more than 72 hours
   
72.006   Parking vehicles for sale
   
72.007   Parking vehicles for greasing or repair
   
72.008   Parking vehicles for washing or polishing for charges
   
72.009   Parking adjacent to schools
   
72.010   Parking on narrow streets
   
72.011   Parking on grades
   
72.012   Parking by peddlers and vendors
   
72.013   Emergency parking signs
All-Night Parking
   
72.025   Permits
   
72.026   Applications and fees for permits
   
72.027   Refund of permit fees
   
72.028   Investigation
   
72.029   Permits; contents, term
   
72.030   Transfer of ownership
   
72.031   Lost permit
   
72.032   Display of permits
   
72.033   Vehicles for which permits shall not be issued; exemptions
   
72.034   Designated streets in permits
   
72.035   Emergency and temporary permits
   
72.036   Revocation of permits
Private Parking Limited
   
72.045   Findings
   
72.046   Definitions
   
72.047   Parking in off-street private parking facilities
   
72.048   Duty of police officers
Parking on Unpaved Land
   
72.055   Landowner's responsibility
   
72.056   Vehicle owner's responsibility
Stopping, Standing or Parking Restricted or Prohibited
   
72.065   Twenty minute parking
   
72.066   One-hour parking
   
72.067   Two-hour parking
   
72.068   Parallel parking on one-way street
   
72.069   Diagonal parking
   
72.070   Parking space markings
   
72.071   All-night parking
   
72.072   Limited curb parking space; right-of-way
   
72.073   Parking exemptions for certain disabled persons
   
72.074   Parking commercial vehicles in residential districts
   
72.075   Parking on city property
   
72.076   Parking and operating vehicles on private property
   
72.077   No stopping zones
   
72.078   Mission District Zone parking
   
72.079   Signs, curb markings, and parking meters
Loading and Unloading
   
72.085   Authority to establish loading zones
   
72.086   Curb markings
   
72.087   Effect of permission to load or unload
   
72.088   Restricted uses
   
72.089   Public transit bus zones
   
72.090   Special passenger loading zones
   
72.091   Funeral zones
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.001 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times, or at those times specified,
except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official
traffic control device.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the laws of the city prohibiting
or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at
specified times.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1001) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.002 STOPPING OR STANDING IN PARKWAYS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any parkway set apart from
the roadway by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation, or where posted
“No Parking” by the City Traffic Engineer.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1002) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 348-C.S., passed -
- )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.003 MAINTENANCE OF NO STOPPING ZONES, NO PARKING AREAS AND RESTRICTED
PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by
appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no
parking areas and restricted parking areas as defined and described in this
chapter.
   (B)   When such curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any
vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb
marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1003) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.004 NO PARKING AREAS DESIGNATED.
   No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such
vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic, or in compliance with the direction of a police officer, or
other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:
   (A)   Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated
with appropriate signs or markings;
   (B)   On either side of any street between the projected property lines of
any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such
street when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon
the curb surface;
   (C)   In any area where the City Traffic Engineer determines that the
parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would
endanger life or property when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or
by red paint upon the curb surface;
   (D)   In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no parking
area when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the
curb surface;
   (E)   Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder,
delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track;
   (F)   In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would
constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;
   (G)   On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway, or a
portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the
street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or where the
use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a
purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street
or highway, or any portion thereof, is necessary for the movement of equipment,
articles or structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicle would
prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving
notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the
effective time of such no parking;
   (H)   At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately
opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone when such place is indicated by
appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;
   (I)   At any place within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in any
business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red
paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus
stop; and
   (J)   Within 20 feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop
sign or official electric flashing device.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1004) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.005 PARKING FOR MORE THAN 72 HOURS.
   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle
shall park the vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive
period of 72 hours.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1005) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.006 PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE.
   No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any street in the
city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale unless
authorized by resolution of the Council.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1006) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.007 PARKING VEHICLES FOR GREASING OR REPAIR.
   No person shall construct, or cause to be constructed, repair, or cause to
be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be
dismantled, any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any public street in the
city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1007) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.008 PARKING VEHICLES FOR WASHING OR POLISHING FOR CHARGES.
   No person shall wash, or cause to be washed, or polish, or cause to be
polished, any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any public street in the city
when a charge is made for such service.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1008) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.009 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   (A)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs
indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or
create a hazardous situation.
   (B)   When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of
a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any
such designated place.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1009) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.010 PARKING ON NARROW STREETS.
   (A)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or
markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway
does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such
signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.
   (B)   When such official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected
upon narrow streets, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in
violation of any such sign or marking.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1010) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.011 PARKING ON GRADES.
   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway
when upon any grade exceeding 3% (within any business or residential district)
without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against the curb or
by other means.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1011) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.012 PARKING BY PEDDLERS AND VENDORS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or
park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise,
fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for
sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon, eating car or vehicle, on
any portion of any street within the city except that such vehicles, wagons or
pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a
period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of
this division shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon the
order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of
business or distribution.
   (B)   No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used, or intended
to be used, in the transportation of property for hire on any street while
awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written
permit to do so from the City Traffic Engineer, which permit shall designate
the specific location where such vehicle may stand.
   (C)   Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section,
and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person
shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon on any location other than as
designated in such permit. In the event the holder of any such permit is
convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the
provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the City
Traffic Engineer upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such
officer, and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six
months have elapsed from the date of such revocation.
   (D)   Vehicles, wagons or pushcarts from which goods, wares, merchandise,
fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for
sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon, eating car or vehicle, on
any portion of any street within the city are prohibited from operating within
15 feet of a fire hydrant, bus bench, transit shelter, crosswalk, driveway and
setting set out tables and chairs.
(‘65 Code, § 4-5.1012) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - -; Am. Ord. 718, passed 3-4-25)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.013 EMERGENCY PARKING SIGNS.
   (A)   Whenever the City Traffic Engineer shall determine that an emergency
traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the City Traffic
Engineer shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be
erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of
vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the City Traffic Engineer
shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs
shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the City
Traffic Engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.
   (B)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place
giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle
contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1013) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
ALL-NIGHT PARKING
§ 72.025 PERMITS.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day except in accordance with either of
the all-night parking permits described in this chapter.
('65 Code, §4-5.1501) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 556-C.S., passed 9-
6-05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.026 APPLICATIONS AND FEES FOR PERMITS.
   Each application for an all-night parking permit for a period longer than
seven nights shall be filed in writing with the Finance Director upon a form to
be accompanied by an investigation fee to be established by the City Council,
from time to time, by resolution, which shall entitle the applicant to park one
vehicle in a designated place for a period of 12 months. Each such application
shall set forth the name and address of the applicant; the license number of
the vehicle, the make, year, and type of vehicle; the necessity for the period
requested; and such other pertinent information as the Finance Director may
require.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1502) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.027 REFUND OF PERMIT FEES.
   When any person has been issued a permit for the all-night parking of a
motor vehicle and has paid the fee as set forth by the City Council by
resolution, and he subsequently finds that he will not need to use the permit
for the remaining portion of the permit period, he may request a refund
therefor. The refund shall be at the rate established by the City Council, from
time to time, by resolution.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1503) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.028 INVESTIGATION.
   Upon the filing of each such application, the Finance Director shall cause
to be made such investigation as he may deem proper to ascertain whether such
permit should be granted. If, after the investigation, the Finance Director
determines there is not adequate off-street parking space reasonably obtainable
by the applicant at the place of his residence, or within 600 feet thereof, for
the parking of the vehicle described in the application, an all-night parking
permit shall be granted, otherwise, it shall be denied.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1504) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.029 PERMITS; CONTENTS, TERM.
   Each permit shall contain a brief description of the vehicle, the area
within which the vehicle may be parked (which area shall be at the curb line
adjoining the permittee's residence property, except as hereinafter provided),
and the expiration date thereof. The permit shall be effective only as to such
vehicle and such area. No permit shall continue for a period of time longer
than the time reasonably required to provide off-street parking for the subject
vehicle and in no event longer than one year after the date of the permit. When
parking space is not available to the permittee in the area adjoining his
residence property because of the location of a fire hydrant, driveway, storm
drain or other physical deterrent, or because of prior applications and
permits, or other sufficient reasons, the Finance Director may designate an
area adjacent thereto.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1505) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.030 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   Upon the transfer of the vehicle described in any permit or upon the
permittee's change of place of residence or obtaining off-street parking
facilities for such vehicle rendering the permit unnecessary, the permittee
shall destroy the permit and report such destruction to the Finance Director.
Upon the expiration of any such permit or within 20 days prior thereto, the
Finance Director shall cause to be made such investigations as he may deem
proper to ascertain whether a renewal of the permit should be granted. The
Finance Director may grant a renewal of the permit if, as a result of the
investigation, he determines that the permittee could not reasonably have
sooner obtained the required off-street parking space and that the need for the
permit still exists.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1506) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.031 LOST PERMIT.
   If a permittee loses, surrenders or destroys an unexpired permit for a
certain vehicle, he may obtain another permit for the same vehicle for the
unexpired term or a permit for a substituted vehicle for the unexpired term
upon the payment of a fee established by Council resolution.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1507) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed -
- )
§ 72.032 DISPLAY OF PERMITS.
   A sticker supplied by the city evidencing the issuance of such permit shall
be at all times displayed in the five inch square of the lower left-hand corner
of the windshield. All previously issued stickers shall be removed prior to
display of newly issued sticker. The sticker shall be plainly visible from the
exterior.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1508) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 325-C.S., passed -
- )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.033 VEHICLES FOR WHICH PERMITS SHALL NOT BE ISSUED; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No all-night parking permit shall be issued to any person permitting
the all-night parking of any vehicle, other than a passenger automobile, van or
pickup truck whose primary purpose is to transport passengers for non-
commercial purposes. No permit shall be issued for any truck, trailer, van or
pickup truck whose primary purpose is commercial in nature, passenger trailer,
motor home, house car, camper, boat, boat trailer, commercially licensed
vehicle, other than a van or pickup truck whose primary purpose is to transport
passengers for non-commercial purposes, or any other vehicle, except as
provided herein.
   (B)   In the case of a van or pickup truck, the applicant shall sign a
declaration, under penalty of perjury, stating that the primary use of the
vehicle is the non-commercial transportation of passengers.
   (C)   Upon a written application to the Police Chief and a showing of good
cause that the application of this section works an unreasonable hardship upon
the owner or occupant of real property within the city, the Police Chief, with
or without holding a hearing thereon, may grant an exemption from the
provisions of this section upon such terms and conditions as the Police Chief
shall determine in his sole discretion.
   (D)   Permits issued under this section are subject to revocation if it is
discovered that the vehicle to which the permit is issued is not in compliance
with the declaration on file.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1509) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 166-C.S., passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 182-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 332-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.034 DESIGNATED STREETS IN PERMITS.
   The Finance Director may approve an application for a permit for all-night
parking on a fee basis as provided in this chapter and on any street in the
city, except Valley Boulevard, Las Tunas Drive and that portion of San Gabriel
Boulevard between Las Tunas Drive and the Interstate 10 interchange.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1510) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.035 EMERGENCY AND TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   The Police Chief shall have the discretionary power, in emergencies, to
issue to any person an all-night parking permit for a period not exceeding
seven consecutive nights. The permit may be either oral or written, at the
discretion of the Police Chief, and no investigation fee shall be charged.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1512) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.036 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   The Police Chief or the Finance Director may revoke any permit granted
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, without a refund of the fees
paid, when the holder thereof abuses the privilege granted by a wilful
violation of the conditions under which the permit was granted. Any person who
feels he is aggrieved by an arbitrary refusal of a permit or the revocation of
a permit may appeal to the Council for relief and a hearing. The decision of
the Council upon the appeal shall be final after the hearing.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1513) (Ord. 55-C.S., passed - - )
PRIVATE PARKING LIMITED
§ 72.045 FINDINGS.
   The Council finds that many persons abuse the provision of limited off-
street private parking made by business and professional people, organizations
and institutions in that such persons park their vehicles in such private off-
street parking lots or places which are obviously limited to use by customers,
clients, patients or patrons of the owner or other person in lawful possession
thereof, and that such persons so parking having no intention of making a
purchase or sale at the place of business, being or becoming a patient or
client at the office, or having any useful or other contact with such owner or
other person in lawful possession providing such limited off-street private
parking facility, and thereby use up the space reserved for or limited to the
use of customers, clients, patients or patrons of the owner or other person in
lawful possession of such facility to his loss or other disadvantage.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1701(a)) (Ord. 56-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Parking and operating vehicles on private property, see § 72.076
§ 72.046 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFF-STREET PRIVATE PARKING FACILITY. Any lot, place, stall or stalls
provided by the owner as defined below and limited to use by himself, his
employees or his customers, clients, patients or patrons to park vehicles
therein and off the public street while the person so parking a vehicle engages
in business or other contact with such owner, as distinguished from a parking
lot operated for the use of the general public.
   OWNER. The actual owner of the land, the tenant, the proprietor of an
establishment or other person in lawful possession thereof, or the agent or
employee of such owner, tenant, proprietor or other person in lawful
possession.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1701(b)) (Ord. 56-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.047 PARKING IN OFF-STREET PRIVATE PARKING FACILITIES.
   When an appropriate sign is in place on any off-street private parking
facility giving notice that such property is private property and limited to
use as vehicle parking for customers, patients, clients or other patrons of
such named owner, it shall be unlawful for any person other than a customer,
patient, client or patron of such owner to park a vehicle in the off-street
private parking facility.
(‘65 Code, § 4-5.1702) (Ord. 56-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 610-C.S., passed 4-
1-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.048 DUTY OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   Upon complaint to a police officer of the city by the owner of an off-street
private parking facility that some person has unlawfully parked a vehicle in
such place as provided in §
72.047, such police officer shall require the owner so complaining to sign a
formal complaint or endorse a citation before the police officer shall issue
and serve a citation for the violation.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1703) (Ord. 56-C.S., passed - - )
PARKING ON UNPAVED LAND
§ 72.055 LANDOWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   No person, whether as owner, lessee or person otherwise having the lawful
possession or control of any lot, plot or parcel of land used or intended to be
used for the parking of vehicles and having a normal capacity or parking area
for more than five vehicles, shall permit, allow or suffer any vehicle to be
parked therein unless the parking area of such land shall be fully hard-
surfaced in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works
Projects, as adopted by reference by the city.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1801) (Ord. 60-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.056 VEHICLE OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   No person who owns or has possession or control of any vehicle shall park
such vehicle in any lot, plot or parcel of land used or intended to be used for
the parking of vehicles and having a normal capacity or parking area for more
than five vehicles, unless the parking area of such land shall be fully hard-
surfaced. ('65 Code, § 4-5.1802) (Ord. 60-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED
§ 72.065 TWENTY MINUTE PARKING.
   (A)   Green curb markings shall mean no standing or parking for a period of
time longer than 20 minutes at any time on any day or as designated by
appropriate signs or markings.
   (B)   When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been
determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving
notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such
vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking, sign or parking meter in
violation thereof.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1101) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.066 ONE-HOUR PARKING.
   (A)   One hour parking commercial vehicles (three to five tons) on
nonresidential streets. No person shall park or leave standing any commercial
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons (6,000 pounds), but less
than five tons (10,000 pounds), upon any street for a period exceeding one hour
except as follows:
      (1)   While actively loading or unloading property, such time will be
allowed as necessary to complete such work; and
      (2)   When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in the aid of,
the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which the
vehicle is parked, such time as is necessary will be allowed to complete such
service.
   (B)   One hour parking commercial vehicles (five tons or more) on non-
residential streets. No person shall park or leave standing any commercial
vehicle with a gross weight of five tons (10,000 pounds) upon any street for a
period exceeding one hour except as follows:
      (1)   While actively loading or unloading property, such time will be
allowed as necessary to complete the work; and
      (2)   When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in the aid of,
the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which the
vehicle is parked, such time as is necessary will be allowed to complete such
service.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1102) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 388-C.S., passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 389-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 409-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.067 TWO-HOUR PARKING.
   When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined
by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and
holidays, for a period of time longer than two hours.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1103) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.068 PARALLEL PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREET.
   (A)   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be
stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the
direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place
prohibiting such stopping or standing.
   (B)   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless
signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.
   (C)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine when
standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way
street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of
any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall
erect signs giving notice thereof.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1104) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
One-way streets and alleys; signs, see § 70.20
§ 72.069 DIAGONAL PARKING.
   (A)   On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution
of the Council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are
in place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except:
      (1)   At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings
allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the
allotted space; and
      (2)   With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the
curb.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is
actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or
goods, in which event the applicable provisions of §
72.068 of this subchapter shall be complied with.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1105) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.070 PARKING SPACE MARKINGS.
   (A)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to install and maintain
parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where
authorized parking is permitted.
   (B)   When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to
other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left
standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of
such vehicle makes compliance impossible.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1106) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.071 ALL-NIGHT PARKING.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day except in accordance with all-night
parking permits as provided by §§
72.025 through 72.037 of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1107) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 556-C.S., passed 9-
6-05
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.072 LIMITED CURB PARKING SPACE; RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, LIMITED CURB PARKING
SPACE shall mean an area open for lawful parking alongside of, and adjacent to,
a curb, which area is restricted by other parked vehicles or by other
restrictions to street parking and is not of sufficient length to permit two or
more vehicles to freely move for parking therein at the same time.
   (B)   Parking right-of-way. Any person seeking to park his vehicle in a
limited curb parking space, whose vehicle arrives at such parking space prior
to any other vehicle, and who proceeds beyond the space a distance not to
exceed ten feet for the purpose of backing his vehicle therein, shall have the
right-of-way over any person driving, or attempting to drive, any other vehicle
directly into such limited curb parking space or who in any manner obstructs
such limited curb parking space, and the driver of the other vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to the driver who first arrived at the parking space.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1108) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.073 PARKING EXEMPTIONS FOR CERTAIN DISABLED PERSONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any veteran who is
entitled to either of the exemptions provided in Cal. Veh. Code § 9105 and Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code § 10783 shall be allowed to park in restricted zones. The
provisions of this section shall not be construed, however, to allow the
stopping, parking or standing of a vehicle at the times and places that
stopping, parking or standing of all vehicles is prohibited absolutely by state
or local laws.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1109) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.074 PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Parking commercial vehicles on resident streets; more than three tons
but less than five tons. No person shall park or leave standing any commercial
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons (6,000 pounds), but less
than five tons (10,000 pounds), upon any street that is not a designated truck
route, nor shall any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of
three tons (6,000 pounds), but less than five tons (10,000 pounds), be parked
or left standing on any residential property except as follows:
      (1)   While actively loading or unloading property for such time that is
reasonably necessary to complete the work;
      (2)   When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in the aid of,
performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which the vehicle
is parked for such time that is reasonably necessary to complete the service.
   (B)   Parking commercial vehicles on residential streets; more than five
tons. No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle with a
maximum gross weight of five tons (10,000 pounds) or more upon any street that
is not a designated truck route, nor shall any commercial vehicle with a
maximum gross weight of five tons (10,000 pounds), be parked or left standing
on any residential property except as follows:
      (1)   While actively loading or unloading property for such tune that is
reasonably necessary to complete the work;
      (2)   When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in the aid of,
performance of a service to or on property in the block in which the vehicle is
parked for such time that is reasonably necessary to complete the service.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1110) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 369-C.S., passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 409-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.075 PARKING ON CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   Whenever the City Traffic Engineer shall determine that the orderly,
efficient conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of
vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted, the City
Traffic Engineer shall have the power and authority to order signs and to have
such signs erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus
prohibited, limited or restricted.
   (B)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place
giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to
the directions or provisions of such signs.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1111) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.076 PARKING AND OPERATING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive or leave any vehicle in, over or upon
any private property without the express or implied permission of the owner
thereof, or the person entitled to the possession thereof, for the time being,
or the authorized agent of either, except that the provisions of this section
shall not apply to public or private parking lots.
   (B)   Operators of private buses using private property to park, load or
unload passengers shall first obtain a city business license in accordance with
§
110.67 of this code, and provide documentation to the city that the owner and
all tenants thereof approve of such use of the property.
(‘65 Code, § 4-5.1112) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 610-C.S., passed 4-
1-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Private parking limited, see §§
72.045 through
72.048
§ 72.077 NO STOPPING ZONES.
   (A)   The City Traffic Engineer shall designate established no stopping
zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of
vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is
prohibited.
   (B)   During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop such vehicle on any of the
streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the Council as no
stopping zones.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1113) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.078 MISSION DISTRICT ZONE PARKING.
   (A)   Parking restrictions established. When authorized signs or curb
markings have been determined by the Community Development Director to be
necessary within the Mission District Zone and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle at
any time or an any day for any period of time longer than indicated on said
signs or curb markings.
   (B)   Enforcement times for other parking restrictions. Notwithstanding
other provisions of this code, all parking restrictions within the Mission
District Zone which are duly posted with authorized signs or curb markings,
shall be enforced during the hours and during the days duly indicated on the
posted signs.
   (C)   Valet parking. The City Manager is hereby authorized to develop and
implement procedures for valet parking within the Mission District Zone.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1114) (Ord. 446-C.S., passed 4-18-95)
Cross-reference:
   Mission District Zone, see §§ 153.300 through 153.308
§ 72.079 SIGNS, CURB MARKINGS, AND PARKING METERS.
   When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined
by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle in
violation of any posted sign, legible curb marking or parking meter.
Penalty, see § 10.99
LOADING AND UNLOADING
§ 72.085 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and mark
loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
      (1)   At any place in the business district; and
      (2)   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in
front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
   (B)   In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any
block be reserved for loading zone purposes.
   (C)   Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all
curbs within such zones.
   (D)   Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top
of all curbs within such zones.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1201) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
§ 72.086 CURB MARKINGS.
   The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions
and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein shall
place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations,
and such curb markings shall have the following meanings:
   (A)   Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time, except as
permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone
marked or signed as a bus zone.
   (B)   Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any
purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials;
provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more
than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20
minutes.
   (C)   White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose
other than the loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of
depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes,
and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day,
except Sundays and holidays, and except as follows:
      (1)   When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the
restrictions shall apply at all times.
      (2)   When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall
apply at all times except when the theater is closed.
   (D)   When the City Traffic Engineer, as authorized by the provisions of
this chapter, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation
of any of the provisions of this section.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1202) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.087 EFFECT OF PERMISSION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD.
   (A)   Permission granted by the provisions of this chapter to stop or stand
a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading materials shall apply only to
commercial vehicles, except private buses, and shall not extend beyond the time
necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes.
   (B) The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
deliveries and to the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages
and United States mail.
   (C)   Permission granted by the provisions of this chapter to stop or park
for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or
unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary
therefor, and in no event for more than three minutes.
   (D)   Within the total time limits specified by the provisions of this
section, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate
necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of
the privileges granted by the provisions of this section.
   (E)   Private buses are expressly prohibited from stopping, standing,
parking, loading, or unloading passengers on all public streets or rights-of-
way except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, or as otherwise excepted in §
71.81 or other provisions of this code as may be amended from time to time.
(‘65 Code, § 4-5.1203) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 610-C.S., passed 4-
1-14)
§ 72.088 RESTRICTED USES.
   (A)   Loading zones. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any
yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers
or material for such time as is permitted in § 72.087. ('65 Code, § 4-5.1204)
   (B)   Passenger loading zones. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or
unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in § 72.087 of this
subchapter. ('65 Code, § 4-5.1205)
   (C)   Alleys. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose
other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. ('65
Code, § 4-5.1206)
(Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.089 PUBLIC TRANSIT BUS ZONES.
   (A)   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite
curb space for the loading and unloading of public transit buses and to
determine the location thereof.
   (B)   Public transit bus zones shall normally be established on the far side
of an intersection.
(‘65 Code, § 4-5.1207) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 610-C.S., passed 4-
1-14)
§ 72.090 SPECIAL PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, SPECIAL PASSENGER LOADING
ZONES shall be those areas adjacent to the curb, not more than 60 feet in
length, located between two approved permanent or portable signs in front of or
adjacent to, and within the projected real property boundaries of, any church,
theater, club, place of business or public gathering. Such signs shall be
provided and paid for by the church, theater, club, place of business or public
gathering for which they are used and shall be approved by the City Traffic
Engineer.
   (B)   Use of special passenger loading zones. No operator of any vehicle
shall stop, stand or park such vehicle in any special passenger loading zone
when approved permanent or portable signs are in place, as provided in division
(A) of this section, for any period of time longer than is necessary for the
loading or unloading of passengers and not to exceed three minutes.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1208) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.091 FUNERAL ZONES.
   No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle for any
period of time longer than it is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, and not to exceed three minutes, at any place between the limit
markers or signs placed within the projected real property boundaries of any
undertaking establishment, private residence or any public or private place at
any time during or within 40 minutes prior to the beginning of any funeral or
funeral service, if such director or person in charge shall have placed and
maintained prior to and during such time limit specified two approved portable
signs, one at each extremity of such place, upon the sidewalk or pavement area
and within two feet of the curb.
('65 Code, § 4-5.1209) (Ord. 49-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that the 25 miles per hour speed limit permitted by state law
upon the hereinafter designated streets or parts of streets does not facilitate
the orderly movement of vehicular traffic thereon, and that a speed greater
than 25 miles per hour thereon would be reasonable and safe, and it is,
therefore, hereby declared that the prima facie speed limits upon the herein
designated streets or parts of streets shall be as set forth in this schedule
when appropriate signs are erected giving notice thereof:
Street Location Speed (m.p.h.) Ord. No. Date Passed
Street        Location      Speed     Ord. No.                  Date Passed
                            (m.p.h.)
              Mission Rd.             485-C.S. 588-C.S.         2-3-98
Broadway      to Junipero   25        663                       4-3-12
              Serra Dr.                                         10-6-20
              Junipero                588-C.S.                  4-3-12
Broadway      Serra Dr. to  25        663                       10-6-20
              Del Mar Ave.
              Del Mar Ave.            485-C.S.                  2-3-98
Broadway      to east city  30        663                       10-6-20
              limits
              North city              485-C.S.                  2-3-98
Del Mar Ave.  limits to Las 35        663                       10-6-20
              Tunas Dr.
              Las Tunas Dr.           485-C.S.                  2-3-98
Del Mar Ave.  to Mission    25        663                       10-6-20
              Rd.
              Mission Rd.             485-C.S.                  2-3-98
Del Mar Ave.  to Valley     35        663                       10-6-20
              Blvd.
              Valley Blvd.            485-C.S.                  2-3-98
Del Mar Ave.  to south city 30        663                       10-6-20
              limits
              Mission Dr.             485-C.S .                 2-3-98
Hermosa Dr.   to Del Mar    25        663                       10-6-20
              Ave.
              Del Mar Ave.            485-C.S .                 2-3-98
Hermosa Dr.   to east city  25        663                       10-6-20
              limits
Junipero      San Marino              588-C.S .                 4-3-12
Serra Dr.     Ave. to       30        663                       10-6-20
              Mission Rd.
              West city                  485-C.S .              2-3-98
Las Tunas Dr. limits to Del 35           663                    10-6-20
              Mar Ave.
              Del Mar Ave.               485-C.S .              2-3-98
Las Tunas Dr. to San        35           663                    10-6-20
              Gabriel Blvd.
              San Gabriel                485-C.S .              2-3-98
Las Tunas Dr. Blvd. to east 35           663                    10-6-20
              city limits
              Del Mar Ave.               485-C.S .              2-3-98
Live Oak St.  to San        25           663                    10-6-20
              Gabriel Blvd.
              Del Mar Ave.               485-C.S .              2-3-98
Longden Dr.   to San        35           663                    10-6-20
              Gabriel Blvd.
              North city                 485-C.S .              2-3-98
Mission Dr.   limits to Las 25           663                    10-6-20
              Tunas Dr.
Mission Dr.   Las Tunas Dr. 25           485-C.S .              2-3-98
              to Broadway                663                    10-6-20
Mission Dr.   Broadway to   25           485-C.S .              2-3-98
              Ramona St.                 663                    10-6-20
              West city
Mission Rd.   limits to     40           588- C.S.           4-3-12
              Junipero                663                       10-6-20
              Serra Dr.
              Junipero                   485-C.S .              2-3-98
Mission Rd.   Serra Dr. to  30           663                    10-6-20
              Del Mar Ave.
              Del Mar Ave.               485-C.S .              2-3-98
Mission Rd.   to east city  35           663                    10-6-20
              limits
Ramona St.    Mission Rd.   30        588-C.S .                 4-3-12
              to Wells St.            663                       10-6-20
              West city                  485-C.S .              2-3-98
Roses Rd.     limits to Del 25           663                    10-6-20
              Mar Ave.
San Gabriel   North city                 485-C.S .              2-3-98
Blvd.         limits to Las 35           663                    10-6-20
              Tunas Dr.
San Gabriel   Las Tunas Dr.              485-C.S .              2-3-98
Blvd.         to Mission    35           663                    10-6-20
              Rd.
San Gabriel   Mission Rd.                485-C.S . 588-C.S .    2-3-98
Blvd.         to Valley        35/2663                       4-3-12
              Blvd.                                             10-6-20
San Gabriel   Valley Blvd.  35           485-C.S .              2-3-98
Blvd.         to I-10 Fwy.               663                    10-6-20
San Marino    North city              485-C.S .                    2-3-98
Ave.          limits to     25        663                       10-6-20
              Hermosa Dr.
Santa Anita   Hermosa Dr.             588-C.S .                 4-3-12
St.           to Las Tunas  25        663                       10-6-20
              Dr.
Santa Anita   Las Tunas Dr.           588-C.S .                 4-3-12
St.           to Mission    25        663                       10-6-20
              Dr.
Santa Anita   Mission Dr.             588-C.S .                 4-3-12
St.           to Mission    25        663                       10-6-20
              Rd.
              West city               485-C.S .                    2-3-98
Valley Blvd.  limits to     35           663                    10-6-20
              Walnut St.
              Walnut St. to           485-C.S .                    2-3-98
Valley Blvd.  east city     35           663                    10-6-20
              limits
 
25* = 25 m.p.h. when children present (school zone)
(‘65 Code, § 4-5.1401)
Penalty, see § 10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED, WRECKED AND DISMANTLED VEHICLES
      
91.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   BOXING
      
94.   CEMETERIES
      
95.   TREES AND SHRUBS; WEEDS
      
96.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
97.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
98.   NUISANCES
      
99.   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
      
100.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED, WRECKED AND DISMANTLED VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Findings and declarations
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Abandonment of vehicle prohibited
   
90.04   Exceptions
   
90.05   Effect on other laws
   
90.06   Administration and enforcement
   
90.07   Right of entry of certain persons
   
90.08   Administrative costs
   
90.09   Notice of intention to remove vehicle; public hearing
   
90.10   Hearings; determinations
   
90.11   Appeals
   
90.12   Removal of vehicle
   
90.13   Notice to state department of motor vehicles
   
90.14   Assessment of costs
   
90.15   Failure to abate nuisance
§ 90.01 FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the state pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Veh. Code §
22660 to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or
parts thereof, as public nuisances, the Council hereby makes the following
findings and declarations:
      The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, is
hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private
property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create
fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and
to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the
presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part
thereof, on private or public property, except as expressly permitted by the
provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance
which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-24.01) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Nuisances, see Ch. 98
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel. HIGHWAY shall
include STREET.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. This term shall not include HIGHWAY.
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or
drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
('65 Code, § 5-24.02) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
§ 90.03 ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park,
store or leave, or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving, of any
licensed or unlicensed vehicle, or part thereof, which is in an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or
public property, within the city for a period in excess of ten days unless such
vehicle, or part thereof, is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful
manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or
private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler,
licensed vehicle dealer or a junk yard.
('65 Code, § 5-24.14) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
      (2)   A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or junk dealer, or when such storage or
parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not authorize the maintenance of
a public or private nuisance as defined pursuant to provisions of law other
than Cal. Veh. Code Division 11, Chapter 10 (commencing with § 22650) and this
chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-24.03) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
§ 90.05 EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.
   The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulation of
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. The
provisions of this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to the other
regulatory codes, statutes and laws heretofore or hereafter enacted by the
city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
('65 Code, § 5-24.04) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
§ 90.06 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager. In the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter, such officer, his deputies or city police
officers, firefighters, health officers, code enforcement officers, or building
inspectors may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle, or
parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to
remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or part thereof, declared to be a
nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; provided such persons are
regularly salaried full-time employees of the city.
('65 Code, § 5-24.05) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 97-C.S., passed - -
)
§ 90.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF CERTAIN PERSONS.
   When the Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person,
such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public
property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof,
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-24.06) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
§ 90.08 ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
   The Council from time to time shall determine and fix an amount to be
assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of the removal of
any vehicle, or part thereof) for the purposes of administering the provisions
of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-24.07) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
§ 90.09 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO REMOVE VEHICLE; PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   A notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle as a public
nuisance shall be given at least ten days prior to the abatement thereof. The
notice shall be mailed at least ten days before the hearing by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last
equalized county assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of
record, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are
not available to determine ownership. The notice shall read as follows:
   NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE
      TO: The registered and legal owners of the motor vehicle described herein
and to the owner of the land upon which it is located.
   PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that a certain
                                                                 (make, model,
license number, and/or engine numbers) is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled
or inoperative condition upon property located at
                                 and constitutes a public nuisance.
   The City of San Gabriel intends to remove said vehicle from said location
and abate said public nuisance at the expiration of ten days from the date of
mailing of this notice.
   You and each of you may request a hearing before the City Manager of said
city within ten days of the date of the mailing hereof. You may appear in
person at said hearing.
   The owner of the property may submit a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the vehicle on his land within said ten day period. Said
statement shall contain his reasons for such denial.
   The costs of removal may be charged against the owner of the parcel of land
on which the vehicle, or part thereof, is located.
   DATED: This         day of                  , 19       .
                                     
   City Manager
   (B)   If no hearing is requested, the City Manager may order the removal of
the vehicle from the property as a public nuisance at the conclusion of the ten
day notice period and determine the administrative costs and the costs of
removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the
vehicle, or part thereof, is located. The order requiring removal shall include
a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the correct identification
number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.
('65 Code, § 5-24.08) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 97-C.S., passed - -
; Am. Ord. 212-C.S., passed - - )
§ 90.10 HEARINGS; DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   All hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
held before the City Manager or one or more of his deputies, designated by him
as Hearing Officer, who shall hear all facts and testimony deemed pertinent.
Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle,
or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on private
property or public property. The Hearing Officer shall not be limited by the
technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is
located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written
statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land,
with his reasons for such denial.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer may impose such conditions and take such other
action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the
purposes of this chapter. He may delay the time for the removal of the vehicle,
or part thereof, if, in his opinion, the circumstances so justify. At the
conclusion of the public hearing, the Hearing Officer may find that a vehicle,
or part thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on
private or public property, order the same removed from the property as a
public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the
administrative costs and the costs of removal to be charged against the owner
of the parcel of land on which the vehicle, or part thereof, is located. The
order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or part
thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the
vehicle, if available at the site.
   (C)   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the
land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, the Hearing Officer shall not assess costs of
administration for removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the
vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such
landowner.
   (D)   If an interested person makes a written presentation to the Hearing
Officer but does not appear, such interested person shall be notified in
writing of the decision.
('65 Code, § 5-24.09) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 97-C.S., passed - -
)
§ 90.11 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Hearing Officer
by filing a written notice of appeal with the Hearing Officer within 10 days
after his decision.
   (B)   The appeal shall be heard by the Council which may affirm, amend or
reverse the order or take any other action deemed appropriate.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the
hearing to the appellant and those persons set forth in §
90.09 of this chapter.
   (D)   In conducting the hearing the Council shall not be limited by the
technical rules of evidence.
('65 Code, § 5-24.10) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
§ 90.12 REMOVAL OF VEHICLE.
   Ten days after the adoption of the order declaring the vehicle, or parts
thereof, to be a public nuisance, or ten days from the date of mailing of the
notice of the decision, if such notice is required by the provisions of §
90.10, or 15 days after such action of the Council authorizing removal
following an appeal, the vehicle, or parts thereof, may be disposed of by
removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has
been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
('65 Code, § 5-24.11) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
§ 90.13 NOTICE TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle, or part thereof,
notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state
identifying the vehicle, or part thereof, removed. At the same time there shall
be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration
available, including, but not limited to, registration certificates of title or
license plates.
('65 Code, § 5-24.12) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 97-C.S., passed - -
)
§ 90.14 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of § 90.10 are
not paid within 30 days from the date of the order, or the final disposition of
an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land
pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5 and shall be
transmitted to the Tax Collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the
same priority as other city or county taxes.
('65 Code, § 5-24.13) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
§ 90.15 FAILURE TO ABATE NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to
remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part
thereof, or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in
accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where
such state law is applicable.
('65 Code, § 5-24.15) (Ord. 40-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 91: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Registration of alarm agents
   
91.03   Appeals to appeals Board
   
91.04   Appeals to Council
   
91.05   False alarms; prevention payments
   
91.06   Standards and regulations
   
91.07   Submission of emergency information
   
91.08   Automatic shutoff requirements; audible alarms
   
91.09   Delay device requirements
   
91.10   Power supply
   
91.11   Testing alarm systems
   
91.12   Alarm systems emitting sounds similar to emergency sirens prohibited
   
91.13   Direct dial telephone devices
   
91.14   Fees
   
91.15   Limitations on liability
Permits
   
91.25   Permit required
   
91.26   Application
   
91.27   Investigation of alarm system
   
91.28   Suspension and revocation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM AGENT. Any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include
the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling,
servicing, responding to (excluding public safety officers) or causing others
to respond to an alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.
   ALARM BUSINESS. The business carried on by any individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or
causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,
moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or
facility.
   ALARM OWNER. A person who owns, controls, subscribes, leases, uses or
operates an alarm system installed upon a residence or commercial or industrial
business establishment pursuant to this chapter.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used
for the detection of intrusion into a building, structure or facility or for
alerting others of an event within a facility, or both, which event causes a
local audible alarm or transmission of a signal or message for the purpose of
evoking a response from law enforcement. ALARM SYSTEM shall include, but shall
not be limited to, direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor
alarms. ALARM SYSTEM shall not include vehicle alarms, fire alarms, domestic
violence alarms, local alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response.
Devices which are not designed or used to evoke a police response, or used to
register alarms that are intended to be audible, visible or perceptible outside
of the protected building, structure or facility, are not included within this
definition, nor are auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to
protect its systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm
system.
   APPELLANT. An alarm owner of a residence or commercial or industrial
business establishment which perfects an appeal pursuant to this chapter.
   APPLICANT. An alarm owner of a residence or commercial or industrial
business establishment which files an application for a permit as provided in
this chapter.
   AUDIBLE ALARM. A device designed for the detection of an intrusion on
premises which device generates an audible sound on the premises when it is
actuated.
   COMMERCIAL or INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A firm, corporation,
association, sole proprietor, partnership, organization or company which has an
alarm system installed or maintained pursuant to this chapter.
   DAY. A calendar day.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
accidental tripping, misoperation, malfunction, misuse or the neglect of the
alarm owner or of their employees, representatives or agents. Upon the failure
of the Police Department to find any evidence of intrusion or other need or
cause for activating an alarm system, a presumption of a false alarm will be
made. FALSE ALARM shall not include alarms caused by earthquakes, winds,
malfunctions of telephone line circuits or external causes beyond the control
of the alarm owner.
   PERMITEE. Any person who shall be granted a permit, as provided in this
chapter, and their agents and representatives.
   PROPRIETOR ALARM. An alarm which is not regularly serviced by an alarm
business.
   RESIDENCE. A single or multi-family dwelling unit which has an alarm system
installed or maintained pursuant to this chapter.
(‘65 Code, § 4-10.01) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 673, passed 7-6-21)
§ 91.02 REGISTRATION OF ALARM AGENTS.
   No person shall engage in, conduct or operate as an alarm agent without
registering his name and filing a copy of his state identification card with
the City Clerk. No fee or application shall be required for such registration.
('65 Code, § 4-10.02) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.03 APPEALS TO APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby created an Appeals Board within the city. The members
of the Appeals Board shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be three
in number.
   (B)   In the event a permit is suspended as provided in §
91.28 the permittee may perfect an appeal to the Appeals Board by filing a
notice of appeal with the City Clerk setting forth the facts and circumstances
regarding the appeal. Such notice of appeal shall be filed not later than ten
days after the service of a notice of suspension as provided in §
91.28 of this chapter.
   (C)   The Appeals Board shall consider the appeal not less than five days
after the date on which the appeal is made and not later than 15 days after the
date on which such appeal is filed with the City Clerk.
('65 Code, § 4-10.07) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
§ 91.04 APPEALS TO COUNCIL.
   (A)   If an appellant is aggrieved by any action of the Appeals Board, the
appellant may appeal to the Council by filing with the City Clerk a statement
addressed to the Council setting forth the basis for the appeal from the action
of the Appeals Board. The City Clerk shall notify the appellant in writing of
the time and place set for the hearing on the appeal. The Council, at its next
regular meeting held not less than 10 days after the date on which such appeal
has been filed with the City Clerk, shall hear the appellant, the City Manager
and all relevant evidence and shall determine the merits of the appeal. The
Council may affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the Appeals Board, and
the decision of the Council shall be final.
   (B)   The right to appeal to the Council from an action of the Appeals Board
shall terminate upon the expiration of 10 days following the deposit of a
registered letter in the United States Post Office, or personal service of such
letter, advising the appellant of the action of the Appeals Board and the right
of appeal to the Council.
('65 Code, § 4-10.08) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
§ 91.05 FALSE ALARMS; PREVENTION PAYMENTS.
   (A)   When emergency messages, signals or notices are received by the Police
Department that evidence a failure to obtain a permit or comply with any other
requirement of this chapter, the City Manager is authorized to demand that the
owner of the alarm system initiating such message, signal or notice, or their
representative, disconnect the alarm system until it is made to comply with
such requirements.
   (B)   Any alarm owner of a residence or commercial or industrial business
establishment which maintains or has an alarm system which causes any signal,
message or alarm to be transmitted to the Police Department, either by direct
telephone or other direct communication, or by communication from an alarm
agent or an alarm business, or by a person responding to an audible alarm, and
which is proven to be a false alarm, shall pay a false alarm prevention payment
to the city in an amount established by the City Council, from time to time, by
resolution.
   (C)   An alarm system permit may be suspended or revoked, as provided in §
91.28 of this chapter, in addition to the payment of the prevention payment as
provided in this section.
(‘65 Code, § 4-10.09) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 528-C.S., passed 2-
18-03; Am. Ord. 673, passed 7-6-21)
§ 91.06 STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
   All alarm systems and appurtenant equipment installed within the city shall
meet or exceed the highest standards of the industry and those standards which
may hereafter be established by the city. The city reserves the right to
inspect all systems installed within the city.
('65 Code, § 4-10.10) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.07 SUBMISSION OF EMERGENCY INFORMATION.
   The alarm system permittee shall supply on its application for a permit, as
provided for in §
91.26 of this chapter, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
selling or installing alarm company or, if the permittee is not under a service
contract with an alarm system business, at least two persons to call who will
be able to respond during nonbusiness hours in the event of an emergency. In
the event such names, addresses and telephone numbers change, the permittee
shall supply the city with such changes within 20 days after the change.
(‘65 Code, § 4-10.11) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.08 AUTOMATIC SHUTOFF REQUIREMENTS; AUDIBLE ALARMS.
   All audible alarm systems for which permits are required by this chapter
shall include a device which will limit the generation of the audible sound of
the system to not longer than 60 minutes after activation when the alarm system
is protecting a commercial or industrial structure. Such systems shall include
an automatic resetting device which shall cause the subject system to be
rearmed upon an automatic shutoff.
('65 Code, § 4-10.12) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.09 DELAY DEVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   Burglary detection alarm systems for which permits are required by this
chapter shall include a device which will provide a minimum of a 30 second
delay of the original transmission and activate a signal immediately in such a
manner as to be perceptible to a person lawfully entering, leaving or occupying
the premises. Such a device is intended to provide an opportunity for the alarm
owner of a residence or commercial or industrial business establishment having
lawful control of the alarm system to terminate its operation after activation
but prior to the transmission of a false alarm.
(‘65 Code, § 4-10.13) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 673, passed 7-6-21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.10 POWER SUPPLY.
   Such alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply in
such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal utility electrical
service will not activate the alarm system. The backup power supply shall be
capable of at least four hours of operation.
('65 Code, § 4-10.14) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.11 TESTING ALARM SYSTEMS.
   Permittees under this chapter shall notify the Police Department prior to
any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration or installation
of a system which would normally result in a police response, which might
activate a false alarm. Any alarm activated where such prior notice has been
given shall not constitute a false alarm.
('65 Code, § 4-10.15) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.12 ALARM SYSTEMS EMITTING SOUNDS SIMILAR TO EMERGENCY SIRENS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to install or use an alarm system which, upon
activation, emits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for
civil defense purposes.
('65 Code, § 4-10.16) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.13 DIRECT DIAL TELEPHONE DEVICES.
   No person shall maintain or operate a telephone alarm system which is
intended to automatically and directly dial, upon activation, the telephone
number of the office of the Police Department or Fire Department.
('65 Code, § 4-10.17) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.14 FEES.
   The fees prescribed by this chapter shall be in addition to any other lawful
fees imposed by the city for doing or conducting business within the city.
('65 Code, § 4-10.18) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
§ 91.15 LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY.
   The city shall be under no obligation or duty to any permittee or any other
person by reason of any provision of this chapter or the exercise of any
privilege by any permittee pursuant to this chapter, including, but not limited
to, any defect in a police alarm system, any delay in the transmission of an
alarm message to any emergency unit, or any damage caused by any delay in
responding to any alarm by any city officer, employee or agent.
('65 Code, § 4-10.19) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
PERMITS
§ 91.25 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No alarm owner of a residence or commercial or industrial business
establishment shall possess, install or use an alarm system without first
applying for and receiving an alarm system permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(‘65 Code, § 4-10.03) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 673, passed 7-6-21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.26 APPLICATION.
   Applications for alarm system permits shall be filed with the Finance
Director on forms provided by the city, and the applicant at that time shall
pay the appropriate fee established by resolution of the Council. The
application shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall contain
such information as may be deemed necessary by the City Manager The permits
provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the Finance Director and shall
be nontransferable.
('65 Code, § 4-10.04) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
§ 91.27 INVESTIGATION OF ALARM SYSTEM.
   Upon receiving an application from any alarm owner of a residence or
commercial or industrial business establishment for an alarm system permit, the
City Manager shall cause an investigation to be made of the system to be
installed to determine if the system complies with the requirements of this
chapter. If the proposed system complies with this chapter, the Finance
Director shall cause a permit to be issued.
(‘65 Code, § 4-10.05) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 673, passed 7-6-21)
§ 91.28 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   If at any time it shall come to the attention of the City Manager that
the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter has violated any
provision of this chapter, or rules or regulations made pursuant to this
chapter, including, but not limited to, false alarms which exceed the numbers
permitted pursuant to § 91.05 of this chapter, or has refused to pay the false
alarm prevention payment as provided in said section, the City Manager may
suspend the permit.
   (B)   If an alarm system permit is suspended as provided in this section,
the permit shall be deemed suspended and shall not be used for ten days after
the notice of suspension is deposited in the United States Post Office by
registered mail or personally served upon the permittee. Upon the failure of
the permittee to cause the system to be repaired or to be properly used and
operated within such ten day period, or to pay the delinquent false alarm
prevention payment, or to file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk, the
permit shall be revoked at the expiration of such ten day period, and the alarm
system may not thereafter be used until a new permit is issued.
('65 Code, § 4-10.06) (Ord. 242-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Age when offspring are considered animals
   
92.02   Keeping certain animals and fowl prohibited; exceptions
Bees
   
92.20   Purpose
   
92.21   Definitions
   
92.22   Keeping bees restricted
Wild Animals
   
92.35   Keeping wild animals; permit required
   
92.36   Issuance of permit
Dogs
   
92.45   Definition
   
92.46   License and tag required
   
92.47   Application for license; presentation of vaccination certificate
   
92.48   Issuance of license; required information
   
92.49   License tax; delinquencies
   
92.50   Licenses; records to be kept
   
92.51   License tags to be fastened to collar or harness
   
92.52   Leashes required; animal nuisances cleanup
   
92.53   Impoundment of certain dogs; right of entry
   
92.54   Reports of dog bites
   
92.55   Confinement of biting dogs
   
92.56   Permit required to remove from confinement
   
92.57   Examination of animals for rabies; quarantine
   
92.58   Vaccination and revaccination required
   
92.59   Vaccination certificate required
   
92.60   Impounding of unvaccinated dogs
   
92.61   Enforcement of provisions
Impoundment
   
92.70   Impoundment of animals
Potentially Dangerous and Vicious Dogs
   
92.80   Declaration of public nuisance
   
92.81   Definitions
   
92.82   Procedure for declaring dog potentially dangerous and/or vicious
   
92.83   Administrative hearing by City Manager or designee of City Manager
   
92.84   Appeal procedure
   
92.85   Licensing and vaccinating
   
92.86   Seizure and impoundment
   
92.87   Cost assessment when animal seized
   
92.88   Identification and sterilization requirement for vicious dogs
   
92.89   Procedure for destruction
   
92.90   Restraint or enclosure
   
92.91   Posting of property where potentially dangerous or vicious dogs are
maintained
   
92.92   Notice of disposal or escape
   
92.93   Owners to permit compliance inspections
   
92.94   Removal from list of potentially dangerous dogs
   
92.95   Unlawful to own, harbor or keep dog found by another jurisdiction to be
potentially dangerous or vicious
   
92.96   Keeping by minors prohibited
Cats
   
92.100   Definitions
   
92.101   Voluntary licensing
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   
Rats and vermin, see §§ 97.10 through 97.16
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 AGE WHEN OFFSPRING ARE CONSIDERED ANIMALS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the young or offspring of any of the
animals regulated by this subchapter, except rabbits, shall be considered as
animals when they reach the age of four months, and the young or offspring of
any of the fowl and rabbits regulated by this subchapter shall be considered as
fowl and rabbits when they reach the age of nine weeks.
('65 Code, § 6-2.101) (Ord. 459, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 52-C.S., passed - - )
§ 92.02 KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS AND FOWL PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or permit to
be kept or maintained, in the city horses, mules, donkeys, goats, cows,
roosters, turkeys, pigeons, ducks, geese, or other such similar animals or fowl
within the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, house or maintain more
than three canine or feline animals on any premises, lot, plot or parcel of
land within the city, except in a duly licensed pet shop or licensed veterinary
hospital. Any more than three of such canine or feline animals, or combination
of canine and feline animals, shall constitute a kennel, and kennels are not
permitted in the city, except in the M-1 Zone subject to approval of a
conditional use permit.
   (C)   Hens. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or
permit to be kept or maintained, hens within the city except as provided below.
      (1)   Number. A maximum of 15 hens, including chicks, may be kept on a
parcel in the R-1 Zone.
      (2)   Enclosure. Hens shall be located within an enclosure and not be
allowed to roam at large.
         (a)   Location. The enclosure shall be located in the rear yard in
accordance with the following setbacks:
            1.   Forty feet from any dwelling house or structure used as a
dwelling house unless it is occupied by the owner of the hens or chicks.
            2.   Fifty feet from the front property line.
            3.   Twenty-five feet from the street side property line on corner
lots.
            4.   Fifteen feet from interior side property lines.
            5.   Fifteen feet from rear property lines, except where the rear
of the property abuts a public alley. In such case, the enclosure may be kept
up to the rear property line.
         (b)   Coop area. The enclosure shall include a minimum of ten square
feet of coop area for each hen or chick. The coop shall be covered and predator
resistant and designed to allow for ventilation and ease of cleaning per
agricultural standards.
      (3)   Clean/sanitary conditions. Every person owning or occupying
premises where any hens or chicks are kept shall keep the enclosure in which
the hen is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The enclosure shall be
cleaned daily. Feed shall be stored in a location that is not accessible by
pests, rodents or predators.
      (4)   Dyeing/coloring. It shall be unlawful for any person to dye, color
or otherwise artificially treat any baby chick.
      (5)   Displaying/selling. It shall be unlawful to display, sell, offer
for sale, barter or give away hens, chicks or eggs as a pet or for any
commercial purpose to customers who come to the property. Advertisements on the
property are also prohibited.
      (6)   Noise. It is declared a nuisance, and no person shall keep,
maintain or permit any hens or chicks, which by any sound, or cry, shall
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an individual.
      (7)   Slaughtering. No person shall willfully slaughter or cause to be
slaughtered any hens or chicks.
      (8)   Permits. The property owner shall obtain plumbing and electrical
permits for any such fixtures servicing the coop. A building permit is required
for any coop more than 120 square feet in size.
      (9)   Inspections. Community Development Department staff may conduct an
inspection every six months to ensure compliance with the above conditions. The
city may charge a fee for inspections in an amount established by the City
Council, from time to time, by resolution.
   (D)   Modifications. The Council may modify any of the requirements of this
section upon making a finding that any of the requirements are unnecessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare, and, in making such
modification, the Council may impose such conditions as it deems necessary for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The Council, in its
discretion, may conduct a public hearing with respect to any such proposed
modification prior to the granting thereof and may prescribe such notice of the
hearing as the Council deems necessary under the circumstances.
(‘65 Code, § 6-2.102) (Ord. 459, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 52-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 274-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14) Penalty, see
§
92.99
BEES
§ 92.20 PURPOSE.
   The Council, after investigation, hereby finds, determines and declares
that, unless reasonably regulated, the keeping of bees in the city can and has
become detrimental to the public health, peace, safety and general welfare and
an invasion of the property rights of inhabitants and other persons within the
city; that most portions of the city are built upon to the extent that the
keeping of bees, if allowed to fly at large, is a public nuisance and therefore
should be regulated; and that, accordingly, the purposes of this subchapter are
to prevent, insofar as possible, the happening of any such contingencies that
may occur and to provide for the abatement of those which do occur.
('65 Code, § 6-2.401) (Ord. 637, passed - - )
§ 92.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEES. All types of bees, including hornets, bumblebees, wasps and any
hymenopterous insect of the superfamily Apoidea and the honey-producing insects
of the species Apis Mellifica and shall include the adults, eggs, larvae, pupae
or other immature stages thereof.
   HIVE. Any receptacle or container made or prepared for the use of bees, or
any box or similar container of which bees have taken possession.
   PERSON. Any natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership,
association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization, school
or church, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any
of them.
('65 Code, § 6-2.402) (Ord. 637, passed - - )
§ 92.22 KEEPING BEES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any
person to establish or maintain, or permit to be established or maintained, any
hive or box where bees are kept, or to keep or permit to be kept any bees in,
on or upon any premises under his control within the city; provided, however,
nothing contained in this subchapter shall be deemed or construed to prohibit
the keeping of bees:
      (1)   In a hive or box located and kept within a school for the purpose
of study or observation;
      (2)   In a hive or box located and kept within a physician’s office or
laboratory for medical research or treatment, or for scientific purposes; or
      (3)   On any single-family residential property in the R-1 Zone, subject
to the following requirements:
         (a)   General requirements.
            1.   Only the common domestic honey bee, Apis Mellifera species, at
any stage of its development, shall be permitted.
            2.   No more than two hives may be maintained on any single-family
residential property.
            3.   All bee colonies shall be kept in hives capable of being
inspected and consisting of moveable frames and combs.
            4.   Hives must be kept in sound and usable condition at all times.
            5.   City staff shall conduct an initial inspection to verify
compliance with all beekeeping requirements and may conduct an inspection as
frequently as every six months to ensure compliance with these requirements.
The city may charge a fee for inspections in an amount established by the City
Council, from time to time, by resolution.
         (b)   Hive placement requirements.
            1.   Hives shall be located in the rear or side yard only. No hives
shall be permitted in any front yard or in the street side yard of a corner
property.
            2.   Hives shall be located at least five feet from the side and
rear property lines.
            3.   Hive entrances shall face away from or parallel to the nearest
property line(s).
            4.   Hives must either be screened so that the bees must fly over a
six-foot barrier, which may be vegetative, before leaving the property, or be
placed at least eight feet above the adjacent ground level.
         (c)   Hive management requirements.
            1.   Hives shall be continually managed to provide adequate living-
space for their resident bees to prevent swarming.
            2.   Hives shall replace the queen bee in a colony with a younger
and more productive queen (requeening) at least once every two years to prevent
swarming.
            3.   A water source for bees shall be provided at all times on the
property where the bees are kept to discourage bee visitation at swimming
pools, hose bibs and other water sources on adjacent public or private
property.
            4.   Hive maintenance materials or equipment must be stored in a
sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.
         (d)   Nuisance. Bees or hives shall be considered a public nuisance
when any of the following occurs:
            1.   Colonies of bees exhibit defensive or objectionable behavior,
or interfere with the normal use of neighboring properties.
            2.   Colonies of bees swarm.
            3.   Bees or hives do not conform to this code.
            4.   Hives become abandoned by resident bees or by the owner.
   (B)   No bees kept upon any premises pursuant to the provisions of divisions
(A)(1) and (2) of this section shall be permitted to fly at large.
(‘65 Code, § 6-2.403) (Ord. 637, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-
14) Penalty, see §
92.99
WILD ANIMALS
§ 92.35 KEEPING WILD ANIMALS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall have, keep or maintain, or have in possession or under
control, any elephant, bear, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, lion, tiger, leopard,
wolf, monkey or any poisonous reptile of any kind, or any dangerous or
carnivorous wild animal or reptile, without first applying to and receiving
from the Council a permit to do so.
('65 Code, § 6-2.701) (Ord. 798, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.36 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Council may issue permits for the keeping or maintaining of any of the
animals enumerated and described in this subchapter to any person when, in the
opinion of the Council, any such animal may be kept or maintained without
menacing the safety of any person or property; provided, however, the Council
may require any such animal to be properly caged or tethered, may make
additional rules and regulations regarding the keeping or maintaining of any
such animal, may limit the term of such permit and may revoke any such permit
for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or when, in the
opinion of the Council, the safety of any person or property is menaced by the
keeping of any such animal.
('65 Code, § 6-2.702) (Ord. 798, passed - - )
DOGS
§ 92.45 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, DOGS shall mean any dog, irrespective of
its age, and shall be deemed to include female as well as male dogs.
('65 Code, § 6-2.301) (Ord. 471, passed - - )
§ 92.46 LICENSE AND TAG REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to have, harbor, keep in his
possession, own or have an interest in any dog over the age of four months
without keeping a collar and proper tag attached thereto, displayed and worn at
all times.
('65 Code, § 6-2.302) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 429, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 471, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.47 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; PRESENTATION OF VACCINATION CERTIFICATE.
   Every person applying for a dog license, whether to the contracting pound
service of the city or to the Finance Director, shall exhibit a certificate
issued by a person licensed by the state, or any other state or nation, to
practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall show that the dog for
which the license shall be issued either:
   (A)   Has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter; or
   (B)   Should not be vaccinated with rabies vaccine by reason of age,
infirmity or other disability, which disability shall be shown on the face of
the certificate and to the satisfaction of the person issuing the license to be
in effect at the time of the license application. A license for such dog shall
not be issued unless and until such a certificate is so exhibited.
('65 Code, § 6-2.303) (Ord. 761, passed - - )
§ 92.48 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   (A)   Required information. Every dog license issued shall state the name
and residence of the person to whom the license is issued, the amount and
character thereof, the date when issued and the time at which the license will
expire. A tag shall be issued with the number and year of the issuance thereof
and the words “S. G. Dog License” plainly inscribed thereon. ('65 Code, § 6-
2.304) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 429, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 471, passed
- - )
   (B)   Recording of vaccination information. At the time any dog license is
issued, there shall be stamped or written on the copy of the receipt therefor
retained by the Finance Director the date of vaccination and the type of
vaccine used on such dog as shown on the veterinarian's certificate, or there
shall be stamped or written thereon the words “No vaccination required,” if
such license is issued as the result of a certificate of disability. ('65 Code,
§ 6-2.305) (Ord. 761, passed - - )
§ 92.49 LICENSE TAX; DELINQUENCIES.
   (A)   A special license tax in an amount established by Council resolution
for every dog, male or female shall be paid for the privilege of having and
keeping such dog in the city by the owner or person having the custody or
control of such dog for each year, or fraction of each year, commencing on July
1 of each year and ending on the next ensuing June 30. ('65 Code, § 6-2.306)
(Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 162-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 170-C.S.,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - )
   (B)   If the license tax provided for in division (A) of this section is not
paid to the city on or before September 1 of the year, an additional amount
established by Council resolution is hereby expressly provided as a penalty for
failure to pay the special license tax when due, and such penalty shall be in
addition to any other penalty provided by law. The license tax provided for,
and the amount of the penalty, shall be deemed a debt due to the city,
collectible by suit at law, with costs. ('65 Code, § 6-2.307) (Ord. 408, passed
- - ; Am. Ord. 842, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 170-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-
C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.50 LICENSES; RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   The Finance Director shall keep a file wherein shall be kept the name and
address of each owner or person to whom such dog tag was issued, the number of
each of such tags, and the date of its issuance. He shall also keep a record of
the license receipts indicating the vaccination information for a period of not
less than one year following the date of the expiration of the licenses to
which they relate.
('65 Code, § 6-2.308) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 429, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 471, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 761, passed - - )
§ 92.51 LICENSE TAGS TO BE FASTENED TO COLLAR OR HARNESS.
   The owner or person having the care, control or custody of any dog upon
which such license tag shall have been paid shall securely fasten the tag upon
a suitable collar and securely fasten the collar with the tag attached thereto,
upon the dog. A dog harness or other device may be substituted in lieu of the
collar if so desired. If the tag is lost, a new license shall be secured as
though no license had been issued.
('65 Code, § 6-2.309) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 429, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 471, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.52 LEASHES REQUIRED; ANIMAL NUISANCES CLEANUP.
   (A)   No person owning or having the charge, care, custody or control of any
dog shall cause, permit or allow the same to be or to run at large upon any
street, lane, alley, court or other public place in the city, or upon any
private property or premises in the city other than those of the person owning
or having the charge, care, custody or control of such dog, unless such dog
shall be restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six feet in
length and is in the care, custody or control of a competent person.
   (B)   No person owning or having the charge, care, custody or control of any
dog shall cause, permit or allow the same to be in any automobile or other
vehicle upon any street or other public place in the city unless such dog shall
be restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length
and shall be in the charge, care, custody or control of a competent person.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, walker or person in
control of any animal to dump, deposit, or allow to remain, the excrement of
any animal on any public or private property, including streets, sidewalks,
public parks, parkways and alleys, other than the animal owner's property. In
the event the animal deposits any excrement on any public or private property,
including streets, sidewalks, public parks, parkways, and alleys, other than
the animal owner's property, the owner, keeper, walker or person in control of
the animal, shall immediately remove the animal's excrement and properly
dispose of it. Any excrement on the animal owner's property must be properly
disposed of in a timely manner so as not to create a health hazard.
(Ord. 471, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 506-C.S., passed 9-19-00)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.53 IMPOUNDMENT OF CERTAIN DOGS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Poundkeeper, the Health Officer and any police officer of the city shall
pursue, capture and impound any dog found or discovered in violation of any of
the provisions of this subchapter, and such persons are hereby authorized to
enter upon any private property while engaged in the immediate discharge of the
duties required of them for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
subchapter. In the event such persons, or their deputies, shall, upon
reasonable pursuit of such dog, or because of its apparent viciousness, be
unable to capture it, the Poundkeeper, Health Officer, police officer or deputy
shall be empowered to then and there take such action as is deemed appropriate
to capture the dog, including but not limited to the use of traps and snares.
('65 Code, § 6-2.311) (Ord. 471, passed - - )
§ 92.54 REPORTS OF DOG BITES.
   Any person bitten by any animal, and any official of the city, or any other
person in the city having knowledge of any person injured through having been
bitten by any animal, shall, as soon as possible, report such occurrence to the
Health Officer or to the Police Department, giving a description of the animal
and the locality where confined. Such animal shall be kept confined until
released in writing by the Health Officer. All health and police officers are
hereby designated as enforcement officers in carrying out the provisions of
this section.
('65 Code, § 6-2.312) (Ord. 471, passed - - )
§ 92.55 CONFINEMENT OF BITING DOGS.
   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer, upon receiving an affidavit from
any person who has been bitten by a dog or from any person who has witnessed
such occurrence, after investigation and upon reasonable indication of
viciousness, to notify the owner or custodian of such dog, in writing, to keep
the dog at all times on the property or premises where the owner or custodian
resides. After the receipt by the owner or custodian of such dog of such
notice, the dog shall at all times thereafter be kept securely restrained on
the premises of the owner or custodian by an adequate chain attached to the
collar or harness of such dog, or such dog shall be restrained in an enclosure
sufficiently strong to prevent such dog from in any manner wandering, straying
or getting at large or beyond control until such dog has been released, in
writing, by the Health Officer.
('65 Code, § 6-2.313) (Ord. 471, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.56 PERMIT REQUIRED TO REMOVE FROM CONFINEMENT.
   No dog ordered confined pursuant to the provisions of §
92.55 shall be transported, taken or removed from the place of such confinement
unless written authority so to do shall be first obtained from the Health
Officer. Such authority shall specify the terms and conditions upon which the
removal or transportation of such animal may be made, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to violate or disregard any of the terms or conditions so
prescribed by the Health Officer for the removal or transportation of any such
dog.
('65 Code, § 6-2.314) (Ord. 471, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.57 EXAMINATION OF ANIMALS FOR RABIES; QUARANTINE.
   (A)   Whenever the owner or person having custody or possession of any
animal shall observe or learn that such animal has shown symptoms of rabies, or
has acted in a manner which would lead a reasonable person to suspect that it
might have rabies, such person shall immediately notify the Health Officer to
inspect or examine the animal. The Health Officer shall quarantine the animal
on the premises where found or may order its removal to a safe place of
detention selected by the Health Officer, at the expense of the owner, until it
is established to the satisfaction of the Health Officer that such animal does,
or does not, have rabies.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of all veterinarians to hold any animal in
quarantine at any kennel, hospital or other place where such veterinarian is
treating an animal indicating symptoms of rabies until the disposition of the
animal is ordered by the Health Officer.
   (C)   No person having the custody of an animal suspected of having rabies
shall fail, refuse or neglect to surrender the carcass of the animal, or such
portion of the carcass as may be demanded, to the Health Officer after the
death of the animal.
   (D)   Any animal suspected of rabies shall be confined and kept under
observation until it is either released, destroyed by the written order of the
Health Officer, or dies. If, for the protection of life and property, it is
necessary to shoot any animal suspected of rabies, every effort shall be made
to prevent shooting or injuring the head, which shall be preserved for
laboratory examination.
   (E)   When any animal shall be bitten by another animal having rabies, no
person having custody of the animal so bitten, upon being informed thereof,
shall fail, refuse or neglect to quarantine such animal and keep it confined or
chained for a minimum period of 90 days, and the Health Officer shall have the
power, at his discretion, to kill or quarantine the animal so bitten.
   (F)   No person shall knowingly bring any dog into the city from any place
in which rabies shall be present or shall have been known to be present within
six months prior thereto without the permission of the Health Officer.
('65 Code, § 6-2.315) (Ord. 471, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.58 VACCINATION AND REVACCINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Rabies vaccination required. Every person keeping, harboring or having
a dog over the age of four months in the city shall cause such dog to be
vaccinated with rabies vaccine within a period of 30 days from the date such
dog was first harbored, kept or had within the city, or within 30 days from the
date the dog attains the age of four months; provided, however, the provisions
of this section shall not apply so as to require the vaccination of any dog
which has been vaccinated by a person licensed by the state, or by any other
state or nation, to practice veterinary medicine where such vaccination has
been completed within the period of time prescribed as follows:
      (1)   If chick embryo vaccine was used in the vaccination, it shall have
been completed within two years prior to the date the dog was first kept,
harbored or brought into the city; or
      (2)   If tissue phenolized vaccine was used, such vaccination shall have
been completed within one year prior to the date the dog was first kept,
harbored or brought into the city.
('65 Code, § 6-2.316) (Ord. 761, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 785, passed - - )
   (B)   Revaccinations required.
      (1)   Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog in the city, which
dog has been vaccinated with chick embryo vaccine, shall cause the dog to be
revaccinated within a period of not more than two years after the prior
vaccination.
      (2)   Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog in the city, which
dog has been vaccinated with tissue phenolized vaccine, shall cause the dog to
be revaccinated with rabies vaccine within a period of not more than one year
after the prior vaccination.
('65 Code, § 6-2.317) (Ord. 761, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.59 VACCINATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   Every person keeping, harboring or having in the city any dog required by
this subchapter to be vaccinated shall, at all times while the dog is thus
kept, harbored or had, have in his possession a certification issued by a
person licensed by the state, or by any other state or nation, to practice
veterinary medicine, which certificate shall specify either that the dog has
been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of §
92.58 or that the dog should not be vaccinated by reason of age, infirmity or
other disability.
('65 Code, § 6-2.318) (Ord. 761, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.60 IMPOUNDING OF UNVACCINATED DOGS.
   (A)   Capture and impoundment. The Poundkeeper shall capture and impound any
dog found within the city which is not wearing a current license issued by any
municipality in the county or by the county.
   (B)   Right of entry. Any officer or employee of the Poundkeeper or any
police officer of the city or of any city in the county shall have the right to
enter upon any private or public property in the city to examine or capture any
dog thereon or therein; provided, however, no such officer or employee shall
have the right to enter a house which is in use as a residence without first
having secured a search warrant therefor.
   (C)   Conditions of release. No dog so impounded shall be released to any
person except where there has been a performance of the following conditions:
      (1)   There has been presented to the Poundkeeper a current license for
the dog issued by the Finance Director or, if the person keeping, harboring or
having the dog is not a resident of the city, such nonresident person has
presented to the Poundkeeper a current license conforming to the provisions of
this subchapter, for the dog issued by any other municipality in the county or
by the county;
      (2)   There has been paid to the Poundkeeper the impounding, collection
and other fees provided by law;
      (3)   There has been paid to the Poundkeeper a reasonable fee, as
determined by the Poundkeeper, for the vaccination of the dog, or there has
been shown to the satisfaction of the Poundkeeper that the dog has been
vaccinated with rabies vaccine within the time periods and according to the
other requirements set forth in §
92.58 of this subchapter, or that a certificate of disability has been issued
for the dog; and
      (4)   The Poundkeeper has determined that the dog does not have and is
not reasonably suspected of having rabies.
   (D)   Vaccination and release. Within 72 hours after the receipt of the
vaccination fee, or as soon thereafter as possible, and except as provided in
division (E) of this section, the Poundkeeper shall cause the dog for whom the
fee has been paid to be vaccinated with chick embryo vaccine by a person
licensed by the state to practice veterinary medicine or shall secure from such
veterinarian a certificate of disability for the dog. After the dog has been
vaccinated, or a certificate of disability has been issued, and if all the
conditions of division (C) of this section have been satisfied, the Poundkeeper
shall release the dog to the person keeping, harboring or having the dog or to
the person making application for the release of the dog.
   (E)   Examination for rabies. If the Poundkeeper suspects that any dog so
impounded has rabies, he shall hold the dog for inspection by a Health Officer
of the county. In the event such Health Officer shall determine that the dog is
afflicted with rabies, it shall be disposed of or confined for such time as the
Health Officer shall direct. In the event such Health Officer suspects that the
dog may develop rabies, it shall be confined for such time as the Health
Officer shall direct. Whenever such Health Officer shall determine that the dog
does not have rabies, it shall be released in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
('65 Code, § 6-2.319) (Ord. 761, passed - - )
§ 92.61 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.
   The Poundkeeper, the Health Officer and all police officers of the city and
their respective deputies or representatives are hereby charged with enforcing
the provisions of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 6-2.320) (Ord. 471, passed - - )
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 92.70 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS.
   The City Council may provide for the impoundment of animals either by city
forces or by contract with an agency qualified to provide such services. The
impoundment of animals shall in accordance with applicable regulations of the
state of California and county of Los Angeles.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS
§ 92.80 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish procedures
pursuant to Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 31601 et seq. to deal with potentially
dangerous and vicious dogs. Potentially dangerous and vicious dogs have become
a serious threat to the safety and welfare of the citizens of this city.
Attacks by potentially dangerous and vicious dogs on human beings and domestic
animals are attributable to the failure of owners to register, confine and
properly control vicious and potentially dangerous dogs. Potentially dangerous
and vicious dogs are declared a public nuisance.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
§ 92.81 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall be
defined as follows.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. One or more of the following:
      (1)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, engages in any behavior which
requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the
person and the dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog; or
      (2)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a human being; or
      (3)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, has killed, seriously bitten,
inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off
the property of the owner or keeper of the dog; or
      (4)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon
the streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing fashion
or apparent attitude of attack; or
      (5)   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of human
beings or domestic animals; or
      (6)   Any dog which on three separate occasions within a twelve-month
period has been observed to be unrestrained off its owner's premises by an
Animal Control or Law Enforcement Officer of the city, or which has been
apprehended and/or impounded on three such occasions for being unrestrained or
uncontrolled off its owner's premises; or
      (7)   Any dog which engages in or is found to have been trained to engage
in exhibitions of fighting.
   VICIOUS DOG. One or more of the following:
      (1)   Any dog seized under Cal. Penal Code § 599(aa) and upon the
sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under Cal. Penal Code § 597.5
(a); or
      (2)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner inflicts
severe injury on or kills a human being. Severe injury means any physical
injury to a human being that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations
or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery; or
      (3)   Any dog previously determined to be currently listed as a
"potentially dangerous dog" which, after its owner or keeper has been notified
of its determination, continues the behavior described under the definition of
"potentially dangerous dog", or any dog previously determined to be currently
listed as a potentially dangerous dog, which is not properly licensed and
vaccinated, not properly restrained and/or not properly maintained on the
owner's property.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
§ 92.82 PROCEDURE FOR DECLARING DOG POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND/OR VICIOUS.
   (A)   If an Animal Control Officer or a Law Enforcement Officer has
investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that a
dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, the City Manager, or his or her
designee, shall within ten days of receipt of such notice, set a hearing for
the purpose of determining whether or not the dog in question should be
declared potentially dangerous or vicious.
   (B)   The City Manager shall notify, in writing, the owner or keeper of the
dog that an administrative hearing will be held by the city within 30 days of
the Notice of Administrative Hearing, at which time the owner may present
evidence as to why the dog in question should not be declared potentially
dangerous or vicious.
   (C)   The owner or keeper of the dog shall be served with written notice of
the hearing, either personally or by first class mail, or by certified mail at
the owner's last known address, not less than five days before the time set for
hearing. Service shall be deemed complete at the time notice is personally
served or deposited in the mail.
   (D)   Failure of any person to receive notice shall not affect the validity
of any proceedings under this chapter.
   (E)   The hearing shall be open to the public.
   (F)   The City Manager or other person designated by the City Manager shall
conduct the administrative hearing.
   (G)   Notice shall be substantially in the form set forth below:
   Notice of Administrative Hearing re: Determination and Disposition of
Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Dog. This is a Notice of Hearing before the
San Gabriel City Manager or his designee, to determine whether your dog (name
of dog and description, if available) is a potentially dangerous or vicious
dog. If your dog is found to be a potentially dangerous and/or vicious dog as
defined by San Gabriel Municipal Code § 92.81 et seq., the City Manager or
other person designated as Hearing Officer, may issue orders addressing any of
the requirements of this Ordinance, including but not limited to:
      (1)   The dog shall be properly licensed and vaccinated;
      (2)   The dog shall be maintained on owner's property and shall, at all
times, be kept indoors, or in a securely fenced yard from which the dog cannot
escape, and into which children cannot trespass;
      (3)   The dog may not be off the owner's premises unless it is restrained
by a substantial leash, of appropriate length, and if it is under the control
of a responsible adult;
      (4)   If the dog in question dies or is sold, transferred or permanently
removed from the City, the owner shall notify the City of San Gabriel of the
changed condition and new location of the dog within two days in writing;
      (5)   The dog shall be destroyed;
      (6)   Owner shall pay any and all costs incurred by the City in the
administration of San Gabriel Municipal Code §
92.80 et seq., including but not limited to costs incurred by the City for
housing, maintenance, feeding and providing care, including medical care, of
the dog during such time as the dog is in the custody of the City of San
Gabriel.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
§ 92.83 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING BY CITY MANAGER OR DESIGNEE OF CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   At the time stated in the notice, the City Manager or his designee,
hereinafter referred to as Hearing Officer, shall hear and consider all
relevant evidence, objections, or protests and shall receive testimony under
oath relative to the alleged potentially dangerous and/or vicious animal. The
Hearing Officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including
incident reports and affidavits of witnesses. The Hearing Officer may find,
upon a preponderance of evidence, that the dog in question is potentially
dangerous or vicious and may make other orders authorized by this chapter. The
hearing may be continued from time to time.
   (B)   If the Hearing Officer finds by a preponderance of evidence that the
animal which is the subject of the hearing is potentially dangerous and/or
vicious, the Hearing Officer shall prepare findings and an order, which shall
specify and make specific orders with respect to the dog as authorized by this
chapter. A copy of the findings and order shall be served on the owner of the
dog, within five days of the conclusion of the hearing, in accordance with the
provisions of §
92.82.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
§ 92.84 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   After the hearing is conducted pursuant to this chapter, the owner/keeper of
the dog shall be notified in writing of the determination and orders issued,
either personally or by first class mail postage prepaid. If a determination is
made that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, the owner or keeper
shall comply with those orders made by the Hearing Officer. If the owner or
keeper of the dog contests the determination of the Hearing Officer, he or she
may, within five days of receipt of the notice of determination, appeal the
decision of the Hearing Officer. Appeal shall be made to the City Council. The
appellant shall serve personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid,
notice of the appeal upon the city.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
§ 92.85 LICENSING AND VACCINATING.
   All potentially dangerous and/or vicious dogs shall be properly licensed and
vaccinated. The licensing authority shall include the potentially dangerous
designation in the registration records of the dog, either after the owner or
the keeper of the dog has agreed to the designation or after the city has
determined the designation applies to the dog. The city may charge a
potentially dangerous dog fee in addition to the regular licensing fee to
provide for the increased costs of maintaining the records of the dog.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.86 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   If upon investigation it is determined by the Animal Control Officer
that probable cause exists to believe that the dog in question poses an
immediate threat to public safety, then the Animal Control Officer may seize
and impound the dog pending the hearings to be held pursuant to this chapter.
The owner or keeper of the dog shall be liable to the city for the costs and
expenses of keeping the dog if the dog is later adjudicated potentially
dangerous or vicious.
   (B)   When a dog has been impounded pursuant to subsection (A) of this
section and it is not contrary to public safety, the Animal Control Officer may
permit the animal to be confined at the owner's expense in a city-approved
kennel or veterinary facility.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.87 COST ASSESSMENT WHEN ANIMAL SEIZED.
   If it is determined at the hearing as provided in this chapter that the dog
in question is potentially dangerous and/or vicious, the Hearing Officer may
assess the owner of the dog for any costs of administration incurred by the
city, including but not limited to costs incurred in housing, maintaining and
feeding the dog and for any medical attention required for the dog. Costs
assessed shall be charged to the owner.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.88 IDENTIFICATION AND STERILIZATION REQUIREMENT FOR VICIOUS DOGS.
   The owner or keeper of any dog determined to be vicious pursuant to this
chapter shall at his/her expense have an identification number assigned by the
Animal Control Department permanently tattooed on the inner left rear leg of
the dog. The identification shall be noted in the city licensing files for that
dog. Any dog determined to be vicious shall be sterilized at the owner's
expense.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.89 PROCEDURE FOR DESTRUCTION.
   (A)   A dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious may be
destroyed by the Animal Control Department/city when it is found, after a
hearing pursuant to §
92.83, that the release of the dog would create a significant threat to the
public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   If it is determined that a dog found to be potentially dangerous or
vicious shall not be destroyed, the Hearing Officer shall impose conditions
upon the ownership of the dog that protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.90 RESTRAINT OR ENCLOSURE.
   (A)   A dog determined to be potentially dangerous pursuant to this chapter
shall at all times while not securely confined indoors:
      (1)   Be confined in an area which is securely fenced and locked so as to
prevent trespassing by children and from which the dog cannot escape; and
      (2)   When off the property of its owner or keeper, be humanely muzzled
and leashed with a substantial leash or chain not to exceed four feet in length
and under the control of a responsible adult who is familiar with and in
control of the dog; or
      (3)   Be humanely confined in a vehicle so that it can neither escape nor
inflict injury on passers-by.
   (B)   A dog determined to be vicious pursuant to this chapter at all times
while not securely confined indoors:
      (1)   Shall be confined in an outdoor fenced enclosure on the property
where the dog is kept or maintained, so it cannot bite, attack or cause injury
to any person. All enclosures, fences and gates must be constructed of
substantial material and installed and maintained in a workmanlike manner. The
enclosure must be anchored solidly to the ground and must be of sufficient
structural strength and height to ensure the strict confinement of the dog and
to prevent unauthorized access. If necessary to accomplish the intent of
containment, a cover over the enclosure shall be installed. In addition, any
and all gates must be kept locked;
      (2)   May be off the property of the owner or keeper for purposes of
obtaining veterinary care, being sold or given away, complying with any
provision of law or with a directive of the City Manager or his designee or the
Animal Control Department serving the city. Any such directive of the City
Manager or his designee or the Animal Control Department serving the city shall
be in writing and made a part of the animal's file with the city and the Animal
Control Department serving the city.
      (3)   When off the property of its owner or keeper or in the care of a
veterinarian, shall be securely and humanely muzzled and restrained with a
harness and nylon leash, sufficient to restrain the dog, not exceeding four
feet in length, and shall be under the direct charge and control of its owner
or keeper.
   For the purposes of this section, a dog which is humanely muzzled and/or
confined in a vehicle shall be able to drink, breathe and pant freely under
conditions which do not subject the animal to needless suffering. When
circumstances warrant, an Animal Control Officer serving the city may modify
conditions of restraint to accommodate the special needs of the dog. Within 48
hours of any restraint modification, the Animal Control Officer shall furnish
the City Manager with a written explanation and justification for such
modification.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.91 POSTING OF PROPERTY WHERE POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS ARE
MAINTAINED.
   The owner or keeper of a dog which has been determined to be potentially
dangerous or vicious pursuant to this chapter shall display a sign, on the
property where the dog is kept, containing a visual and verbal warning that
there is a dangerous or vicious dog on the property. The sign shall be visible
to the general public and capable of being read from any adjacent street,
sidewalk or other such public right-of-way.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.92 NOTICE OF DISPOSAL OR ESCAPE.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of any dog found to be potentially dangerous or
vicious pursuant to this chapter shall notify the City Manager and the Animal
Control Department immediately if the dog has escaped, is unconfined, has
attacked another animal, has bitten a human being, or has died. If the
reportable incident referred to in the previous sentence occurs during a
weekend or holiday, the immediate telephone notification shall be to the City
Police Department.
   (B)   The owner or keeper of a dog found to be potentially dangerous
pursuant to this chapter shall notify, in writing, the Animal Control
Department serving the city, the City Manager, and, if applicable, the Police
Agency in the jurisdiction of relocation, within 48 hours if the dog is sold,
transferred, or permanently removed from the place where the owner or keeper
resided or kept the dog at the time the dog was determined to be potentially
dangerous. The owner or keeper shall also furnish written notice to the Animal
Control Department of any new address where the dog is to be kept and the name,
address and telephone number of any new owner.
   (C)   The owner or keeper of a dog found to be vicious pursuant to this
chapter shall notify, in writing, the Animal Control Department serving the
city, the City Manager, and, if applicable, the Police Agency in the
jurisdiction of relocation, at least 48 hours prior to selling, transferring,
or permanently removing the dog to a new location and shall also furnish this
notice providing any new address where the dog is to be kept and the name,
address and telephone number of any new owner.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.93 OWNERS TO PERMIT COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS.
   The owner or keeper of any dog determined to be potentially dangerous or
vicious pursuant to this chapter shall consent to inspection of the property
where the dog is kept and of the dog upon 24 hours' written notice by the
Animal Control Department. The inspection shall be set at a reasonable time and
in a reasonable manner to verify full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and/or the requirements of the orders issued by the Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.94 REMOVAL FROM LIST OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   If there are no additional instances of the behavior described in § 92.81
within a 36 month period from the date of designation as a potentially
dangerous dog, the dog shall be removed from the list of potentially dangerous
dogs. The dog may, but is not required to be, removed from the list of
potentially dangerous dogs prior to the expiration of the 36 month period if
the animal or keeper of the dog demonstrates to the Animal Control Department
that changes in circumstances or measures taken by the owner or keeper, such as
training of the dog, have mitigated the risk to the public safety.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.95 UNLAWFUL TO OWN HARBOR OR KEEP DOG FOUND BY ANOTHER JURISDICTION TO BE
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS.
   No dog which has previously been determined to be potentially dangerous or
vicious after an administrative hearing or court order by another jurisdiction
will be allowed to be kept, owned or harbored in the city unless the City
Manager or his designee first conducts an administrative hearing, pursuant to
this chapter, to determine the present state of the dog and any necessary
conditions for relocating and maintaining said animal. Any notice by the Animal
Control Department serving the city to remove, abate or destroy any dog owned,
harbored, or maintained in violation of this section may be appealed to the
City Manager or his designee by filing with the City Manager a written
statement of the factual basis for the appeal within five working days of the
receipt of the notice.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.96 KEEPING BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No dog determined to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this
chapter shall be kept by an owner or keeper who is a minor.
(Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98)
Penalty, see § 92.99
CATS
§ 92.100 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, CATS shall mean any cat, irrespective of
its age, and shall be deemed to include cats of any gender.
(Ord. 674, passed 9-7-21)
§ 92.101 VOLUNTARY LICENSING.
   (A)   Every person owning or having control, custody or possession of any
cat within the city may procure a license for each such cat over the age of
four months upon submission of proof of rabies vaccination, certified to by a
licensed veterinarian, and upon payment of a fee.
   (B)   The fee shall be as established by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   Every cat license issued to any person choosing to participate in the
voluntary cat licensing program as set forth herein, shall state the name and
residence of the person to whom the license is issued, a description of the
cat, the date when issued and the time at which the license will expire. A tag
shall be issued with the number and year of the issuance thereof and the words
“S. G. Cat License” plainly inscribed thereon.
   (D)   The Finance Director shall keep a file wherein shall be kept the name
and address of each owner or person to whom such cat license was issued, the
number of each of such tags, and the date of its issuance, and such other
information that they may deem proper.
   (E)   This section is intended to provide a method for identifying cats for
owner redemption. This section is not intended nor shall it be construed to
mean the requiring of licenses for cats.
(Ord. 674, passed 9-7-21)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of provision of this chapter, for
which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in the
city or county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
   (B)   Every person convicted of an infraction for violation of §§ 92.46,
92.51 or 92.52 shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 for a first
conviction, a fine not exceeding $200 for a second conviction of the same
section within two years of the first conviction and a fine not exceeding $500
for a third conviction of the same section within two years of the first
conviction. A fourth conviction within two years of the first conviction shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any violation of §§
92.80 -
92.96 involving a potentially dangerous dog shall be punishable by an
administrative fine not to exceed $500. Any violation of §§
92.80 -
92.96 involving a vicious dog shall be punishable by an administrative fine not
to exceed $1000. All administrative fines paid pursuant to §§
92.80 -
92.96 shall be paid to the city for the purpose of deferring costs of
implementation of these sections. The City Prosecutor, in his or her sound
discretion, may prosecute violations of §§
92.80 -
92.96 as infractions or misdemeanors.
(Ord. 422-C.S., passed 4-5-94; Am. Ord. 493-C.S., passed 9-15-98; Am. Ord. 509-
C.S., passed 11-7-00)
CHAPTER 93: BOXING
Section
   
93.01   Sparring exhibitions and boxing contests unlawful
   
93.02   Sparring or boxing instruction
   
93.03   Elimination tournaments among participants
§ 93.01 SPARRING EXHIBITIONS AND BOXING CONTESTS UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any sparring
exhibition or boxing contest in any place in the city where a fee is charged
for admission thereto.
('65 Code, § 5-5.01) (Ord. 101, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 53-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.02 SPARRING OR BOXING INSTRUCTION.
   Sparring or boxing instruction conducted under the supervision of
responsible persons at schools, churches, community centers, playgrounds or the
Community Services Department may be given in the city, subject to such
reasonable rules and regulations as may be established by the organization
sponsoring such instruction when such rules and regulations are approved by the
City Manager and Police Chief or by the Council.
(‘65 Code, § 5-5.02) (Ord. 53-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-
16)
§ 93.03 ELIMINATION TOURNAMENTS AMONG PARTICIPANTS.
   Elimination tournaments among participants in sparring or boxing instruction
may be held in the city by sponsoring organizations, where no fee is charged
for admission to the place of such tournament, subject to such rules and
regulations as may be established by the sponsoring organization when such
rules and regulations are approved by the City Manager and Police Chief or by
the Council.
('65 Code, § 5-5.03) (Ord. 53-C.S., passed - - )
CHAPTER 94: CEMETERIES
Section
   
94.01   Purchase and sale of land
   
94.02   Districts defined
§ 94.01 PURCHASE AND SALE OF LAND.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, or otherwise acquire, sell,
convey, lease or in any manner or way dispose of any land in the city for the
purpose of burying, interring or cremating the dead body of any human being
therein except in those districts set forth in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 6-3.01) (Ord. 929, passed - - ) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.02 DISTRICTS DEFINED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, inter or cremate, or cause to
be buried, interred or cremated, the dead body of any human being in the city
except in those districts described as follows:
   (A)   Beginning at a point distant 15°, 40 minutes east 411.98 feet from a
point on the northerly line of Lot B of Tract No. 214, as recorded in Map Book
14, page 1, records of Los Angeles County, California, in the office of the
County Recorder thereof, said point on the northerly line of said Lot B being
distant north 71°, no minutes west 25.39 feet from the most easterly corner of
said Lot B; thence south 74°, 20 minutes east 145.39 feet to a point on the
westerly line of Junipero Street; thence along said westerly line of Junipero
Street north 2°, 10 minutes east 160.13 feet; thence north 6°, 30 minutes east
235.80 feet; thence leaving said Junipero Street north 74°, 20 minutes west
265.36 feet; thence south 15°, 40 minutes west 388.50 feet; thence south 74°,
20 minutes east 194.88 feet to the point of beginning;
   (B)   A portion of Lot 1 of Tract No. 152, as recorded in Map Book 13, page
101, records of Los Angeles County, California, in the office of the County
Recorder thereof, and a portion of Section 2, Township 1 South, Range 12 West,
S. B. M., described as follows: Beginning at the northeast corner of said Lot
1; thence south no degrees, 5 minutes west along the east line of said Lot 1
326.47 feet to the northeast corner of Tract No. 1, Dobbins Tract, as per map
recorded in Book 10, page 80 of Maps, records of said Los Angeles County;
thence south no degrees, 15 minutes east along the west line of said Tract No.
1 of Dobbins Tract and its prolongation southerly 872.22 feet; thence north
88°, 53 minutes west 300.85 feet to a point in the east line of said Lot 1,
Tract No. 152; thence north no degrees, 18 minutes east along said east line of
said Lot 1 and its prolongation northerly to the southerly line of the Southern
Pacific Railroad Company's right-of-way (Monrovia Branch); thence easterly
along the said southerly line of said Southern Pacific Railroad Company's
right-of-way to the point of beginning; also, Tracts 3 and 4 of the Dobbins
Tract, as per map recorded in Book 10, page 80 of Maps, records of said Los
Angeles County; also, that portion of the southwest quarter of the northeast
quarter of Section 2, Township 1 South, Range 12 West, S. B. M., described as
follows: Beginning at the southwest corner of Tract No. 3, Dobbins Tract, as
per map recorded in Book 10, page 80 of Maps; thence north no degrees, 30
minutes west along the west line of said Tract No. 3, 155.10 feet to the
northwest corner thereof; thence south 89°, 30 minutes west 100 feet; thence
south no degrees, 30 minutes east 155.10 feet to a point in the north line of
Tract No. 1 of the said Dobbins Tract; thence north 89°, 30 minutes east along
said northerly line 100 feet to the point of beginning; and
   (C)   The west 44 feet of the north 276 feet of that portion of Tract No. 1
of the Dobbins Tract, in the City of San Gabriel, County of Los Angeles, State
of California, as per map recorded in Book 10, page 80 of Maps, records of said
Los Angeles County, lying south of and adjacent to the southerly line of the
land described in the deed to the San Gabriel Cemetery Association, recorded in
Book 14694, page 278, Official Records, in the office of said County Recorder;
excepting therefrom the east 20 feet of the south 102 feet thereof.
   (D)   The land referred to herein below is situated in the County of Los
Angeles, State of California, and is described as follows: The west half of the
east half of that portion of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
Section 2, Township 1 South, Range 12 West, San Bernardino Meridian, in the
City of San Gabriel, County of Los Angeles, State of California, according to
the official plat of said land filed in the District Land Office February 11,
1870, described as follows: Beginning at the southeast corner of the land
described in the deed to the San Gabriel Cemetery Association, recorded in Book
1975, Page 189, official records of said county, said point being in the east
line of said northeast quarter of the southwest quarter, thence southerly along
said line 336.85 feet, more or less to a point in the north line of the land
described in the deed of the City of San Gabriel, recorded in Book 6155, Page
39 of Deeds, records of county; thence westerly along said northerly line
304.61 feet, more or less, to the easterly line of Lot 1 of Tract No. 152, as
per map recorded in Book 13, Page 101 of Maps, records of said county; thence
northerly along said easterly line 344.57, more or less, to the southwest
corner of said land described in the deed to the San Gabriel Cemetery
Association; thence easterly along the southerly line of said last mentioned
land, 300.83 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning.
(‘65 Code, § 6-3.02) (Ord. 929, passed - -; Am. Ord. 711, passed 9-17-24)
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 95: TREES AND SHRUBS; WEEDS
Section
Trees and Shrubs
   
95.01   Title
   
95.02   Community Development Director; jurisdiction and control powers
   
95.03   Permit required to plant or remove
   
95.04   Duty of property owners to maintain trees and shrubs
   
95.05   Interference with maintenance of trees and shrubs
   
95.06   Injuring trees and shrubs
   
95.07   Hazardous trees and shrubs
   
95.08   Appeals
Tree Protection and Preservation Regulations for Single Family Zones
   
95.20   Title
   
95.21   Definitions
   
95.22   Permit required for trimming certain trees
   
95.23   Exemptions
   
95.24   Permit process
   
95.25   City not liable
Tree Protection and Preservation Regulations for    Multiple Family, Commercial
and Industrial Zones
   
95.35   Title
   
95.36   Definitions
   
95.37   Permit required for trimming certain trees
   
95.38   Exemptions
   
95.39   Permit process
   
95.40   City not liable
Weeds
   
95.50   Owner's duty
   
95.51   Definition
   
95.52   Public nuisance
   
95.53   Notice
   
95.54   Mailing of notice
   
95.55   Abatement by contractor
   
95.56   Seasonal and recurrent nuisance
   
95.57   Hearing; notice
   
95.58   Abatement by owner
   
95.59   Right of entry
   
95.60   Cost of abatement
   
95.61   Notice and posting of cost
   
95.62   Report to Council
   
95.63   Assessment and lien
   
95.64   Cost account filing
   
95.65   Application of state laws
   
95.66   Collection of assessment
   
95.67   Alternate remedies
 
   
95.99   Penalty
TREES AND SHRUBS
§ 95.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Tree Regulations of the city and may
be cited as such.
('65 Code, § 7-7.01) (Ord. 593, passed - - )
§ 95.02 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR; JURISDICTION AND CONTROL POWERS.
   The Community Development Director shall have full jurisdiction and control
of the designation of the kind and type, planting, setting out, location and
placement of all trees and shrubs in the streets, parks, pleasure grounds,
boulevards, alleys and public places of the city and shall have the
supervision, direction and control of the removal, relocation and replacement
thereof; provided, however, in making such determinations and exercising such
control, he shall be governed by the provisions of the then current Parkway
Tree Resolution.
('65 Code, § 7-7.02) (Ord. 593, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 862, passed - - )
§ 95.03 PERMIT REQUIRED TO PLANT OR REMOVE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, and it is hereby prohibited, for any person to
plant, move, remove or replace any tree or shrub in the streets, avenues,
highways, parks, parkways and public places of the city, or to cause the same
to be done, unless and until a permit in writing so to do shall have been first
obtained from the Community Development Director. ('65 Code, § 7-7.03)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful, and it is hereby prohibited, for any person
maintaining any overhead wires or any pipes or underground conduits along or
across any street, avenue, highway, park, parkway or public place in the city,
or owning any property abutting upon any street, avenue, highway, park, parkway
or public place in the city, to have any tree, shrub or plant located therein
cut, trimmed, pruned or removed unless and until a permit in writing so to do
shall have been first obtained from the Community Development Director. ('65
Code, § 7-7.04)
(Ord. 593, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.04 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNERS TO MAINTAIN TREES AND SHRUBS.
   It shall be the duty of all owners and persons having the possession and
control of real property within the city to properly cultivate, care for and
maintain all trees and shrubs planted or set out on any of the street, avenue,
highway and parkway planting areas immediately adjacent to their respective
real properties, subject, however, to the general supervision, direction and
control of the Community Development Director.
('65 Code, § 7-7.05) (Ord. 593, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.05 INTERFERENCE WITH MAINTENANCE OF TREES AND SHRUBS.
   No person shall interfere with the Community Development Director, or
persons acting under his authority, while engaged in planting, mulching,
pruning, trimming, spraying, treating or removing any tree, shrub or plant in
any street, avenue, highway, park, parkway or public place within the city, or
in the removing of any stone, cement or other substance from about the trunk of
any tree, shrub or plant in any such street, avenue, highway, park, parkway,
ground or public place.
('65 Code, § 7-7.06) (Ord. 593, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.06 INJURING TREES AND SHRUBS.
   (A)   Use of injurious substances. No person shall cause, authorize or
procure any brine water, oil, liquid, dye or other substance deleterious to
tree life to lie, leak, pour, flow or drip upon or into the soil about the base
of any tree, shrub or plant in any street, avenue, highway, park, parkway or
public place of the city, or onto any sidewalk, road or pavement within the
city, at a point from which such substance may, by lying upon or by flowing,
dripping or seeping into such soil, injure such tree, shrub or plant, or
otherwise harm or kill any such tree, shrub or plant.
   (B)   Use of cement or stone. No person, without the approval of the
Community Development Director, shall place or maintain any stone, cement or
other substance so that it shall impede the free access of water or air to the
roots of any tree, shrub or plant in any street, avenue, highway, park, parkway
or public place of the city.
('65 Code, § 7-7.07) (Ord. 593, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.07 HAZARDOUS TREES AND SHRUBS.
   (A)   Duty of property owners to notify Community Development Director. It
shall be the duty of all owners and persons having the possession or control of
real property within the city to promptly notify the Community Development
Director in the event any tree or shrub in the street, avenue, highway and
parkway planting areas immediately adjacent to the property owned or controlled
by such owners or persons entitled to the possession and control of such
property is in such condition as to be a menace to public safety or endanger
life or property. ('65 Code, § 7-7.08)
   (B)   Inspection. The Community Development Director may inspect any tree,
shrub or plant upon any street, avenue, highway, park, parkway, ground or
public place of the city, or any tree, shrub or plant standing on any private
property, which tree, shrub or plant overhangs or projects into any street,
avenue, highway, park, parkway, alley or public place of the city, to determine
whether such tree, shrub or plant, or any part thereof, is in such condition as
to constitute a hazard or an impediment to the progress or vision of anyone
traveling on such street, avenue, highway, park, parkway, alley or public
place. ('65 Code, § 7-7.09)
   (C)   Trimming and removal. If, in the opinion of the Community Development
Director, any such tree, shrub or plant is hazardous to the traveling public or
impedes the progress or the vision of the public on any such street, avenue,
highway, park, parkway, alley or public place, he may cause such tree, shrub or
plant, or such parts thereof as are hazardous or an impediment, to be trimmed
or removed so as to remedy such condition. ('65 Code, § 7-7.10)
   (D)   Removal; notice to owner; service of notice.
      (1)   No hazardous tree, shrub or plant standing on any private property
shall be cut down or removed unless ten days notice in writing of such
intention shall be given by the Community Development Director to the owner,
occupant or agent of the owner of such property upon which such hazardous
condition exists, unless in the opinion of the Community Development Director,
the public health, safety, and welfare requires immediate action. ('65 Code, §
7-7.11)
      (2)   If, after due diligence, the Community Development Director is
unable to serve such written notice upon such owner or his agent personally,
the Community Development Director may serve such notice by enclosing the same
in an envelope addressed to such owner, or to his agent, at his last known
address, or at the address shown by the last assessment roll of the county, and
by depositing such notice, with postage thereon fully prepaid, in the United
State Post Office in the city. ('65 Code, § 7-7.12)
   (E)   Appeals. If the owner, occupant or agent of the owner of such private
property within seven days after such notice files his objection to the removal
of such tree, shrub or plant with the Community Development Director, such
tree, shrub or plant shall not be cut down or removed unless the Community
Development Director shall give such owner, occupant or agent a reasonable
opportunity to be heard in support of such objection. If such objection shall
not be sustained, the Community Development Director shall thereafter approve
in writing the cutting down or removal of such hazardous tree, plant or shrub.
('65 Code, § 7-7.13)
   (F)   Liability of city and duty of property owners. Nothing contained in
this subchapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city or its
officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property from
the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant upon his property or under his
control in such a condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an
impediment to travel or vision upon any street, avenue, highway, park, parkway,
alley or public place within the city. ('65 Code, § 7-7.14)
(Ord. 593, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.08 APPEALS.
   Any decision of the Community Development Director made pursuant to this
subchapter may be appealed directly to the City Council in accordance with the
provisions of
§ 30.10 et seq. of this code.
('65 Code, § 7-7.15) (Ord. 593, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION REGULATIONS FOR SINGLE FAMILY ZONES
§ 95.20 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Tree Protection and Preservation
Regulations; Single Family Zones and may be cited as such.
('65 Code, § 7-7A.01) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLASS I TREES. The following trees:
      (1)   Alder (Alnus);
      (2)   Ash (Fraxinus);
      (3)   Beech (Fagus);
      (4)   Birch (Betula);
      (5)   Camphor (Cinnamomum camphora);
      (6)   Carrot Wood (Cupaniopsis anacardiopsis);
      (7)   Cedars (Cedrus atlantica, and deodara);
      (8)   Chinese Flame tree (Koelreuteria bipinnata);
      (9)   Coral tree (Erythina);
      (10)   Crape Myrtle (Lagerstroemia indica);
      (11)   Fern Pine (Podocarpus gracilor);
      (12)   Fig tree (Fiscus rubiginosa);
      (13)   Floss Silk tree (Chorisia);
      (14)   Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba);
      (15)   Jacaranda (Jacaranda mimosifolia);
      (16)   Liquidamber (see “Sweetgum”);
      (17)   Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora);
      (18)   Oaks, all (Quercus);
      (19)   Olive (Olea europaea);
      (20)   Pepper, “California” (Schinus molle);
      (21)   Pine, “Canary Island” (Pinus canariensis);
      (22)   Pine, “Italian Stone” (Pinus pinea);
      (23)   Redwood, “Coast” (Sequoia empervirens);
      (24)   Sequoia (Sequoia giganteum);
      (25)   Strawberry tree (Arbutus unedo);
      (26)   Sweetgum (Liquidamber stryaciflua);
      (27)   Sycamore (Platanus racemosa); and
      (28)   Tulip tree (Liriodendron tulipifera)
   DAMAGE. Any intentional action taken which causes injury, disfigurement or
death to a tree. This includes, but is not limited to, cutting, poisoning,
drilling and the like.
   DEADWOOD. Limbs, branches or a portion of a tree void of green leaves during
a season of the year when green leaves should be present.
   FRUIT TREES. All common tree varieties which typically bear edible fruit and
are not listed as Class I trees.
   LANDMARK or HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT. Any tree or stand of trees (except
palm trees) that meet one of the following criteria:
      (1)   A tree or stand of trees which have taken on an aura of historical
value by virtue of age or location.
      (2)   A tree which has a trunk with a 40-inch circumference (12.75-inch
diameter) if located in the front yard or 60 inches in circumference (19-inch
diameter) if located in the rear and side yards.
   MATURE. Any Class I tree (except a palm or fruit tree) located in the front
yards which exceeds 19 inches in circumference (6-inch diameter) or, if located
in a side yard and rear yard, one which exceeds 30 inches in circumference
(9.5-inch diameter) measured four feet above natural grade.
   REMOVAL. The physical removal of a tree or actions leading to the death of a
tree through poisoning, damaging or other action.
('65 Code, § 7-7A.07) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.22 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR TRIMMING CERTAIN TREES.
   (A)   No person shall cut, trim, prune, transplant, destroy or remove more
than one-third (33%) of the live foliage of any mature Class I tree located
anywhere on private property in the Single-Family Residential Zones of the city
without first obtaining a permit from the city.
   (B)   No person shall cut, trim, prune, transplant or destroy more than one-
third (33%) of the live foliage or remove any tree of “historical/landmark”
significance located in any of the Single-Family Residential Zones of the city
anywhere on private property without first obtaining a permit from the city.
   (C)   No person shall reduce the height of any protected mature tree by more
than one-fourth (25%) over two years without first obtaining a permit from the
city.
('65 Code, § 7-7A.02) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.23 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No permit is required for the removal, trimming or pruning of a tree
damaged by storm, fire or other natural disaster or otherwise determined to be
dangerous by the City Manager, Community Development Director, police officer,
firefighter or Code Enforcement Officer. The exemption applies only to the
extent necessary to remove the danger and reshape the tree.
   (B)   Class I trees located in the front yards which do not exceed 19 inches
in circumference (6-inch diameter) and Class I trees located in side yards and
rear yards which do not exceed 30 inches in circumference (9.5-inch diameter)
measured four feet above natural grade may be removed, cut, trimmed or
transplanted without a permit. These trees are considered “immature.”
   (C)   Trees that must be removed or trimmed by order of any public agency or
public utility having jurisdiction are exempted from the permit requirement.
   (D)   Normal and routine trimming or pruning which does not result in damage
or death to a tree or does not result in the loss of more than one-third (33%)
of the live foliage and limbs of any mature tree is allowed without a permit.
Removal of deadwood is allowed without a permit.
   (E)   Any palm tree or fruit tree may be trimmed or removed without a
permit.
   (F)   All trees in excess of five protected trees on properties of less than
8,000 square feet may be trimmed more than one-third or removed without a
permit. The maximum number of protected trees on these properties is five. On
lots in excess of 8,000 square feet, the maximum number of protected trees is
seven.
('65 Code, § 7-7A.03) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.24 PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   The Community Development Director shall prepare an application for a
tree trimming and/or removal permit which shall contain information necessary
for the Community Development Director to determine whether the standards for
issuance of a permit have been satisfied.
   (B)   The Community Development Director shall grant a permit only if the
Director makes one or more of the following findings:
      (1)   The tree constitutes a nuisance or hazard by virtue of its
condition, location, species, proximity to existing structures, walkways or
utilities.
      (2)   The pruning or trimming of the tree is deemed necessary by a
professional arborist to maintain or enhance the health or appearance of the
tree.
      (3)   The tree has not been reduced in height more than one-fourth (25%)
over a two-year period.
      (4)   The pruning, trimming or removal of the tree is necessary to
prevent a substantial inconvenience or financial hardship to the property
owner.
   (C)   The Community Development Director may require as a condition of a
tree removal permit the replacement of the tree at the applicant's expense. One
or more trees may be required as replacement trees. The size, location and
species of replacement tree(s) shall be determined by the Community Development
Director with consultation of the applicant and taking into consideration such
factors as the size, location, type of tree, number of trees on the property
and the number and type of trees in the surrounding neighborhood. The Director
may consider the option of relocating the subject tree in another location on
the subject property.
   (D)   Any decision of the Community Development Director made pursuant to
this subchapter may be appealed directly to the City Council in accordance with
the provisions of
§ 30.10 et seq. of this Code.
('65 Code, § 7-7A.04) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-
16-02)
§ 95.25 CITY NOT LIABLE.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to impose any liability for
damages or a duty of care and maintenance upon the city or upon any of its
officers or employees.
('65 Code, § 7-7A.06) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
TREE PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION REGULATIONS FOR MULTIPLE FAMILY, COMMERCIAL
AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES
§ 95.35 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Tree Protection and Preservation
Regulations; Multiple Family, Commercial and Industrial Zones and may be cited
as such.
('65 Code, § 7-7B.01) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DAMAGE. Any action taken which causes injury, disfigurement or death to a
tree. This includes, but is not limited to, cutting, poisoning, drilling and
the like.
   DEADWOOD. Limbs, branches or a portion of a tree void of green leaves during
a season of the year when green leaves should be present.
   LANDMARK or HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT. Any tree or stand of trees (except
palm trees) that meet one of the following criteria:
      (1)   A tree or stand of trees which have taken on an aura of historical
value by virtue of age or location.
      (2)   A tree which has a trunk with a 40-inch circumference (12.75-inch
diameter) if located in the front yard or 60 inches in circumference (19-inch
diameter) if located in the rear and side yards.
   MATURE. Any variety of a tree (except fruit trees) that is more than 12½
inches in circumference (4-inch diameter) when measured at a point four feet
above the natural grade.
   REMOVAL. The physical removal of a tree or actions leading to the death of a
tree through poisoning, damaging or other action.
('65 Code, § 7-7B.07) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.37 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR TRIMMING CERTAIN TREES.
   (A)   No person shall cut, trim, prune, transplant, destroy or remove more
than one-third (33%) of the live foliage of any mature tree located anywhere on
private property in any of the multiple-family, commercial or industrial zones
of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city.
   (B)   No person shall reduce the height of any mature tree more than a total
of one-fourth (25%) over two years without first obtaining a permit from the
city.
('65 Code, § 7-7B.02) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.38 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No permit is required for the removal, trimming or pruning of a tree
damaged by storm, fire or other natural disaster or otherwise determined to be
dangerous by the City Manager, Community Development Director, police officer,
firefighter or Code Enforcement Officer. The exemption applies only to the
extent to remove the danger.
   (B)   Trees that do not exceed 12½ inches circumference (4-inch diameter)
when measured four feet above the natural grade may be removed, cut, trimmed or
transplanted without a permit. These trees are considered “immature.”
   (C)   Trees that must be removed or trimmed by order of any public agency or
public utility having jurisdiction are exempted from the permit requirement.
   (D)   Normal and routine trimming or pruning which does not result in damage
or death to a tree or does not result in the loss of more than one-third (33%)
of the live foliage and limbs of any mature tree is allowed without a permit.
Removal of deadwood is allowed without a permit.
   (E)   Any fruit tree may be trimmed or removed without a permit.
('65 Code, § 7-7B.03) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.39 PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   The Community Development Director shall prepare an application for a
tree trimming and/or removal permit which shall contain information necessary
for the Community Development Director to determine whether the standards for
issuance of a permit have been satisfied.
   (B)   The Community Development Director shall grant a permit only if the
Director makes one or more of the following findings:
      (1)   The tree constitutes a nuisance or hazard by virtue of its
condition, location, species, proximity to existing structures, walkways or
utilities.
      (2)   The pruning or trimming of the tree is deemed necessary by a
professional arborist to maintain or enhance the health or appearance of the
tree.
      (3)   The relocation of the tree will not damage the tree or will not
constitute a hazard or interference with other structures or property.
      (4)   The tree has not been reduced in height more than one-fourth (25%)
over a two-year period.
      (5)   The pruning, trimming or removal of the tree is necessary to
prevent a substantial inconvenience or financial hardship to the property
owner.
   (C)   The Community Development Director may require as a condition of a
tree removal permit the replacement of the tree at the applicant's expense. One
or more trees may be required as replacement trees. The size, location and
species of replacement tree(s) shall be determined by the Community Development
Director with consultation of the applicant and taking into consideration such
factors as the size, location, type of tree, number of trees on the property
and the number and type of trees in the surrounding neighborhood. In addition,
the applicant may be required to submit a landscape plan to the city's Design
Review Committee for review and approval.
   (D)   Any decision of the Community Development Director made pursuant to
this subchapter may be appealed directly to the City Council in accordance with
the provisions of
§ 30.10 et seq. of this code.
('65 Code, § 7-7B.04) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-
16-02)
§ 95.40 CITY NOT LIABLE.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to impose any liability for
damages or a duty of care and maintenance upon the city or upon any of its
officers or employees.
('65 Code, § 7-7B.06) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
WEEDS
§ 95.50 OWNER'S DUTY.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, his agent, his lessee and of the person
in possession of private real property, whether improved or unimproved, in the
city to keep the same, together with the sidewalk or sidewalk space of any of
the public streets of the city abutting or adjoining such property, free from
weeds, rubbish, refuse and waste materials of all kinds which may endanger or
injure neighboring property, or the health, safety or welfare of the residents
in the vicinity of such property.
('65 Code, § 6-4.301) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 95.99
Cross-reference:
   
Garbage and refuse, see Ch. 50
§ 95.51 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, WEEDS includes any of the following:
      (1)   Weeds which bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;
      (2)   Sagebrush, chaparral and any other brush or weeds which attain such
large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved
property;
      (3)   Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous;
      (4)   Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as
to constitute a menace to the public health;
      (5)   Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter or other flammable material which
endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard;
('65 Code, § 6-4.303) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.52 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All weeds and rubbish on sidewalks, parking areas, streets and private
property constitute a nuisance, dangerous and injurious to the neighboring
property and to the health and welfare of the residents of the city.
('65 Code, § 6-4.305) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Nuisances, see Ch. 98
§ 95.53 NOTICE.
   Whenever a public nuisance as described in the preceding section is found to
exist within the city, that fact shall be communicated by the Fire Chief or his
deputies, in writing, to the owner of the property abutting the public street
or sidewalk whereon such nuisance exists, or to the owner of the private
property whereon such nuisance exists. The heading of the notice shall be
“Notice to destroy weeds and remove rubbish, refuse and dirt” in letters not
less than one inch in height. The notice shall be in the following form:
      NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that a nuisance exists because of the presence of
weeds and/or rubbish upon or in front of, the property located at
               , City of San Gabriel, California, and more particularly
described in the schedule attached hereto (legal description) and that they
constitute a public nuisance which must be abated by the removal of such weeds
and/or rubbish, within             days of the date of this notice. Otherwise,
it will be removed and the nuisance abated by the City and the cost of removal
assessed up on the land from or in front of which the weeds, rubbish, refuse
and dirt are removed and will constitute a lien upon such land until paid.
   All property owners having any objection to the proposed removal of the
weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt are hereby notified that they may demand a
public hearing before the City Council of the City of San Gabriel by giving
written demand therefor to the City Clerk of the City of San Gabriel within ten
(10) days of the date of this notice. Failure to make demand for such hearing
shall be deemed a waiver thereof and a consent that the City may proceed to
cause the removal of such nuisance.
      Dated this          day of                       , 19        .
                                       
   City Clerk
   City of San Gabriel
('65 Code, § 6-4.308) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.54 MAILING OF NOTICE.
   The notice shall be mailed to each person to whom such described property is
assessed in the last equalized assessment roll available on the date that the
notice is given.
('65 Code, § 6-4.309) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.55 ABATEMENT BY CONTRACTOR.
   In lieu of abatement by day labor, abatement of the nuisance may, in the
discretion of the Fire Chief, be performed by contract on the basis of
competitive bids let to the lowest responsible bidder. In such event, the
contractor shall keep an account and submit an itemized written report for each
separate parcel of land whereon work is performed.
('65 Code, § 6-4.311) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.56 SEASONAL AND RECURRENT NUISANCE.
   (A)   Whenever nuisances are found to be seasonal and recurrent, on
specified parcels of property, the Fire Chief shall notify the property owner
in writing that the efficient and economical control of such seasonal and
recurrent nuisances requires preventive chemical control of such weeds, weed
seeds and weed seedlings. In the event the city is once required to abate such
nuisance, the city may, in addition, before and during the next following
germinating season of such weeds, provide for the preventive abatement of such
nuisance by using chemical control of such weeds.
   (B)   Such seasonal and recurrent nuisances shall be abated in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter; provided, that upon the second and any
subsequent occurrence of such nuisance on the same parcel or parcels within the
same calendar year, no further hearings need be held and it shall be sufficient
to mail a post card notice to the owners of the property as they and their
addresses appear upon the current assessment roll.
   (C)   The notice shall refer to and describe the property and shall state
that noxious or dangerous weeds of a seasonal and recurrent nature are growing
on or in front of the property, and that the same constitute a public nuisance
which must be abated by the removal of said noxious or dangerous weeds within
an established period of time as determined by the city, and that otherwise
they will be removed and the nuisance will be abated by the city authorities,
in which case the cost of such removal shall be assessed upon the parcel and
lands from which or in front of which such weeds are removed and that upon
confirmation such cost will constitute a lien upon such parcel or lands until
paid.
('65 Code, § 6-4.313) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.57 HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   If any property owner demands a hearing pursuant to the provisions of
§ 95.53 of this subchapter, the same shall be held at the time stated in the
notice thereof given pursuant to division (B) of this section. The City Council
shall consider any evidence offered by the property owner as to whether a
public nuisance, in fact, exists. If the City Council determines that no public
nuisance exists, the city shall take no further action with respect to the
subject property. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. If
the Council determines that a public nuisance exists, the Council shall order
that the nuisance be abated by the owner within a reasonable period of time or
that the city cause such abatement and assess the charge therefor against the
real property. ('65 Code, § 6-4.315)
   (B)   The City Council shall give written notice of the time and place when
a hearing is to be held, pursuant to division (A) of this section, to each
property owner who has made a demand therefor, at least ten days in advance of
such hearing. Notice may be given by personal service or by depositing the same
in the United States mail, postage prepaid. Such hearing may be continued from
time to time, without further notice. ('65 Code, § 6-4.317)
(Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.58 ABATEMENT BY OWNER.
   Before the Fire Chief commences to abate the nuisance, the landowner may
accomplish such abatement at his or her own expense. Nevertheless, in any case
in which an order to abate is issued, the City Council by motion or resolution
may further order that a special assessment and lien be imposed pursuant to §
95.63 of this subchapter. In that case the assessment and lien shall be limited
to the costs incurred by the responsible agency in enforcing abatement upon the
parcels, including investigation, boundary determination, measurement, clerical
and other related costs.
('65 Code, § 6-4.319) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.59 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Fire Chief or the contractor engaged by the city may enter upon private
property to abate the nuisance.
('65 Code, § 6-4.321) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.60 COST OF ABATEMENT.
   The Fire Chief shall keep an account of the cost of abatement in front or on
each separate parcel of land where work is done by the city or by a contractor
engaged by the city. The Fire Chief shall submit the same to the City Council
for confirmation.
('65 Code, § 6-4.323) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.61 NOTICE AND POSTING OF COST.
   The City Clerk shall send a notice to the owner of the subject property as
shown upon any city record or upon the last equalized tax roll, whichever the
Clerk shall determine to be the best means for reaching the actual owner,
through the United States mail, showing the cost of abatement on each separate
lot or parcel of land of such owner and designating the time fixed for the
receiving and considering by the City Council of the report and for the hearing
upon objections to it. The failure of the owner to receive such notice shall
not affect the power of the city or its officers or employees to proceed as
provided in this subchapter, nor shall it invalidate the assessment against the
subject property. A copy of the report shall be posted for at least three days
prior to its submission to the Council on or near the Council chamber door with
notice of the date it will be submitted to the Council.
('65 Code, § 6-4.325) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.62 REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   At the time fixed for receiving the schedule of account of the cost of
abating the nuisance, the Council shall hear it and any objections of the
property owners liable to be assessed for the abatement to its approval. The
Council may confirm, accept, modify or reject the schedule of account as it
deems fair and necessary. Acceptance or modification shall be made by
resolution.
('65 Code, § 6-4.327) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.63 ASSESSMENT AND LIEN.
   The cost of abatement in front of or on each parcel of land and the costs
incurred by the responsible agency in enforcing abatement upon the parcels,
including investigation, boundary determination, measurement, clerical and
other related costs, constitutes a special assessment against that parcel.
After the assessment is made and confirmed, it is a lien on the parcel and
shall remain a lien until paid.
('65 Code, § 6-4.329) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.64 COST ACCOUNT FILING.
   A certified copy of the resolution confirming all or part of the cost of
abatement as set forth in the schedule of account shall be filed with the
County Auditor. The description of the parcels reported shall be those used for
the same parcels on the County Assessor's map book for the current year.
('65 Code, § 6-4.331) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.65 APPLICATION OF STATE LAWS.
   State laws relating to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes
apply to such special assessments, as are provided for in this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 6-4.333) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.66 COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENT.
   The amount of assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner as
the ordinary municipal taxes. If delinquent, the amount is subject to the same
penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale, as are provided for ordinary
municipal taxes.
('65 Code, § 6-4.335) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.67 ALTERNATE REMEDIES.
   Violation of this subchapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
which may be abated as provided in Cal. Civil Code Division 4, Part 3 and in
Cal. Civil Proc. Code Part 2, Chapter 2, which remedy shall be in addition to
any other remedy provided in this subchapter or by state law, including Cal.
Penal Code § 372.
('65 Code, § 6-4.339) (Ord. 315-C.S., passed - - )
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $1000 or imprisonment for not more than six
months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of §§
95.20 through
95.40 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of either a misdemeanor or an
infraction. Violations may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction
depending on the severity, willfulness and whether the conduct has been
repeated. Each violation of §§
95.20 through
95.40 shall constitute a separate offense. Misdemeanors may be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period
of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Infractions
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
      (2)   In addition to the criminal penalties established herein, the
Planning Commission may, after a duly noticed public hearing, suspend any
development permits that utilize the sites of trees which were trimmed or
removed in violation of §§
95.20 through
95.40 of this chapter.
('65 Code, §§ 7-7A.05, 7-7B.05) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed - - )
CHAPTER 96: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Fire Code
   
96.01   Short title
   
96.02   Adoption of the California Fire Code
   
96.03   California Fire Code; additions and amendments
   
96.04   Variances
   
96.05   Fire hazard severity zone map
Fireworks
   
96.20   Definition
   
96.21   Permit required
   
96.22   Granting of permit
   
96.23   Permit fees
Hazardous Materials Response Plans
   
96.40   Assumption of administrative responsibility
   
96.41   Delegation of administrative responsibility
   
96.42   Definitions
   
96.43   Handler to report release and provide access
   
96.44   Schedule of fees
   
96.99   Penalty
FIRE CODE
§ 96.01 SHORT TITLE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall constitute the fire code of the city
and may be cited as such.
('65 Code, § 4-4.101) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed
11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10)
§ 96.02 ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   There is hereby adopted by the City Council for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire,
hazardous materials or explosion, these certain codes and standards known as
the 2022 Edition of the California Fire Code. As the California Fire Code, 2022
Edition, thereof and whole thereof, including Appendix Chapter 4, B, BB, C, CC,
D-I, K, N and O, 2022 Edition, the State of California Title 24, Part 9,
California Fire Code Amendments of 2022, including Errata’s and Supplements
hereafter, same and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified,
or amended by this subchapter. A copy of the Code and Standards is now on file
in the office of the City Clerk and the San Gabriel Fire Department and are
hereby adopted and incorporated as if fully set out at length herein. The
provisions hereof shall be controlling within the limits of the incorporated
areas of the city.
(‘65 Code, § 4-4.102) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 502- C.S.,
passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 531-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed
11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed 11-19-
13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16; Am. Ord. 655, passed 11-19-19; Am. Ord.
686, passed 11-15-22)
§ 96.03 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE; ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS.
   The following section and subsections of the California Fire Code are hereby
added or amended as follows:
   (A)   Section 104.1 General. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the
administration and the enforcement of this Code. Under his direction, the Fire
Department shall enforce all ordinances of the jurisdiction and the laws of the
State pertaining to:
   (B)   Section 111.1 Board of appeals established. Any person (appellant) who
is aggrieved by the determination of the Fire Chief as to the suitability of
any alternate materials or methods of construction, and/or as to the reasonable
interpretations of the provisions of this Code may appeal to the City Manager
or his designee (hearing officer) for a final determination. Such appeal must
be in writing and must be filed with the City Clerk not less than ten days
after notice of the determination of the Fire Chief is served by first class
mail upon the appellant. A filing fee for an appeal will be charged in an
amount established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution. If
any appeal is made, the hearing officer, in reviewing the Fire Chief’s
decision, shall call upon him for testimony or written reports necessary to
become fully informed on the subject of the appeal. Formal rules of evidence
shall not be employed, but the hearing officer shall conduct these meetings in
such a manner as to give all concerned a reasonable opportunity to make a
presentation of all relevant facts and arguments. The hearing officer may
conduct or cause to be conducted any investigations or tests by any specific
means he deems necessary. The hearing officer may sustain, overrule or modify
the determination of the Fire Chief in accordance with the provisions of this
Code or the ordinance appealed, and his decision shall be final upon
notification to the Fire Chief and the appellant of his determination.
   (C)   Section 112 Violations. It is hereby declared that any violation of
the Fire Code constitutes a public nuisance, and in addition to any other
remedies provided by the Fire Code for its enforcement, the administrative
authority may bring civil suit to enjoin the violation of any provisions of
this Fire Code. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of the Fire Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to
exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for not more than
six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or portion
thereof during which violations of the Fire Code occurs or continues shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Section 903.2 Where Required & 9032.8 Group R.
      (1)   New Buildings and Structures. An automatic fire extinguishing
system or other approved combined system shall be installed in all new
occupancies and locations for which any building permit is issued after the
effective date of this section.
      (2)   Existing Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures
existing as of the effective date of this section, regardless of the type of
construction, type of occupancy, or area, shall be provided with an automatic
fire extinguishing system conforming to the most current requirements of the
California Fire Code, State Fire Marshal regulations, and requirements of the
National Fire Protection Association Codes and Standards, upon the occurrence
of any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Addition(s) to any building creating a total area exceeding
4,000 square feet in floor area between unpierced area separation walls, and in
occupancies and locations as set forth in Section 903.2; or
         (b)   Additions, alterations or repairs to any building which exceed
25% of the existing square footage of the building, within any 12-month period;
or
         (c)   Whenever a change in occupancy or use increases the fire hazard
to the structure or the life safety of the occupants.
   (E)   Section 906.1 Where required. Portable fire extinguishers of a 3-A-40-
B.C type shall be installed in all occupancies and locations as set forth in
the Fire Code and as required by the Fire Chief.
      Exceptions:
      (1)   Other portable fire extinguishers may be installed, if approved by
the Chief.
      (2)   Group R Division 3 and Group U occupancies are exempt.
   (F)   Appendix B, TABLE B105.2.
   TABLE B105.2
   REQUIRED FIRE-FLOW FOR BUILDINGS OTHER THAN ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY
   DWELLINGS, GROUP R-3 AND R-4 BUILDINGS AND TOWNHOUSES
 
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM MINIMUM FIRE-FLOW         FLOW DURATION (hours)
(Design Standard)          (gallons per minute)
No automatic sprinkler     Value in Table B105.1(2)  Duration in Table B105.1
system                                               (2)
Section 903.3.1.1 or       50% of the value in Table Duration in Table B105.1
Section 903.3.1.2 of the   B105.1(2) but not less    (2)
California Fire Code       than 1500
 
(‘65 Code, § 4-4.104) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 502- C.S.,
passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 531-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed
11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed 11-19-
13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16; Am. Ord. 686, passed 11-15-22)
§ 96.04 VARIANCES.
   The Council shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the
California Fire Code upon an application in writing by the owner or lessee, or
his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code; provided, however, the
spirit of the provisions of said Code shall be observed, public safety secured,
and substantial justice done.
('65 Code, § 4-4.105) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed
11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10)
§ 96.05 FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE MAP.
   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 51179, the City of San Gabriel hereby
adopts the fire hazard severity zone map for local responsibility areas as
developed and designated by the California Department of Forestry and Fire
Protection (CAL FIRE).
   (B)   The adopted map shall be maintained on file with the City Clerk and
made available for public inspection during normal business hours. The map may
also be accessed on the CAL FlRE website.
(Ord. 719, passed 6-17-25)
FIREWORKS
§ 96.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, FIREWORKS shall mean and include all
fireworks as are defined in Cal Health & Safety Code §§ 12505, 12511, 12512,
and 12529, including “dangerous fireworks,” “safe and sane fireworks,” and
fireworks kits.
(‘65 Code, § 4-4.201) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575- C.S.,
passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed
11-19-13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16)
§ 96.21 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell, use, discharge, or have in his or her possession,
within the city, any fireworks without first securing a permit therefor from
the Council as provided in this subchapter.
(‘65 Code, § 4-4.202) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575- C.S.,
passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed
11-19-13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16)
§ 96.22 GRANTING OF PERMIT.
   The Council, in its sole discretion and subject to such conditions as the
Council may require for the protection of the public health, safety, and
welfare, may grant permits for a public fireworks display, provided such
display shall be under the supervision of a person licensed as a pyrotechnic
operator. No such permit shall be issued without the approval of the Fire
Chief.
(‘65 Code, § 4-4.203) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575- C.S.,
passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed
11-19-13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16)
§ 96.23 PERMIT FEES.
   The Council may establish a charge for the issuance of any permit authorized
by this subchapter, in such amount as the Council shall determine from time to
time, to defray any expense incurred by the city for investigations or policing
such pyrotechnic display.
(‘65 Code, § 4-4.204) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575- C.S.,
passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed
11-19-13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16)
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE PLANS
§ 96.40 ASSUMPTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY.
   Pursuant to its agreement with the Fire Protection District of Los Angeles
County, San Gabriel hereby assumes responsibility for the administration of
Cal. Health & Safety Code Chapter 6.95.
('65 Code, § 4-4.301) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed
11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10)
§ 96.41 DELEGATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The city hereby designates the Los Angeles County Fire Department as
administering agency for the enforcement and regulation of Cal. Health & Safety
Code Chapter 6.95, Division 20, §§ 25500 et seq. for the jurisdiction of the
city.
('65 Code, § 4-4.302) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed
11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10)
§ 96.42 DEFINITIONS.
   The words and phrases listed below shall be defined as provided in this
section. All other words or phrases not defined here shall have the same
meaning as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25501.
   HANDLE. To use, generate, process, produce, package, treat, store, emit,
discharge or dispose of a hazardous material in any fashion.
   HANDLER. Any business which handles a hazardous material.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any material that, because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant
present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if
released into the workplace or the environment. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS include,
but are not limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, and any material
which a handler or the administering agency has a reasonable basis for
believing that it would be injurious to the health and safety of persons or
harmful to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment.
('65 Code, § 4-4.303) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed
11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10)
§ 96.43 HANDLER TO REPORT RELEASE AND PROVIDE ACCESS.
   The handler of any hazardous material shall, upon discovery, immediately
report any release or threatened release of a hazardous   The handler of any
hazardous material shall, upon discovery, immediately report any release or
threatened release of a hazardous material to the administering agency and the
State Office of Emergency Services. Each handler shall provide all state, city
or county fire or public health or safety personnel and emergency rescue
personnel with access to the handler’s facilities. This section does not apply
to any person engaged in the transportation of a hazardous material on a
highway which is subject to, and in compliance with, the requirements of Cal.
Veh. Code §§ 2453 and 23112.5.
('65 Code, § 4-4.304) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed
11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10)
§ 96.44 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   (A)   The Cal. Health & Safety Code § 25513 requires each administering
agency to be required to adopt a schedule fee to be collected from each
business required to submit a hazardous material business plan pursuant to this
subchapter which is within its jurisdiction.
   (B)   Each business required to submit a plan shall pay the fees set forth
in this subchapter in an amount established, from time to time, by resolution
of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 4-4.306) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed
11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
96.01 through 96.05, or any provision of the California Fire Code adopted by
reference by the provisions of §
96.02 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person or business who violates any provision of §§
96.40 through
96.44 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $25,000
for each day of violation, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more
than one year, or by both the fine and imprisonment. If the conviction is for a
violation committed after a first conviction under this section, the person
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $2,000 or more than $50,000 per
day of violation, or by imprisonment in the state prison for 16, 20, or 24
months or in the county jail for not more than one year, or by both the fine
and imprisonment. Furthermore, if the violation results in, or significantly
contributes to, an emergency, including a fire, to which the county or city is
required to respond, the person shall also be assessed the full cost of the
county or city emergency response, as well as the cost of cleaning up and
disposing of the hazardous materials.
('65 Code, § 4-4.305) (Ord. 461-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 502-C.S., passed
6-3-99; Am. Ord. 531-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07;
Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10)
CHAPTER 97: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Public Health and Safety Code
   
97.01   Adoption of Los Angeles County Public Health and Safety Code
Rats and Vermin
   
97.10   Definition
   
97.11   Ratproofing for grain storage required
   
97.12   Ratproofing structures housing food for human consumption required
   
97.13   Maintaining rat harborages unlawful
   
97.14   Notice to ratproof; service
   
97.15   Ratproofing specifications
   
97.16   Interference with Health Office
   
97.17   Food establishments
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
§ 97.01 ADOPTION OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE.
   Subject to the additions, deletions and amendments hereinafter set forth in
this subchapter, the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions set forth in
that certain code entitled Los Angeles County "Health and Safety Code," Title
11 Los Angeles County Code including amendments thereto through County
Ordinances No. 95-0056, including the following: Division 1 - Health Code;
Division 2 - General Hazards; Division 3 - Miscellaneous Regulations; Division
4 - Underground Storage of Hazardous Materials; Appendices to Title 11 and such
code shall be and become the Health and Safety Code for the city. One copy of
the County Health and Safety Code has been deposited in the office of the City
Clerk and shall be at all times maintained by the Clerk for use and examination
by the public. Said edition of the County Health and Safety Code, except as
provided in this subchapter, is substituted for and shall take the place of the
previous edition of the County Public Health Code previously adopted.
(‘65 Code, § 6-10.01) (Ord. 464-C.S., passed 5-21-96; Am. Ord. 720, passed 6-
17-25)
RATS AND VERMIN
§ 97.10 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, RATPROOFING shall mean a continuous
masonry foundation of the size and depth required by the building code and
other requirements for a new building of the same occupancy with regard to
clearances beneath wood joists, wall coverings adjacent to the top foundation
and the protection of roof and foundation openings, or any openings or holes in
stud walls.
('65 Code, § 6-2.601) (Ord. 492, passed - - )
§ 97.11 RATPROOFING FOR GRAIN STORAGE REQUIRED.
   No person shall use any building or structure, or portion thereof, for the
storage, handling, preparation or sale of any grain or grain products which, in
the opinion of the Health Officer, are, or are likely to become, infested with
rats unless such building or structure, or portion thereof, has been
ratproofed.
('65 Code, § 6-2.602) (Ord. 492, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.12 RATPROOFING STRUCTURES HOUSING FOOD FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION REQUIRED.
   No person shall use any building or structure, or portion thereof, for a
slaughterhouse, packinghouse or bakery or for the manufacture, preparation,
storage, handling or display of any food or food product for human or animal
consumption which, in the opinion of the Health Officer, is, or is likely to
become, infested with rats unless such building or structure, or portion
thereof, has been ratproofed.
('65 Code, § 6-2.603) (Ord. 492, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.13 MAINTAINING RAT HARBORAGES UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any building, lot, premises,
vehicle or any place in such an unsanitary condition as to permit the breeding
or harboring therein or thereon of flies, rats, bedbugs, cockroaches, lice or
any vermin. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit an accumulation of
rubbish material that may serve as a harborage for rats unless such material is
elevated not less than 18 inches above the ground with a clear intervening
space thereunder.
('65 Code, § 6-2.604) (Ord. 492, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.14 NOTICE TO RATPROOF; SERVICE.
   (A)   When determined by the Health Officer, or his duly authorized
representative, that any building or structure mentioned in this subchapter
constitutes a rat harborage, he may serve upon the person in charge or control
thereof a notice in writing to ratproof such building or structure, as set
forth in §
97.15, within a reasonable time as stated in such notice.
   (B)   When determined by the Health Officer, or his duly authorized
representative, that it is unnecessary to ratproof such building or structure
in its entirety, he may specify in such notice that portion which shall be
ratproofed.
('65 Code, § 6-2.605) (Ord. 492, passed - - )
§ 97.15 RATPROOFING SPECIFICATIONS.
   In addition to the other requirements set forth in this subchapter, any
building or structure, or portion thereof, used for the storage or handling of
any grain or grain product or any food or food product for human or animal
consumption, except dwellings or apartments, shall be ratproofed as follows:
   (A)   Ratproofing. Buildings shall be ratproofed in such a manner as may be
prescribed in the Los Angeles County Health and Safety Code and/or the Uniform
Building Code, as adopted by the city.
   (B)   Screening. All underfloor vents, openings in foundations, roof vents
and skylights shall be screened by the use of screening of at least one-half
inch mesh hardware cloth.
   (C)   Foundations.
      (1)   All foundations, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter,
shall be continuous masonry foundations as specified for Type V buildings in
the Uniform Building Code.
      (2)   Buildings erected without a continuous foundation and upon a slab
of cement or asphaltic concrete not less than three inches in thickness need
not be ratproofed as required if a concrete curb not less than one foot in
depth below the natural ground grade is run continuously around and under the
outside edges of such slab.
      (3)   Buildings under 400 square feet in area, having an 18-inch
clearance under the floor joists and supported on piers, need not have the
required continuous foundation.
   (D)   Walls. A 12-inch strip of non-corrodible metal lath, weighing not less
than three-fourths pounds per square yard, shall be placed under wall coverings
on the inside and outside of all exterior stud walls at the floor level;
provided, however, such strip need not be placed on the outside face when there
is maintained a clearance of 18 inches under the floor joists, or when the
exterior wall covering is stucco. ('65 Code, § 6-2.606) (Ord. 492, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.16 INTERFERENCE WITH HEALTH OFFICER.
   No person shall refuse, resist or attempt to resist the entrance of the
Health Officer into any railway car, vehicle, building, room, lot or other
place, or portion of room thereof, in the city in the performance of his
duties, nor refuse to obey any lawful order of the Health Officer made in the
performance of his duties within the powers conferred upon him by law or by the
provisions of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 6-2.607) (Ord. 492, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 97.17 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Ordinance No. 2010-00451 of the County of Los Angeles is hereby adopted and
made a part of the San Gabriel Municipal Code. A copy of said Ordinance shall
be maintained on file by the City Clerk.
(Ord. 489-C.S., passed 10-20-98; Am. Ord. 626-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
CHAPTER 98: NUISANCES
Section
   
98.01   Intent and purpose
   
98.02   Maintenance of premises; nuisances
   
98.03   Abatement
   
98.04   Authorization for Community Development Director
   
98.05   Declaration of nuisance; setting for public hearing
   
98.06   Notice of hearing and notice to abate
   
98.07   Abatement by owner prior to hearing
   
98.08   Hearing Officer
   
98.09   Hearing; conduct
   
98.10   Service on owner of Hearing Officer's order of abatement
   
98.11   Appeal of Hearing Officer's decision
   
98.12   City Council hearing
   
98.13   Service on owner of City Council's order of abatement
   
98.14   Abatement after hearing
   
98.15   Report; hearing on assessment
   
98.16   Service on owner of statement of costs
   
98.17   Assessments of costs; lien against property
   
98.18   Community Development Director; right of entry
   
98.19   Alternative actions
   
98.20   Emergency abatement
   
98.21   Duty to abate
   
98.22   Violations
   
98.23   Definitions
   
98.24   Authority to remove illegal signs in public right-of-way
   
98.25   Presumption of responsible party
   
98.26   Charges for removal of illegal signs on public property
   
98.27   Hearing on removal costs
 
   
98.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   
Weeds, see §§ 95.50 through 95.67
§ 98.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of this chapter to identify and provide a remedy for
certain conditions which, when found to exist on land within the city, are
detrimental to public health, safety or welfare, or which interfere with the
reasonable enjoyment of life or property, and thereby create a public nuisance.
('65 Code, § 8-11.01) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.02 MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES; NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful and hereby declared a public nuisance for any person or
persons either owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any
real property within the city to cause, permit or allow any of the following
conditions to exist thereon:
   (A)   To maintain property containing any building, structure, equipment or
facility in violation of the California Building Code, as adopted and enforced
within the city;
   (B)   To maintain any building or structure in such a condition that it
would constitute an “imminent danger” as defined in § 202 of the 2021
International Property Maintenance Code, and as adopted and enforced within the
city.
   (C)   To maintain property containing a building or structure in such a
condition that it would constitute an “unsafe structure or equipment” as
defined in § 111 of the 2021 International Property Maintenance Code, and as
adopted and enforced within the city;
   (D)   To maintain any building or structure which is abandoned, boarded up,
partially destroyed or left unreasonably in a state of partial construction;
   (E)   To abandon or permanently vacate, or cause to be abandoned or
permanently vacated, any building or structure, so that it becomes accessible
to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, juveniles and vagrants,
for unlawful or hazardous use;
   (F)   To maintain property in such a manner that the topography or
configuration, whether a natural state or as a result of grading operations,
causes or will cause erosion, subsidence or surface water containing any oil,
solvent, detergent, odorous material creating runoff problems which will or may
be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent or nearby
properties;
   (G)   To maintain property containing attractive nuisances in the form of:
      (1)   Abandoned, broken, neglected machinery or equipment; or
      (2)   Abandoned, unfenced or otherwise unprotected wells, swimming pools,
spas, ponds or excavations;
   (H)   To maintain, install or erect any barbed wire, broken glass, metal
spike or other similar sharp or edged object affixed and projecting from atop a
solid wall or fence structure, unless otherwise approval is granted by the
Building Official;
   (I)   To maintain property, including any sidewalks and parkways adjacent
thereto, containing weeds, dry grasses, dead trees, dead shrubs or any other
material which bears seeds of a wingy or downy nature or which, by reason of
its size, manner, growth or location, constitutes a fire hazard or a threat to
public health, or containing weeds, vegetation, grasses, trees or shrubs which,
when dry, will in reasonable probability constitute a fire hazard;
   (J)   (1)   To maintain property containing refuse, rubbish, broken or
discarded furniture or household equipment visible from the public right-of-way
or adjoining properties.
      (2)   This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping of, or disposing
of, or the scattering over the property or premises any of the following:
         (a)   Junk, trash or debris;
         (b)   Abandoned or discarded objects or equipment, such as
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or boxes; or
         (c)   Excavations or stagnant water;
   (K)   To maintain property containing refuse, rubbish, garbage, offal,
animal excrement or other waste materials which emit odors that are
unreasonably offensive to the physical senses of normal persons, or which may
cause or attract the migration of insects;
   (L)   To maintain clothes lines in front yard areas;
   (M) To maintain premises with garbage or trash containers stored in front
yards and visible from the public right-of-way, except when in places of
collection and at times permitted by this code. Where the property is a corner
lot, this division shall apply to storage of garbage and trash containers
within those side yard setbacks which are adjacent to the street;
   (N)   To maintain any building, wall, fence or structure with inscriptions,
writings, scratches or other markings commonly referred to as “graffiti”;
   (O)   To maintain, construct or erect any building, advertising structure,
or other structure, in whole or in part, on or upon any sidewalk, alley,
street, lane, court, park or other public place which encroaches upon or
obstructs in any manner the free and open use thereof, unless otherwise
permitted by this code;
   (P)   To maintain any signs or sign structures, including their supports,
braces, guys and anchors which constitute a hazard to health, safety or public
welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence, and
declared as such by the Building Official;
   (Q)   To maintain property in such a manner as to cause a hazard to the
public by obscuring visibility of or at any public right-of-way, road
intersection or pedestrian walkway;
   (R)   To maintain any structure in a state of substantial deterioration,
such as peeling paint on a facade, broken windows, roofs in disrepair, damaged
porches or broken steps or other such deterioration or disrepair not otherwise
constituting a violation and which is visible from a public right-of-way or
adjoining properties, where such condition would have a tendency to depreciate
the aesthetic and property values of surrounding property;
   (S)   To maintain premises with substantial lack of maintenance of
landscaped areas, including the lack of cultivation, irrigation, fertilization,
trimming of trees and lawns, shrubs, vines and any other ground cover, and the
lack of maintenance of non-landscaped areas, where the areas to be maintained
are viewable by the public from a public right-of-way or adjoining properties,
and where such condition would have a tendency to depreciate the aesthetic and
property values of surrounding properties;
   (T)   To maintain or operate, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in such a manner as to create
noise or cause vibrations which cause discomfort or annoyance to reasonable
persons of normal sensitivity, or which endangers the comfort, repose, health
or peace of the public or of any person using or occupying other property in
the vicinity;
   (U)   To maintain, keep or operate any machinery which, by reason of its
dust, exhaust or fumes, creates a health or safety hazard;
   (V)   To maintain, store, discharge, hold, handle, use or otherwise deal
with hazardous substances, sewage or liquid wastes, as defined by applicable
federal, state or local laws or regulations:
      (1)   In violation of federal, state or local laws or regulations;
      (2)   In such a manner to affect in any way air or water quality; or
      (3)   In such a manner as creates an identifiable risk of accidental
release of the substances which might adversely affect the health or safety of
persons, damage property or adversely affect air or water quality;
   (W) To fail to remove underground or aboveground storage vessels or tanks
within six months after the use of such tanks or vessels ceases;
   (X) To maintain any building, structure or property or any part thereof,
which has been constructed or is maintained in violation of any applicable
state or local law or regulation relating to the location, condition, use,
construction or maintenance of buildings and properties;
   (Y)   To maintain property in such condition as creates a detriment or
hazard to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such manner as to
constitute a public nuisance as defined by Cal. Civil Code §§ 3479 and 3480 or
other applicable statutes.
(‘65 Code, § 8-11.02) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed
12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed 11-19-13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16;
Am. Ord. 655, passed 11-19-19; Am. Ord. 686, passed 11-15-22) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.03 ABATEMENT.
   All or any part of any real property, or building or structure located
thereon, found to constitute a public nuisance as provided in this chapter,
shall be abated by rehabilitation, repair, removal or demolition pursuant to
the procedures set forth in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 8-11.03) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.04 AUTHORIZATION FOR COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   The Community Development Director is authorized to administer and enforce
the provisions of this chapter. The Community Development Director may appoint
and authorize one or more members of the Community Development staff to act as
his designee to administer or enforce this chapter. In the context of this
chapter, COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR includes each and all persons
designated by the Community Development Director to assist in the
administration and enforcement of this chapter, as limited by the terms of the
delegation.
('65 Code, § 8-11.04) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.05 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; SETTING FOR PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever the Community Development Director finds that any real
property within the city, or any building, improvement or structure located
thereon, is being maintained in violation of one or more of the provisions of §
98.02 hereof and reasonably believes that such violation constitutes a public
nuisance under this chapter, he may set the matter for a public hearing before
the Hearing Officer.
   (B)   Prior to setting any such matter for public hearing, the Community
Development Director shall insure that all reasonable alternative remedies have
been exhausted without an abatement having been effectuated.
('65 Code, § 8-11.05) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.06 NOTICE OF HEARING AND NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   The Community Development Director shall give not less than ten days
written notice of the time and place of the public hearing to the owner of the
affected property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of Los
Angeles County. The Community Development Director may direct that notice also
be given to other property owners who may have an interest in or be affected by
the conditions which allegedly exist on the property and require abatement. The
notice shall be headed “NOTICE TO ABATE A PUBLIC NUISANCE” in letters not less
than one inch in height, and shall describe the property involved by street
address and by the Los Angeles County Assessor's property identification
number, including the map book, page and parcel numbers, as contained in the
latest equalized assessment roll of the county. The notice shall include a
brief description of the conditions which are deemed to be contrary to the
provisions of §
98.01 hereof and shall contain a detailed list of the corrections necessary to
abate the cited conditions.
   (B)   The notice shall direct the owner of the property to abate the
conditions which have created the nuisance and shall set forth in said notice
the contents of §
98.07, relating to the owner's right to abate the nuisance prior to the
hearing.
   (C)   At least ten days prior to the date set for hearing, the Community
Development Director shall cause a copy of the notice to be conspicuously
posted on or near the affected property.
   (D)   The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings under this chapter. Notice shall be given by
personal delivery or by United States mail, registered or certified, with
return receipt requested. If notice is given by registered or certified mail as
aforesaid, notice shall be deemed received when deposited in the United States
mail.
('65 Code, § 8-11.06) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.07 ABATEMENT BY OWNER PRIOR TO HEARING.
   Any owner shall have the right to abate the alleged nuisance in accordance
with the notice of hearing and notice to abate at his or her own expense,
provided the same is done prior to the time at which the matter is set for
public hearing before the Hearing Officer. On receipt of notice from the
property owner that the conditions directed to be abated have been abated in
accordance with the notice, the Community Development Director shall cause the
same to be inspected to verify compliance. If the Community Development
Director finds that compliance has been achieved, he shall terminate the
proceedings.
('65 Code, § 8-11.07) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.08 HEARING OFFICER.
   The hearing to determine whether a nuisance exists shall be conducted by the
City Manager or his duly authorized designee who shall act as Hearing Officer,
and who shall hereinafter be referred to as the “Hearing Officer.”
('65 Code, § 8-11.08) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.09 HEARING; CONDUCT.
   (A)   The hearing to determine whether a nuisance exists shall be conducted
by the Hearing Officer who shall consider all relevant evidence including, but
not limited to, applicable staff reports, objections or protests relative to
the existence of such alleged public nuisance, and the manner proposed for
abatement of same. The hearing may be continued from time to time, provided,
however, that the hearing shall be completed as expeditiously as circumstances
permit.
   (B)   Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the Hearing Officer shall,
on the basis of the evidence presented at such hearing, determine whether the
property, or any part thereof, or any condition thereon, as maintained,
constitutes a public nuisance, as defined herein. If the Hearing Officer finds
that a public nuisance exists, he or she shall, by written notice, order the
same abated in a reasonable period of time as set forth in the notice. The
determination of the Hearing Officer shall be final unless appealed in the
manner provided in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 8-11.09) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.10 SERVICE ON OWNER OF HEARING OFFICER'S ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
   (A)   A copy of the Hearing Officer's order of abatement of the nuisance
shall be served upon the owner of the property in accordance with the
provisions of §
98.06 hereof, together with a detailed list of needed corrections or abatement
methods.
   (B)   If no appeal is filed pursuant to §
98.11 and the nuisance is not completely abated by the owner, as directed,
within the time set forth in the order of abatement then, when the time for
appeal has expired, the Community Development Director shall cause the same to
be abated by city personnel or private contract, and entry upon the premises is
expressly authorized for such purposes. Upon completion of the abatement by
direction of the Community Development Director, the Community Development
Director shall cause a statement of the costs thereof to be prepared for
submission to the City Council. The Community Development Director shall set a
time and place for the City Council to receive and consider the statement of
costs, and shall serve on the owner or owners of the property a copy of the
statement of costs and a notice of the time and place at which the City Council
will receive and consider the statement of costs. The statement of costs and
the notice of hearing shall be served in the same manner as is provided in §
98.06 hereof and shall be accompanied by a copy of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 8-11.10) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.11 APPEAL OF HEARING OFFICER'S DECISION.
   (A)   The owner or owners of the property affected by the decision of the
Hearing Officer, or any person owning a property interest affected by such
decision, may appeal the decision of the Hearing Officer to the City Council by
filing an appeal with the City Clerk within five working days following the
giving of the notice of the decision of the Hearing Officer. The appeal shall
contain the following:
      (1)   A specific identification of the property;
      (2)   The names and addresses of all appellants;
      (3)   A statement of each appellant's legal interest in the property;
      (4)   A statement specifying the grounds for the appeal together with all
material facts in support thereof;
      (5)   The signature of each appellant and the date of execution of the
appeal document; and
      (6)   The verification of at least one appellant as to the truth of the
matter stated in the appeal.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of such appeal, together with a
filing fee, set the matter for hearing before the City Council not less than
ten nor more than 30 days following the filing of the appeal. Notice of hearing
shall be given in the manner provided for in §
98.06 of this chapter.
   (C)   The Council may, by resolution, establish a fee from time to time for
the processing of an appeal.
('65 Code, § 8-11.11) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.12 CITY COUNCIL HEARING.
   (A)   At the time and place set for the hearing, the City Council shall
review and consider the record before and the report and decision of the
Hearing Officer and written and oral argument relative to the report and
decision of the Hearing Officer. The hearing may be continued from time to
time, provided, however, that the hearing shall be completed as expeditiously
as circumstances permit.
   (B)   Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall, on
the basis of the record before and the report of the Hearing Officer, and
considering such argument as may have been presented and received at the
hearing, determine whether the decision of the Hearing Officer should be
upheld, modified or overturned. The determination of the City Council shall
include a statement as to whether or not a public nuisance exists. If the City
Council finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall, by resolution, order the
same abated within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
resolution. If the City Council finds that no public nuisance exists, the
notice to abate shall be deemed to have been withdrawn and the matter shall be
terminated. The determination of the City Council shall be final.
('65 Code, § 8-11.12) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.13 SERVICE ON OWNER OF CITY COUNCIL'S ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
   A copy of the City Council's resolution ordering abatement of the nuisance
shall be served upon the owner of the property in the same manner as provided
in § 98.06 hereof, together with a detailed list of needed corrections or
abatement methods. If the City Council finds that no nuisance exists, notice of
such findings shall be mailed to the owner of the property by regular or
certified mail and a copy of such notice shall be delivered to the Hearing
Officer.
('65 Code, § 8-11.13) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.14 ABATEMENT AFTER HEARING.
   Any owner shall have the right to abate the public nuisance in accordance
with the City Council's resolution ordering abatement, at his or her own
expense, provided the same is completed prior to the expiration of the time set
forth in the resolution. Upon compliance with the resolution by the owner, the
proceedings hereunder shall be deemed terminated. If such nuisance is not
completely abated by the owner, as directed, within the time set forth in the
resolution, then the Community Development Director shall cause the same to be
abated by city personnel or private contract, and entry upon the premises is
expressly authorized for such purposes. Upon completion of the abatement by
direction of the Community Development Director, the Community Development
Director shall cause a statement of the costs thereof to be prepared for
submission to the City Council. The Community Development Director shall set a
time and place for the City Council to receive and consider the statement of
costs, and shall serve on the owner or owners of the property a copy of the
statement of costs and a notice of the time and place at which the City Council
will receive and consider the statement of costs. The statement of costs and
the notice of hearing shall be served in the same manner as is provided in §
98.06 hereof and shall be accompanied by a copy of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 8-11.14) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.15 REPORT; HEARING ON ASSESSMENT.
   At the time and place set for receiving and considering the statement of
costs, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the statement together with
any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed
for the cost of abating the nuisance. Thereupon, the City Council may make any
such revision, correction or modification to the statement of costs as it may
deem appropriate, after which the statement as submitted, or as revised,
corrected or modified, shall be confirmed by resolution. Such hearing may be
continued from time to time, provided however, that the hearing shall be
completed as expeditiously as circumstances permit. The decision of the City
Council shall be final.
('65 Code, § 8-11.15) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.16 SERVICE ON OWNER OF STATEMENT OF COSTS.
   The City Clerk shall give notice of the City Council's decision regarding
the statement of costs to the owner, or owners of said property in the manner
set forth in § 98.06 of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 8-11.16) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.17 ASSESSMENTS OF COSTS; LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY.
   (A)   The cost of abatement of a nuisance, as confirmed by resolution of the
City Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the property to
which it relates, and after its recording, as thus made and confirmed, the same
shall constitute a lien on said property in the amount of such assessment.
After the confirmation of the statement, a copy thereof shall be recorded in
the official records of Los Angeles County and shall be transmitted to the
assessor and tax collector of the County of Los Angeles by the City Clerk.
Whereupon it shall be the duty of the assessor and tax collector to add the
amount of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes
levied against the said respective lot or parcel of land, and thereafter said
amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary
real property taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties
and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in the case of delinquency as
provided for ordinary real property taxes.
   (B)   The notice of lien for recordation shall be in the form substantially
as follows:
   NOTICE OF LIEN
   (Claim of the City of San Gabriel)
      Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of §§
98.09 through
98.13 of Chapter 98 of Title IX of the Municipal Code, the City Manager of the
City of San Gabriel did, on or about the         day of                 ,
19    , cause the premises hereinafter described to be rehabilitated or the
building or structure on the property hereinafter described to be repaired or
demolished in order to abate a public nuisance on the real property; and the
City Council of the City of San Gabriel did, on the       day of
              , 19     , assess the cost of such rehabilitation, repair or
demolition upon the real property hereinafter described; and the same has not
been paid, the City of San Gabriel claims a lien on such rehabilitation, repair
or demolition in the amount of said assessment, to wit: the sum of $         ;
and the same shall be a lien upon the real property until paid in full and
discharged of record.
      The real property referred to and upon which a lien is claimed is that
certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of San Gabriel, County of
Los Angeles, State of California, and particularly described as follows:
   (legal description)
   DATED: This          day of             , 19      .
   __________________________   City Manager
   City of San Gabriel, California
('65 Code, § 8-11.17) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.18 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Community Development Director or his duly authorized designee,
assistants, deputies, employees or contracting agents may enter upon the land
for posting or serving notice, or for abating any public nuisance and violation
as herein provided.
('65 Code, § 8-11.18) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.19 ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City Council from
ordering the City Attorney to commence a civil action or other judicial or
administrative proceeding to abate the alleged nuisance or to obtain any other
appropriate remedy in addition to, as an alternative to, or in conjunction with
the procedures authorized by this chapter; nor shall the implementation of this
chapter be deemed to prevent appropriate authorities from commencing a criminal
action based upon the conditions constituting the alleged nuisance.
('65 Code, § 8-11.19) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.20 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, whenever the Community
Development Director determines that any real property or any building,
structure or condition thereon is dangerous or constitutes an immediate threat
to public health or safety, he shall, without being required to observe the
provisions of this chapter with reference to abatement procedures, immediately
and forthwith abate such public nuisance. Where such condition exists, and
abatement is immediately required, the Community Development Director shall
prepare a statement of costs in respect thereto, and the provisions of §§ 98.14
through 98.16 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 8-11.20) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
§ 98.21 DUTY TO ABATE.
   No person or entity shall cause, permit, maintain, conduct or otherwise
allow a public nuisance as defined herein to exist within the city. It shall be
the duty of every owner, occupant and person in control of any property,
business, operation or interest therein located within the city to remove,
abate and prevent the recurrence of a public nuisance upon such activity or
interest therein. Any recurrence of a condition may be deemed to be a
continuation of the original condition.
('65 Code, § 8-11.21) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.22 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The owner or other person having charge or control of any such
buildings, premises or property who maintains any public nuisance defined in
this chapter, or who violates an order of abatement made pursuant to §§
98.09 or
98.13, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any occupant or lessee in possession of any such building or structure
who fails to vacate the building or structure in accordance with an order given
as provided in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this
chapter, for the purpose of interfering with the enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
('65 Code, § 8-11.22) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 98.99
§ 98.23 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign which is nonpermanent and is intended to be displayed
for a period of time not to exceed 90 days.
   SIGN OF NOMINAL VALUE. Any sign made of cardboard or other non-durable
material and which has insignificant re-use market value shall be deemed to be
of nominal value.
   ILLEGAL SIGN. A sign which is located on a public street or other public
property in violation of §§ 111.07 or 152.28.
(Ord. 482-C.S., passed 2-17-98)
§ 98.24 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE ILLEGAL SIGNS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Any illegal sign in the public right-of-way may be removed by the
city.
   (B)   No notice shall be required prior to removal of illegal signs,
including without limitation, election signs, located in the public right-of-
way.
   (C)   Any sign removed by the city, except any sign of nominal value, shall
be held in storage and the owner or other person in control of such sign, shall
be given written notice and ten calendar days to reclaim such sign.
   (D)   Any sign held in storage by the city may be destroyed by the city if
not reclaimed:
      (1)   In the time period set forth in division (C) above; or
      (2)   Within ten calendar days after the removal if the owner or other
person in control of such sign is not known.
   (E)   In order to reclaim a sign removed by the city, the owner or other
person in control of such sign shall first pay to the city a fee set forth in a
resolution adopted by the City Council.
   (F)   In any illegal sign in the public right-of-way of nominal value shall
be deemed to be abandoned and may be destroyed by the city after removal. No
opportunity to reclaim sign shall be given by the city.(Ord. 482-C.S., passed
2-17-98)
§ 98.25 PRESUMPTION OF RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
   (A)   Each of the following persons is presumed to be responsible for the
posting of an illegal sign, including without limitation an election sign, on
public property:
      (1)   Any person whose name appears on the sign; and
      (2)   The promoter or sponsor of an event named on the sign; and
      (3)   Any person retained to post or distribute such signs.
   (B)   More than one person may be deemed responsible for the placement of
the same sign.
(Ord. 482-C.S., passed 2-17-98)
§ 98.26 CHARGES FOR REMOVAL OF ILLEGAL SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   All persons responsible for an illegal sign posted on public property,
as well as any person who actually posted the sign, shall be jointly and
severally liable for the costs of the city for the removal of such sign from
public property. Such charges shall be in addition to all other legal remedies,
criminal, civil and administrative, which may be pursued by the city, to
address any violation of this code.
   (B)   The City Manager, or his/her designee, is authorized to determine the
person or persons responsible for the placement of the sign and to invoice such
person for the amount of such costs.
   (C)   An invoice shall be served upon a responsible party by the City of San
Gabriel, via certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (D)   The total amount of the invoice shall be deemed to be a civil debt to
the city and the city may take such action to recover such charges as the city
is authorized to do so by law for the recovery of a civil debt.
(Ord. 482-C.S., passed 2-17-98)
§ 98.27 HEARING ON REMOVAL COSTS.
   (A)   The invoice shall include a notice of the right of the person being
charged to request a hearing before the City Manager, or his/her designee, to
dispute the imposition of the charges.
   (B)   Any request for a hearing to dispute the imposition of charges must be
in writing and received by the Office of the City Manager within ten calendar
days of the date of mailing of the invoice, and shall include a statement of
the reasons and grounds upon which the dispute is based.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the City Manager, or his/her
designee, shall set the hearing date within 30 days after receipt of such
request and shall provide the person requesting the hearing date at least five
days advance notice of such hearing date. The hearing date may be changed by
mutual consent of the City Manager, or his/her designee, and the person or
persons requesting the hearing.
(Ord. 482-C.S., passed 2-17-98)
   (M)   Off-site real estate open house signs. Off-site real estate open house
signs subject to the following standards:
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions in this code to the contrary,
real estate open house signs may be placed upon the public parkway provided
that all of the following restrictions are met:
         (a)   Real estate professionals placing open house signage permitted
by this section shall obtain the permission of the adjacent property owner or
tenant before placing any such signage, whenever possible.
         (b)   Signage shall be limited to one sign per corner, four signs per
intersection.
         (c)   In no event shall an open house sign be placed in a center
median strip.
         (d)   Open house signs shall only be posted on the same day of the
open house.
         (e)   Signage display hours shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. to dusk, or
7:00 p.m., whichever is earlier.
         (f)   Open houses signs shall contain the following information:
            1.   Directional arrow(s) to, or the address of, the subject
property; and
            2.   The real estate professional's name and phone number, for
identification purposes only. A business card taped to the sign will satisfy
this requirement.
         (g)   The message content on the sign shall only relate to an activity
actually in progress during the allowable display period.
         (h)   No sign shall obstruct the safe and convenient use by the public
of adjoining sidewalk, curbside parkway, or roadway area. No sign shall be
placed closer than 15 feet from a driveway approach.
         (i)   No sign shall exceed three feet in height as measured from the
ground to the top of the sign.
         (j)   No flag, pennant, streamer, banner, or balloon shall be
displayed with or attached to an open house sign permitted by this section.
         (k)   The real estate professional placing a sign or signs permitted
by this section shall assume all liability associated with the placement of
such sign and shall hold the City of San Gabriel free and harmless from all
liability and defense costs in the event of litigation regarding injuries or
property damage caused by the placement of the sign(s).
         (l)   Each posted sign, as permitted by this section, shall be
maintained in a neat, clean, and safe condition.
         (m)   No posted sign may be chained to or otherwise locked to a fixed
object in the public right-of-way.
         (n)   Signs posted in violation of any of these requirements shall
subject the person placing the sign(s) to infraction penalties for violation of
the San Gabriel Municipal Code.
         (o)   No more than five signs total shall be posted for a single open
house event.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2408) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95; Am. Ord. 482-C.S.,
passed 2-17-98)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of up to $1,000, or imprisonment
for a period of up to six months in jail, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Any condition which constitutes a public nuisance as set forth in
this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense for each day the violation
exists.
('65 Code, § 8-11.22) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed - - )
CHAPTER 99: PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
Section
General Provisions
   
99.01   Short title
   
99.02   Definitions
   
99.03   Prohibited acts
   
99.04   Hours when closed to the public
   
99.05   Exception and permits
Community Services Director
   
99.15   Jurisdiction
   
99.16   Assistants
   
99.17   Powers and duties
Cross-reference:
   Community Services Commission, see §§
33.01 through
33.03
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 99.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter is hereby designated and shall be known as the Park
Regulations.
('65 Code, § 10-2.01) (Ord. 700, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 420-C.S., passed - -94)
§ 99.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Includes any use of parks and or playgrounds that interferes with
the legal rights of others by causing damage, annoyance or inconvenience.
   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS. Includes all those areas located within and outside
the municipal boundaries of the city, which areas are set apart, designated or
maintained by the city for the entertainment or recreational use of the public,
and includes any school playgrounds for which the city has a contract for
recreational purposes, together with all buildings, apparatus and equipment
kept or maintained therein or thereon.
('65 Code, § 10-2.02) (Ord. 700, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 420-C.S., passed - -94)
§ 99.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts
within the limits of any public park or playground in the city;
   (A)   To lead or let loose any animal of any kind, except dogs which are
restrained by a leash not over six feet in length;
   (B)   To carry, bring in or be in possession of any firearms or fireworks;
   (C)   To make any fires in any other places than in stoves or pits provided
by the Community Services Department, except that special permits may be issued
by the Community Services Director for special events in specified locations;
   (D)   To remove, damage or destroy any real or personal property which is
part of the park system;
   (E)   To loiter, trespass or remain in or upon any park or playground during
the hours designating the areas closed to the public which hours may be
established by the Council;
   (F)   To drive or propel any vehicle upon or across any part of any park
except those parts designated by properly posted signs;
   (G)   To consume or be in possession of any alcoholic beverage, narcotics or
illegal drugs. Alcoholic beverages may be served in connection with an
authorized use and in accordance with all imposed conditions at the San Gabriel
Mission Playhouse, its grounds and parking lot, the Adult Center and Grapevine
Park;
   (H)   To sell, offer for sale or give away any goods, wares or merchandise
without regular permits to do so;
   (I)   To throw, break or deposit any bottles, cans, garbage or other refuse
except in receptacles provided therefor;
   (J)   To play or engage in any game or contest except at such places
especially designated for such purpose;
   (K)   To hold, conduct or participate in any celebration, parade, service or
exercise without advance, written permission obtained from the Community
Services Director;
   (L)   For any male person over eight years of age to enter or use any
restroom designated “For Women” and for any female person over eight years of
age to enter or use any restroom designated “For Men”;
   (M)   To install or use any commercial play equipment, such as amusement
rides, without the advance, written permission of the Community Services
Director;
   (N)   To attempt to enter in or upon or use any facility for which a fee is
charged without first having paid the required fee;
   (O)   To operate or leave any bicycle or wheeled toy upon the grounds of any
city tennis court. Wheeled toys include roller skates, roller blades,
skateboards, coasters, scooters and toy vehicles.
   (P)   To commit or permit to be committed any nuisance;
   (Q)   To play or practice golf in any portion of a city park;
   (R)   To disobey a sign or posted placard that has been posted to notify
park patrons of a rule or regulation adopted by the City Council; and
   (S)   To violate any rule or regulation which may be adopted by the Council
by ordinance or resolution.
('65 Code, § 10-2.06) (Ord. 700, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 188-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 420-C.S., passed - -94; Am. Ord. 611-C.S., passed 3-18-14; Am. Ord.
627-C.S., passed 9-6-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 99.04 HOURS WHEN CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC.
   All parks and playgrounds under the jurisdiction of the city, either by
ownership or lease-contract for use, are hereby declared to be closed to the
public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any day until 7:30 a.m. of the
following day. Special events, for which a permit is granted, may have a later
closing time specified in the approved permit.
('65 Code, § 10-2.07) (Ord. 46-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 420-C.S., passed - -
)
§ 99.05 EXCEPTION AND PERMITS.
   The Community Services Director, the City Manager or the Council, upon
proper application therefor, may issue written permits for use by groups or
organizations for special events in specified locations during the hours when
such area is closed to the public.
('65 Code, § 10-2.08) (Ord. 46-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 420- C.S., passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTOR
§ 99.15 JURISDICTION.
   The Community Services Director shall be the head of the Community Services
Department, and all public parks and playgrounds in the city are hereby placed
under his administrative jurisdiction.
('65 Code, § 10-2.03) (Ord. 700, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 420-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
§ 99.16 ASSISTANTS.
   Any deputy or assistant of the Community Services Director may perform the
duties of the Director.
('65 Code, § 10-2.04) (Ord. 700, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 420-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16 )
§ 99.17 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Community Services Director to maintain all
parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities and to control the use thereof in
such manner that the public will be best served with wholesome activities and
well maintained facilities.
('65 Code, § 10-2.05) (Ord. 700, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 420-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16 )
CHAPTER 100: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Section
General Provisions
   
100.001   Concurrent improvements
   
100.002   Obstructing streets, sidewalks, and public places
   
100.003   Obstructing streets, sidewalks, and public places with tree limbs
Driveways
   
100.015   [Reserved]
   
100.016   Two driveways in commercial districts; separation required
   
100.017   Number of driveways in residential districts restricted
   
100.018   Proximity to curb returns
   
100.019   Details and specifications
Curb Cuts
   
100.030   Curb cut permit required
   
100.031   Inspection and permit fees
   
100.032   Time of completion
Excavations
   
100.045   Definitions
   
100.046   Excavation permit
   
100.047   Application
   
100.048   Permit fees
   
100.049   Security deposits
   
100.050   Performance deposits
   
100.051   Work specifications
   
100.052   Length of open trench
   
100.053   Cover of substructures
   
100.054   Protective measures and routing of traffic
   
100.055   Protection of adjoining property
   
100.056   Maintenance of roadway drainage
   
100.057   Care of excavated material
   
100.058   Noise, vibration, dust and debris
   
100.059   Breaking through pavement and sidewalk
   
100.060   Clearance for emergency vehicles
   
100.061   Relocation and protection of facilities
   
100.062   Abandonment of substructures
   
100.063   Backfilling
   
100.064   Restoration of pavement surface
   
100.065   Site restoration and cleanup
   
100.066   Prompt completion of work
   
100.067   Emergency excavation
   
100.068   Preservation of monuments
   
100.069   Inspections
   
100.070   Maintenance of substructure records
   
100.071   Cancellation conditions
   
100.072   Liability
Specifications and Standards
   
100.085   Datum plane; establishment; purpose
   
100.086   Curbs
   
100.087   Gutters
   
100.088   Sidewalk specifications; widths required
   
100.089   Cement and corrugated metal culverts
Street Improvements
   
100.100   Permit required to improve or construct
   
100.101   Bond and deposits required
   
100.102   Class of pavement
   
100.103   Supervision of work; conformance with specifications
   
100.104   Notice of inspection readiness
   
100.105   Return of deposits; deductions
   
100.106   Deposit of waste prohibited
Blinker Lights Adjacent to Streets
   
100.115   Definitions
   
100.116   Permit required
   
100.117   Application
   
100.118   Issuance of permit
   
100.119   Exceptions to provisions
Building Numbering
   
100.130   Designation of streets
   
100.131   Reference to map of the city
   
100.132   Starting points for numbers
   
100.133   Odd and even numbers
   
100.134   Allotment of numbers
   
100.135   Method of numbering
   
100.136   Time limits for numbering
   
100.137   Duty of the Community Development Director to assign numbers
News Racks in Public Right-of-Way
   
100.150   Definitions
   
100.151   Prohibition of news racks on roadways
   
100.152   Permit required
   
100.153   Dangerous conditions or obstructions
   
100.154   Standards for maintenance and installation
   
100.155   Standards for materials sold
   
100.156   Authority of Community Development Director to adopt regulations
   
100.157   Insurance
   
100.158   News racks in violation of provisions
   
100.159   Appeals
   
100.160   Removal of news racks
   
100.161   Permit index file
Parades
   
100.170   Definitions
   
100.171   Permit required; exceptions
   
100.172   Application for parade permit; fee
   
100.173   Issuance, denial, and revocation of parade permit
   
100.174   Appeal of denial or revocation of parade permit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 100.001 CONCURRENT IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   In any zone in the city, no structure shall hereafter be erected, nor
shall any alteration of, or addition to, an existing structure be hereafter
made, if the valuation thereof, pursuant to § 303 of the Uniform Building Code,
is $1,000 or more unless concurrently with such construction, addition or
alteration all curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be installed, or, if curbs,
gutters and sidewalks are existing, or partially existing, they shall be made
to conform in accordance with the plans and specifications theretofore prepared
by the Community Development Director and approved by the Council. Copies of
such plans shall be available to the public at the office of the City Engineer.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply where such
construction, alteration or addition consists solely of the installation or
alteration of plumbing, electrical or mechanical equipment or facilities.
('65 Code, § 7-2.10) (Ord. 21-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.002 OBSTRUCTING STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy, obstruct, or barricade any
street, alley, or public place in the city.
('65 Code, § 5-14.09) (Ord. 118, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.003 OBSTRUCTING STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PLACES WITH TREE LIMBS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any tree to hang lower than
seven feet above any sidewalk or lower than eight feet above any street or
alley in the city.
('65 Code, § 5-14.10) (Ord. 118, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
DRIVEWAYS
§ 100.015 [RESERVED].
§ 100.016 TWO DRIVEWAYS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS; SEPARATION REQUIRED.
   In the event two driveways on the same street are permitted into the same
business or establishment, the two driveways shall be separated by at least 22
feet.
('65 Code, § 7-2.03) (Ord. 535, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 697, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 840, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.017 NUMBER OF DRIVEWAYS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   In residential districts only one driveway per lot shall be permitted,
except, if the lot or building site is 100 feet or more in width abutting the
street for which the driveway apron is requested, two driveway aprons may be
permitted.
   (B)   If the lot or building site is 10,000 square feet or more in size and
abuts two streets, one driveway apron on each street may be permitted.
   (C)   In cases where the grade of the lot or other special or unique
circumstances require that more than one driveway apron be constructed, the
Community Development Director, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to
permit a second driveway apron.
   (D)   No driveway shall be permitted for unimproved, vacant property within
or abutting the city without complying with
§ 100.030 of this code.
('65 Code, §7-2.04) (Ord. 840, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 552-C.S., passed 11-21-06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.018 PROXIMITY TO CURB RETURNS.
   No driveway shall be permitted to extend into any curb return at a street
intersection.
('65 Code, § 7-2.05) (Ord. 535, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 840, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.019 DETAILS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All driveways shall conform with the details and specifications for
construction as shown on drawings on file in the office of the City Engineer;
provided, however, the driveway approach may extend into the sidewalk for a
distance of not more than one-half the width of such sidewalk where either of
the following conditions exist:
   (A)   Where the distance from the face of the curb to the sidewalk is less
than five feet; or
   (B)   Where the distance from the face of the curb is five feet or more and
the vertical height of the curb face is nine inches or more at the center line
of the driveway.
('65 Code, § 7-2.06) (Ord. 535, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 697, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 824, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 840, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CURB CUTS
§ 100.030 CURB CUT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to break, cut or remove any curb,
or portion thereof, in the city for the purpose of installing any driveway, or
for any other purpose, without first securing a permit therefor from the
Community Development Director. In determining whether to approve or
conditionally approve the permit, the Community Development Director shall seek
the advice and consent of the applicable divisions within the Community
Development Department, including but not limited to, Planning, Public Works,
and Engineering. For purposes of this division, Community Development Director
includes the Director's designee.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for unimproved, vacant property in the city
unless:
      (1)   There are approved development plans for such property and the curb
cut was reviewed as part of such development plans; or
      (2)   Where there are no approved development plans and no current plans
to develop the property, the applicant files an application for a precise plan
of design pursuant to §§
153.350 et seq. of this code, prior to or concurrent with the application for a
curb cut, and such precise plan of design is approved or conditionally
approved. In addition to the items required by §
153.353, the application for precise plan of design shall delineate the use to
which the property will be put. The decision on such application shall be made
in accordance with §
153.354(A).
   (C)   No permit shall be issued for access to unimproved, vacant property
abutting the city unless:
      (1)   The applicant files an application for a precise plan of design
pursuant to §§
153.350 et seq. of this code, prior to or concurrent with the application for a
curb cut, and such precise plan of design is approved or conditionally
approved. In addition to the items required by §
153.353, the application for precise plan of design shall delineate the use to
which the property will be put. The decision on such application shall be made
in accordance with §
153.354(A); and
      (2)   The applicant files written verification from the abutting
jurisdiction that the proposed use of the property meets the abutting
jurisdiction's codes and requirements and all required approvals have been
obtained. This verification may be in the form of approved development plans
from such abutting jurisdiction.
('65 Code, § 7-2.07) (Ord. 218, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 840, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 552-C.S., passed 11-21-06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.031 INSPECTION AND PERMIT FEES.
   Any person applying for the permit required by § 100.030 of this subchapter
shall pay a permit fee established by Council resolution. Such permit fee shall
cover the costs of inspections.
('65 Code, § 7-2.08) (Ord. 218, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 840, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 104-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.032 TIME OF COMPLETION.
   After a permit to remove curbing and/or cement concrete gutters for the
purpose of constructing driveway aprons has been granted, such construction
shall be completed within 60 days after the date of the permit.
('65 Code, § 7-2.09) (Ord. 218, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 840, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
EXCAVATIONS
§ 100.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY. The Community Development Director.
   EXCAVATION. Any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner
whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below and so constructed
as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the general public
or public place.
   FACILITY. Pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole,
meter gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor,
cable, junction box, transformer or any other material, structure or object of
any kind or character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be
lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under
or over any public place.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. A substance carried by a substructure having the
potential to cause immediate and severe hazard to public health and safety if
permitted to escape. Substances that pose a potential hazard to public health
and safety include, but are not limited to, petroleum distillates, butane,
propane, oxygen, chlorine, steam and any corrosive or toxic substances.
   IMPAIRED LATERAL SUPPORT. This shall be assumed to occur whenever an
excavation outside of the public place extends below a plane sloping downward
at an angle of 45° from the boundary of the public place, or whenever a
proposed excavation would expose any adverse geological formation or soil
condition.
   ONE-CALL NOTIFICATION CENTER (ONC). An organization of operators of
subsurface facilities for the purpose of protecting those facilities from
damage, removal, location or repair.
   PARKWAY. The portion of the street dedication between the edge of pavement
or curb and the property line.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, entity or organization of any kind.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square,
plaza or any other similar public property or easements owned or controlled by
the Administrative Authority and dedicated to public use.
   SUBSTRUCTURE. Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable
or wire, or any other similar structure located below the surface of any public
place.
   UTILITY. Includes, but is not limited to every public or private company or
corporation, or any municipal department that maintains and uses pipeline
facilities, gas facilities, telephone facilities, electrical facilities,
telegraph facilities, water facilities, cable facilities, sewage facilities,
storm drainage facilities and heating facilities, where the facilities deliver
a service or commodity to the public or any portion thereof.
('65 Code, § 7-3.01) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.046 EXCAVATION PERMIT.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall make any
excavation or fill any excavation in any public place or impair lateral support
of any public place without first obtaining a permit from the Administrative
Authority. The Administrative Authority may issue an annual or multi-year
permit for the purpose of placing or replacing, or repairing or maintaining any
facility within a public place where the opening or excavation does not exceed
100 square feet, and other miscellaneous excavations approved by the
Administrative Authority. Such annual or multi-year permits may be issued to
the following:
   (A)   A public utility regulated by the State Public Utilities Commission;
   (B)   A person holding a franchise from the Agency.
('65 Code, § 7-3.02) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.047 APPLICATION.
   (A)   No excavation permit shall be issued unless an application provided by
the Administrative Authority for the issuance of an excavation permit is
completed and submitted to the Administrative Authority. The completed
application shall state the following:
      (1)   The name, telephone number and address of the principal place of
business of the applicant;
      (2)   The applicant's justification to occupy the public place for which
the permit is sought;
      (3)   A description of the work to be done, including the use, location
and dimensions of the facility to be installed, removed or repaired and the
approximate size of the excavation required; and
      (4)   The approximate starting and completion dates of such work,
including backfilling the excavation and removing all obstructions, material
and debris. Adjustments to these conditions may be granted by the
Administrative Authority for good and sufficient reasons.
   (B)   The Administrative Authority may establish special conditions on any
permit to preserve and protect the safety and convenience of the traveling
public or the public interest, and also may cancel the permit for good and
sufficient cause.
('65 Code, § 7-3.03) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.048 PERMIT FEES.
   A permit fee shall be charged by the Administrative Authority for the
issuance of any excavation permit. The fee shall be in accordance with the
schedule of fees approved by the City Council.
('65 Code, § 7-3.04) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.049 SECURITY DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Before an excavation permit is issued, the applicant may be required
to deposit with the Administrative Authority a surety bond, or other acceptable
security, in an amount equal to 100% of the estimated cost of the work, or such
other amount as may be necessary as determined by the Administrative Authority,
payable to the Agency. The surety bond, or other acceptable security, shall be
conditioned upon the permittee's securing and holding the Agency and its
officers and employees harmless from and against any and all claims, judgments,
other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the
excavation permit or for which the Administrative Authority or any officer or
employee of the Administrative Authority may be made liable by reason of any
accident or injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee. In lieu of a
surety bond, letters of credit or other forms of security may be accepted when
approved by the Administrative Authority.
   (B)   Public utilities regulated by the State Public Utilities Commission,
persons or utilities holding a franchise from the Agency, Agency departments
and other governmental agencies, may be relieved of the obligation of
submitting such a bond by the Administrative Authority.
('65 Code, § 7-3.05) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.050 PERFORMANCE DEPOSITS.
   All performance deposits shall be a guaranteed security acceptable to the
Administrative Authority.
   (A)   Special deposits. Any required special deposit made in accordance with
the adopted rate schedule shall be submitted with the application for an
excavation permit to the Administrative Authority.
   (B)   Annual deposits. In lieu of a special deposit, any person intending to
make openings, cuts or excavations in public places may make and maintain, with
the Administrative Authority, an annual deposit.
   (C)   Purpose of deposits. Any special or annual deposit shall serve as
security to insure the performance of work necessary to put the public place in
at least as good condition as it was prior to the excavation in the event the
permittee fails to make the necessary repairs or to complete the work in
accordance with the terms and provisions of the excavation permit.
   (D)   Round or reduction of special deposits. Upon the permittee's
completion of the work covered by such permit as determined by the
Administrative Authority, two-thirds of such unencumbered special deposit shall
be promptly refunded by the Agency to the permittee, and the balance shall be
authorized for release by the Agency to the permittee upon the expiration of a
24-month period.
   (E)   Refund or reduction of annual deposits.
      (1)   Two-thirds of any annual deposit shall be refunded by the Agency at
the end of the one-year period for which the deposit is made or the
satisfactory completion of all excavation work undertaken during such period,
whichever is later, and the balance of the annual deposit shall be released at
the expiration of a 24-month period following the completion of such excavation
work.
      (2)   Such deposits may be used to pay the cost of any work the
Administrative Authority performs to restore or maintain the public place in
the event the permittee fails to perform such work, in which event the amount
released to the permittee shall be reduced by the amount thus expended.
   (F)   Exceptions from deposits. Where excavations are made by persons or
utilities operating under a franchise issued by the Agency or regulated by the
State Public Utilities Commission or utilities operated by governmental
agencies, a permit may be granted without making such deposit. In such cases,
the permittee shall be liable for the actual cost of any work required to be
done by the Administrative Authority in restoring the area to at least as good
condition as it was before such work was done. The Administrative Authority
may, in the future, require such deposit from any such permittee if a bill
rendered in accordance with this section becomes delinquent.
('65 Code, § 7-3.06) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.051 WORK SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All work shall be performed in accordance with the current edition of
the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction or according to the
plans and specifications referred to in the permit and, in addition, to any
special requirements and/or specifications which are made a part of the permit.
   (B)   When provisions of this subchapter are in conflict with the Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction, this subchapter shall take
precedence.
('65 Code, § 7-3.07) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.052 LENGTH OF OPEN TRENCH.
   The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be in
accordance with existing ordinances or regulations or as may be specified by
the Administrative Authority.
('65 Code, § 7-3.08) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.053 COVER OF SUBSTRUCTURES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise approved or specified by the Administrative
Authority, the minimum cover of substructure except pipelines carrying
hazardous substances shall be as follows:
      (1)   Streets and alleys.
         (a)   Twenty-four inches below the established flow line of the
nearest gutter; or
         (b)   If said flow line is not established, then the depth shall be at
a minimum of 30 inches below the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the
traveled way.
      (2)   Parkways. Eighteen inches below established or proposed parkway
elevation.
      (3)   Other public places. Twelve inches below the surface.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above requirements, any such new or relocated
installation intended to carry hazardous substances shall be constructed at a
depth of at least 42 inches below the established grade of the gutter of such
street or alley.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to
maintain said specifications as required herein upon subsequent changes of
elevation in the surface unless the elevation of said substructure interferes
with the maintenance of, or travel on, a public street.
('65 Code, § 7-3.09) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.054 PROTECTIVE MEASURES AND ROUTING OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an excavation
in or upon any public place, to place and maintain adequate traffic control
devices and crossings for the safety of the general public, in accordance with
CalTrans specifications.
   (B)   The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions shall be maintained
at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining
property and to the general public. Adequate pedestrian passageways shall be
maintained.
   (C)   The permittee shall maintain one lane in each direction for vehicular
traffic at all street intersections, where possible. If any excavation is made
across any public street, alley, sidewalk or established crosswalk, adequate
crossings of the excavation shall be maintained for vehicles and for
pedestrians.
   (D)   The Administrative Authority may, by prior written approval, permit
the closing of streets and alleys for a prescribed period of time. The
Administrative Authority may require that the permittee give advance
notification to various public agencies and to the general public as a
condition of approval. In specific instances, even though the street may not be
closed, the permittee may also be required to give such notice.
('65 Code, § 7-3.10) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.055 PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY.
   The permittee shall at all times preserve, and protect from damage, any
adjoining property by providing adequate support and taking other necessary
measures. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all
buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged.
('65 Code, § 7-3.11) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.056 MAINTENANCE OF ROADWAY DRAINAGE.
   (A)   The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the
full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the
face of such curb at the gutterline; alternatives shall be approved by the
Administrative Authority. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting street, an
adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained.
   (B)   The permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water
resulting from the work in conformance with all current regulations.
('65 Code, § 7-3.12) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.057 CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
   All excavated material piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall
be maintained in such a manner as not to endanger those working in the trench,
pedestrians or users of the streets, and to inconvenience as little as possible
those using the streets and adjoining property. The Administrative Authority
may require the permittee to remove the excavated material from the work site.
It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission
and make all necessary arrangements (permits, plans and the like) for all
required storage and disposal sites.
('65 Code, § 7-3.13) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.058 NOISE, VIBRATION, DUST AND DEBRIS.
   Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such a manner
as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the general public and occupants of
neighboring property. In the performance of the excavation work, the permittee
shall take appropriate measures to reduce, to the fullest extent practicable,
noise, vibration, dust and unsightly debris. On Sundays and holidays and
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the permittee shall not use,
except with the express written permission of the Administrative Authority, or
in case of emergency, any tool, appliance or equipment producing vibration or
noise of sufficient volume or intensity to disturb the occupants of the
neighboring property.
('65 Code, § 7-3.14) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.059 BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT AND SIDEWALK.
   (A)   Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the Administrative
Authority when their use may endanger existing substructures or other property.
   (B)   Sawcutting of pavement may be required by the Administrative Authority
when the nature of the work or the condition of the street warrants. When
required, the sawcut shall not be less than one inch in depth; however, depths
greater than one inch may be required when circumstances warrant. Sawcutting
may be required outside of the limits of the excavation over cave-outs,
overbreaks and small floating sections.
   (C)   Sawcutting of bituminous pavement ahead of excavations may be required
to confine pavement damage to the limits of the trench.
   (D)   Pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks and the
restoration shall be treated as part of the main excavation.
   (E)   Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned
with the centerline of the trench.
   (F)   Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be perpendicular or parallel
to the trench line unless otherwise required by the Administrative Authority.
   (G)   Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of pavement may be
required.
   (H)   All sections of sidewalk shall be removed by sawcutting unless removed
to a construction joint.
('65 Code, § 7-3.15) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.060 CLEARANCE FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere
with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes and any other
emergency facilities designated by the Administrative Authority.
('65 Code, § 7-3.16) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.061 RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   The permittee shall notify the owners of all facilities in the
excavation area a minimum of two working days prior to excavating. The permit
shall not be valid until the permittee receives a number from the one-call
notification center, and enters that number upon the face of the permit.
   (B)   The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without
the approval of the Administrative Authority and the owner of the facility. If
it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by
its owner or to the satisfaction of its owner. No facility owned by the Agency
shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be
borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned facilities shall be
similarly borne by the permittee unless the permittee makes other arrangements
with the person owning the facility.
   (C)   The permittee shall investigate and be aware of all existing
facilities lawfully within the public place which are within the limits of his
activity. Existing facilities in conflict with the excavation shall be exposed
by excavating with hand tools, prior to machine digging, in accordance with
applicable state laws.
   (D)   The permittee shall support, sustain and protect the facilities under,
over, along or across the permitted work until final backfill consolidation is
obtained. The permittee shall secure approval of the method of support and
protection from the owner of the facility.
   (E)   In case any substructure should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe
coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a
substructure, the permittee shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All
damaged facilities shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them or, if
authorized by the owner, may be repaired by the permittee under the supervision
of the owner. The expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee.
('65 Code, § 7-3.17) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.062 ABANDONMENT OF SUBSTRUCTURES.
   Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment of
service lines three inches or less in diameter designed to serve single
properties, the person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein
shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the Administrative
Authority a statement in writing giving, in detail, the location of the
substructure so abandoned. If, within the period of one year after approval of
abandonment, the abandoned facility interferes with a planned installation of
the Administrative Authority or any other governmental department or agency,
the owner may be required to remove the abandoned facility or affected portion
thereof, or shall pay the costs for its removal.
('65 Code, § 7-3.18) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.063 BACKFILLING.
   The permittee shall backfill the excavation in a manner which is
satisfactory to the Administrative Authority as required in the permit,
consolidating the material to enable the public place to be restored to a
condition at least equivalent to that prior to the excavation. When required,
soil tests certified by a registered professional specializing in soils
engineering are to be furnished by the permittee. Prior to resurfacing, tests
when required must show that the backfill material meets the minimum
requirements as prescribed by the Administrative Authority. The permittee may
be required to bear the expense of such tests.
('65 Code, § 7-3.19) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.064 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT SURFACE.
   (A)   Upon completion of the backfilling, temporary pavement material shall
be used to resurface the excavated area unless otherwise specified. All
temporary paving material shall conform closely enough to the level of the
adjoining paved surface and shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and
smooth enough for pedestrians and vehicular traffic to pass over it safely. The
permittee shall be responsible for maintaining the temporary pavement.
   (B)   Within 30 days after completion of all backfilling, or as specified by
the Administrative Authority, permanent resurfacing shall be commenced and
diligently prosecuted to completion. The Administrative Authority reserves the
option to place permanent pavement by its forces at the expense of the
permittee.
('65 Code, § 7-3.20) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.065 SITE RESTORATION AND CLEANUP.
   (A)   All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner
designed to leave the area clean of earth, dust and debris and in a condition
as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. As the
excavation progresses, all public places shall be maintained free of all
rubbish, excess earth and dust, rock and other debris resulting from such
works. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be
accomplished at the expense of the permittee. When ordered by the
Administrative Authority, and in any event, immediately after completion of the
work, the permittee shall clean up and remove all refuse within 24 hours after
having been notified. Said work may be done by the Administrative Authority and
the cost thereof charged to the permittee.
   (B)   If excavation through any landscaped area is necessary, the permittee
shall, after the excavation has been backfilled, substantially restore the
landscaping to its original condition. The permittee shall not remove, even
temporarily, any existing trees or shrubs without first obtaining the consent
of the Administrative Authority.
('65 Code, § 7-3.21) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.066 PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK.
   After work is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence all
work covered by the permit. The permittee shall promptly complete such work and
restore the site to a satisfactory condition so as not to obstruct the public
place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary.
('65 Code, § 7-3.22) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.067 EMERGENCY EXCAVATION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent excavations as may be necessary to
preserve life or property, to locate trouble in conduit or pipe, or to make
repairs. The person making such emergency excavations shall apply to the
Administrative Authority for a permit on the first working day after such work
is commenced.
('65 Code, § 7-3.23) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.068 PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.
   Any monument set for the purpose of location or preserving the lines of any
street or property subdivision, or a survey reference point, or a permanent
survey bench mark, shall not be removed or disturbed without first obtaining
permission in writing from the Administrative Authority. Permission to remove
or disturb such monuments, reference points or bench marks shall only be
granted upon condition that the person applying for such permission shall pay
all expenses incident to the proper replacement of these monuments by the
Administrative Authority.
('65 Code, § 7-3.24) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.069 INSPECTIONS.
   The Administrative Authority shall make such inspections as are necessary in
the enforcement of this subchapter and shall have the authority to promulgate
and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
enforce and carry out the intent of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 7-3.25) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.070 MAINTENANCE OF SUBSTRUCTURE RECORDS.
   Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in facilities
under the surface of any public place shall have on file maps, each drawn to a
scale of not less than one inch to 200 feet, showing in detail the plan
location, size and kind of installation of their facilities, except service
lines designed to serve single properties. These maps shall be made available
to the Administrative Authority upon request. In the case of facilities
carrying hazardous substances, the map shall include a profile showing record
depths from the surface.
('65 Code, § 7-3.26) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.071 CANCELLATION CONDITIONS.
   The Administrative Authority may cancel the privilege granted by the permit,
for cause, and may remove the permit from the job location. A written report
defining the cause shall be filed with a copy to the permittee within 24 hours
of the incident.
('65 Code, § 7-3.27) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.072 LIABILITY.
   The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the Administrative
Authority, the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees
against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of actions, actions,
suits, proceedings, damages, costs and liabilities (including costs on
liabilities of the city with respect to its employees) of every kind and nature
whatsoever including, but not limited to, damages for injury and death, or
damage to persons or property, and regardless of the merit of any of the same,
and against all liability to others and against any loss, cost and expense
resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any attorney fees,
accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem
expense, traveling and transportation expense or other costs or expenses
arising out of, or pertaining to, the exercise or the enjoyment of a permit
granted pursuant to this subchapter whether such liability is created by the
permittee, his subcontractor, or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him,
and whether such damages accrue or are discovered before or after termination
of said permit.
('65 Code, § 7-3.28) (Ord. 349-C.S., passed - - )
SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS
§ 100.085 DATUM PLANE; ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   (A)   The official datum plane for the city shall be the datum plane
heretofore established and fixed by the United States Geological Survey. ('65
Code, § 7-1.01)
   (B)   The datum plane so established shall be the datum plane for all
purposes in the city for city work or for establishing elevations or grades of
every description. ('65 Code, § 7-1.02)
(Ord. 274, passed - - )
§ 100.086 CURBS.
   Specifications in the Standard Specifications for Public Works for the
construction of cement curbs in the city are hereby adopted as the
specifications for the construction of cement curbs, so approved and filed with
the City Clerk.
('65 Code, § 7-5.01) (Ord. 14, passed - - )
§ 100.087 GUTTERS.
   Specifications in the Standard Specifications for Public Works for the
construction of cement gutters in the city are hereby adopted as the
specifications for the construction of cement gutters, so approved and filed
with the City Clerk.
('65 Code, § 7-5.02) (Ord. 15, passed - - )
§ 100.088 SIDEWALK SPECIFICATIONS; WIDTHS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Specifications in the Standard Specifications for Public Works for the
construction of cement sidewalks in the city are hereby adopted as the
specifications for the construction of cement sidewalks, so approved and filed
with the City Clerk. ('65 Code, § 7-5.03) (Ord. 16, passed - - )
   (B)   The space on streets to be used for sidewalk purposes between the
property line and curb line shall be, unless otherwise fixed by ordinance, as
follows:
      (1)   On streets having a total width of not less than 35 feet, three and
one-half feet;
      (2)   On streets having a total width of not less than 40 feet, five
feet;
      (3)   On streets having a total width of not less than 45 feet, seven and
one-half feet;
      (4)   On streets having a total width of not less than 50 feet and not
exceeding 60 feet, ten feet; and
      (5)   On streets having a total width of not less than 65 feet and not
exceeding 100 feet, twelve feet.
('65 Code, § 7-4.01) (Ord. 401, passed - - )
§ 100.089 CEMENT AND CORRUGATED METAL CULVERTS.
   Specifications in the Standard Specification for Public Works for the
construction of cement and corrugated metal culverts in the city are hereby
adopted as the specifications for the construction of cement and metal
corrugated culverts, so approved and filed with the City Clerk.
('65 Code, § 7-5.04) (Ord. 17, passed - - )
STREET IMPROVEMENTS
§ 100.100 PERMIT REQUIRED TO IMPROVE OR CONSTRUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee,
to make any improvements in any of the streets or highways of the city, or upon
any tract of land, or portion thereof, in the city, which is proposed to be
dedicated as a street or highway unless permission is first secured from the
Community Development Director therefor and unless the deposit provided for in
this subchapter is made.
('65 Code, § 7-6.01) (Ord. 201, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 253, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.101 BOND AND DEPOSITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Bond. Before any such permission shall be issued, there shall be
deposited with the Community Development Director for such improvements a bond
or undertaking in favor of the city, to be approved by the Community
Development Director, in the amount established by Council resolution as a
guarantee that such improvements will be constructed in the time and manner
provided by law.
   (B)   Deposits.
      (1)   Before any such permission shall be issued, there shall be
deposited with the Community Development Director such sum of money as may be
estimated by him to be necessary to cover the costs of inspection and
supervision by the Community Development Department for such improvements.
Should the amount required to be deposited prove to be insufficient to pay the
costs and charges of supervision and inspection, all work under such permit
shall cease until there has been deposited with the Community Development
Director a sufficient amount of money, as estimated by him, to cover the
necessary remaining inspection and supervision charges.
      (2)   In addition, should it become necessary to procure the services of
the City Engineer to establish, fix or correct any grades or levels in
connection therewith, the person making such improvement shall deposit with the
Community Development Director the costs and charges of the City Engineer for
such work so done by him.
('65 Code, § 7-6.02) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 100.102 CLASS OF PAVEMENT.
   All streets and highways to be improved or constructed in the city shall be
improved or constructed with the following class of pavement:
   (A)   Residential. All streets and highways which are residential and not
through streets or highways shall be improved or constructed of class B
pavement, which class B pavement shall be not less than four inches of
asphaltic concrete or its equivalent.
   (B)   Other. All other streets and highways shall be constructed of class A
pavement, which class A pavement shall be not less than six inches of asphaltic
concrete or its equivalent.
('65 Code, § 7-6.03) (Ord. 375, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.103 SUPERVISION OF WORK; CONFORMANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS.
   Such improvements shall be made under the direction and to the satisfaction
of the Community Development Director and in accordance with the specifications
currently in effect. All such work shall conform to the liens and levels which
may, from time to time, be given by the City Engineer.
('65 Code, § 7-6.04) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.104 NOTICE OF INSPECTION READINESS.
   It shall be the duty of any person making such improvements to notify the
Community Development Director prior to the commencement thereof so that the
Community Development Director may ask an inspector to inspect the work.
('65 Code, § 7-6.05) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.105 RETURN OF DEPOSITS; DEDUCTIONS.
   Upon the acceptance of the work by the Community Development Director, he
shall deduct from the deposits made the costs to the city of the inspections
and supervision in connection with such improvements, and the remainder of such
deposits, if there be any, shall be returned to the person making the same upon
demand.
('65 Code, § 7-6.06) (Ord. 201, passed - - )
§ 100.106 DEPOSIT OF WASTE PROHIBITED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to cause, permit or allow the contents of any cesspool, septic tank,
water closet, sewer or sewage effluent, excrement, urine, slop water, butcher
offal, market refuse, garbage, soapy water, wash water and industrial waste
from manufacturing, processing or packing plants, rubbish, cans or any dead
animal, fowl or vegetable matter to remain or be deposited or discharged upon
the surface of the ground on any premises, lot or in any building, basement or
in any public street or alley.
('65 Code, § 7-6.07) (Ord. 354-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
BLINKER LIGHTS ADJACENT TO STREETS
§ 100.115 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLINKER LIGHT. A light, whether colored or uncolored, which emits an
intermittent light.
   STREET. Every public street, alley, lane, court, place, drive, bridge,
viaduct or trestle intended for use or used by the general public.
('65 Code, § 4-2.01) (Ord. 173, passed - - )
§ 100.116 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall erect or maintain, or cause to be erected or maintained, any
blinker light upon or adjacent to any street within the city, whether public or
private property, which blinker light emits a light the same as, or similar to,
highway warning, danger or signal lights and which blinker light is so located
as to be visible from any public street except in accordance with the
provisions of a permit in writing first obtained from the Council.
('65 Code, § 4-2.02) (Ord. 173, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.117 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to erect or maintain any blinker lights upon or adjacent
to any street so located as to be visible from any street shall first make
application in writing so to do to the Council. The application shall state the
proposed location of such lights and the kind thereof.
('65 Code, § 4-2.03) (Ord. 173, passed - - )
§ 100.118 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   If the Council finds that the blinker lights proposed to be erected shall
serve as a warning to persons using the street and will tend to increase the
safety of the traveling public, the Council shall issue a permit in writing
authorizing the erection and maintenance of such blinker lights. Such permit
shall be valid until revoked, and no charge shall be made for any such permit.
('65 Code, § 4-2.04) (Ord. 173, passed - - )
§ 100.119 EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to advertising signs upon
private property consisting of continuous or intermittent lights in the form of
illuminated words, letters or figures, or portraying any advertising scene,
figure or emblem and so constructed, arranged and located as to be clearly
distinguished from a highway warning, danger or signal light.
('65 Code, § 4-2.05) (Ord. 173, passed - - )
BUILDING NUMBERING
§ 100.130 DESIGNATION OF STREETS.
   (A)   Streets running north and south. For the purposes of this subchapter,
the names of all those portions of streets, now or hereafter laid out, running
north and south or northerly and southerly, lying north of Las Tunas Drive,
shall have prefixed to such respective name the word “North,” and the names of
all those portions of such streets lying south of Las Tunas Drive shall have
prefixed to such respective name the word “South.” ('65 Code, § 8-4.01)
   (B)   Streets running east and west. For the purposes of this subchapter,
the names of all those portions of streets, now or hereafter laid out, running
east and west or easterly and westerly, lying east of Del Mar Avenue, shall
have prefixed to such respective name the word “East,” and the names of all
those portions of such streets lying west of Del Mar Avenue shall have prefixed
to such respective name the word “West.” ('65 Code, § 8-4.02)
   (C)   Mission Drive. Owing to the irregular way in which Mission Drive is
laid out in the city, for the purposes of this subchapter, all that part of
Mission Drive which is east or easterly from Del Mar Avenue shall have prefixed
to such name the word “East,” and all that portion of Mission Drive lying
between Del Mar Avenue and Santa Anita Street shall have prefixed to such name
the word “West.” Other portions of Mission Drive shall be designated as set
forth in division (A) of this section. ('65 Code, § 8-4.03)
   (D)   Santa Anita Street. Owing to the irregular way in which Santa Anita
Street is laid out in the city, for the purposes of this subchapter, all that
portion of Santa Anita Street lying west or westerly of Mission Drive shall
have prefixed to such name the word “West.” All other portions of Santa Anita
Street shall be designated as set forth in division (A) of this section. ('65
Code, § 8-4.04)
(Ord. 111, passed - - )
§ 100.131 REFERENCE TO MAP OF THE CITY.
   For the purposes of this subchapter and so as to more easily define and
enumerate blocks and portions of streets lying between cross streets, abutting
streets or a cross street and an abutting street, reference is hereby made to a
map entitled “Map of San Gabriel,” which map is on file with the City Clerk and
particularly sets out, defines and describes the different blocks, or portions
of blocks, and the numbering system applicable thereto.
('65 Code, § 8-4.05) (Ord. 111, passed - - )
§ 100.132 STARTING POINTS FOR NUMBERS.
   The starting points for numbers on buildings fronting on streets now or
hereafter laid out or extended shall be as follows: On streets running north
and south or northerly and southerly, Las Tunas Drive; on streets running east
and west or easterly and westerly, Del Mar Avenue; provided, however, such
starting point for any street which shall intersect both Las Tunas Drive and
Del Mar Avenue shall be Las Tunas Drive. Numbers shall begin at such starting
points and shall continue to the termination of the respective streets.
('65 Code, § 8-4.06) (Ord. 111, passed - - )
§ 100.133 ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS.
   (A)   Odd numbers. The numbers on the north and northerly and west and
westerly sides of streets shall be odd.
   (B)   Even numbers. The numbers on the east and easterly and south and
southerly sides of streets shall be even.
('65 Code, § 8-4.07) (Ord. 111, passed - - )
§ 100.134 ALLOTMENT OF NUMBERS.
   To each block there are hereby allotted 100 numbers or as many thereof as
may be required.
('65 Code, § 8-4.08) (Ord. 111, passed - - )
§ 100.135 METHOD OF NUMBERING.
   (A)   Number 101 shall be the first number used at the respective starting
points in the sides of streets which are designated for odd numbers, and number
100 on the sides designated for even numbers.
   (B)   At the beginning of the second block in either direction from any
respective starting point, the number 200 shall be the first number used on the
“even” side of any street, and the number 201 on the “odd” side.
   (C)   At the beginning of the third block in either direction from any
respective starting point, the numbers 300 and 301 shall be used in like
manner, and the numbering shall so continue throughout the city.
('65 Code, § 8-4.09) (Ord. 111, passed - - )
§ 100.136 TIME LIMITS FOR NUMBERING.
   All buildings erected shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter within 30 days after the time of their erection.
('65 Code, § 8-4.11) (Ord. 111, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.137 DUTY OF THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR TO ASSIGN NUMBERS.
   It shall be the duty of the Community Development Director to assign to the
owner, agent or occupant of any building the proper number thereof, determined
in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, upon an application made
to him for such number.
('65 Code, § 8-4.12) (Ord. 111, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 267-C.S., passed - - )
NEWS RACKS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 100.150 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NEWS RACK. Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or
other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers or news periodicals.
   PARKWAY. That area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street and,
where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the
property line adjacent thereto. PARKWAY shall also include any area within a
roadway which area is not open to vehicular travel.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK. Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
   STREET. All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and
shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
('65 Code, § 5-25.01) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.151 PROHIBITION OF NEWS RACKS ON ROADWAYS.
   No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack or other structure
which projects into, onto or over any part of any roadway of any public street
or which rests wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway
of any public street.
('65 Code, § 5-25.02) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.152 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall install or maintain any news rack which in whole or in
part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Community Development Director. Each
application for such permit shall state:
      (1)   The location of each news rack to be installed or maintained in the
city by the applicant; and
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
   (B)   An amended application for such permit shall be filed with the
Community Development Director in the event additional news racks are installed
in the city or removed from the city by the applicant subsequent to the issuing
of the original permit by the city.
   (C)   No more than one permit shall be required per applicant, regardless of
the number of news racks he maintains in the city. Such permit shall be valid
for one year and shall be renewed pursuant to the procedure set forth in this
section for original applications.
   (D)   Permit applications shall be approved, with or without conditions, or
disapproved with findings justifying disapproval within 10 days of receipt of a
completed application.
('65 Code, § 5-25.03) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.153 DANGEROUS CONDITIONS OR OBSTRUCTIONS.
   No person shall install, use or maintain any news rack which, in whole or in
part, rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway when such
installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property,
or which site or location is used for public utility purposes, public
transportation purposes or other governmental uses, or when such news rack
unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or
egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts,
traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or
near such location.
('65 Code, § 5-25.04) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.154 STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE AND INSTALLATION.
   Any news rack which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any public
sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:
   (A)   No news rack shall exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width, or
two feet in thickness.
   (B)   News racks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of
a building. News racks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than 18
inches nor more than 24 inches from the edge of the curb. News racks placed
adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and
not more than six inches from the wall. No news rack shall be placed or
maintained on the sidewalk or parkway opposite a newsstand or another news
rack.
   (C)   No news rack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any
property not owned by the owner of the news rack or to any permanently fixed
object.
   (D)   News racks may be placed next to each other; provided, however, no
group of news racks shall extend more than eight feet along a curb or wall, and
a space of no less than 18 inches shall separate each such group of news racks.
   (E)   News racks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another;
provided, however, no more than three news racks may be joined together in this
manner, and a space of no less than 18 inches shall separate each group of
three news racks so attached.
   (F)   No news rack or group of attached news racks permitted by the
provisions of division (E) of this section shall weigh, in the aggregate, in
excess of 125 pounds when empty.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
100.153 of this subchapter, no news rack shall be placed, installed, used or
maintained:
      (1)   Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;
      (2)   Within 15 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
      (3)   Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call
box or other emergency facility;
      (4)   Within five feet of any driveway;
      (5)   Within five feet ahead of and 25 feet to the rear of any sign
marking a designated bus stop;
      (6)   Within six feet of any bus bench;
      (7)   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet;
      (8)   Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs
or trees, or within three feet of any display window of any building abutting
the sidewalk or parkway, or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the
reasonable use of such window for display purposes;
      (9)   Adjacent to any curb bearing the authorized designation for 20-
minute parking and so established pursuant to the provisions of §
72.065 of this code; or
      (10)   Within 20 feet of any United States Postal Service mail drop box
located adjacent to any curb and designed for the deposit of mail directly from
a motor vehicle.
   (H)   No news rack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than those dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or
news periodicals sold therein.
   (I)   Each news rack shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive
condition and in good repair at all times.
   (J)   No news rack may remain empty in excess of one week, and material
offered for sale shall be the current edition of the publication so offered.
('65 Code, § 5-25.05) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 222-C.S., passed -
- )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.155 STANDARDS FOR MATERIALS SOLD.
   (A)   No publication which is prohibited by the laws of the state from sale
or distribution to minors may be offered for sale to the public unless such
offer of sale is made or maintained in the presence of an attendant with the
ability to prevent the purchase of such publication by a minor.
   (B)   No publication may be offered for sale to the public on any public
right-of-way by means of such news rack in such manner as to expose to the
public view any photograph or drawing contained within such publication
displaying any of the following:
      (1)   The genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region of any person other than a child under the age of
puberty; or
      (2)   Any portion of the breast, at or below the areola, of any female
person other than a child under the age of puberty.
   (C)   Every person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor who causes, permits,
procures, counsels or assists in an offer of sale of any such publication in
violation of the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Any publication offered for sale in violation of the provisions of
this section shall constitute a public nuisance.
('65 Code, § 5-25.06) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.156 AUTHORITY OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR TO ADOPT REGULATIONS.
   The Community Development Director is hereby empowered to adopt reasonable
standards and regulations to implement the provisions and purposes of this
subchapter based upon street and pedestrian traffic requirements, access to
parking places and facilities and the public health, safety and welfare.
('65 Code, § 5-25.07) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 100.157 INSURANCE.
   Prior to the issuance of a permit by the Community Development Director, the
applicant shall provide evidence of the insurance coverage required under the
city's insurance coverage standards as promulgated by the City Manager.
§ 100.158 NEWS RACKS IN VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS.
   Upon a determination by the Community Development Director that a news rack
has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter, an order to correct the offending condition shall be issued to the
owner of the news rack. Such order shall be mailed to the owner by certified
mail, return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the
offending condition and request the correction of the condition. Failure to
properly correct the offending condition within five days after the mailing
date of the order shall result in the offending news rack being summarily
removed and processed as unclaimed property pursuant to the provisions of §
32.31 of this code. The Community Development Director shall cause an
inspection to be made of the corrected condition or of a news rack reinstalled
after removal pursuant to the provisions of this section. The owner of such
news rack shall be charged an inspection fee established by Council resolution
for each news rack so inspected.
('65 Code, § 5-25.10) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.159 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or
action taken pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter may appeal, and
shall be apprised of his right to appeal, to the Council. An appeal shall be
perfected within 10 days after the receipt of the notice of any protested
decision or action by filing with the office of the City Clerk a letter of
appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be
held on a date no more than 14 days after the receipt of the letter of appeal.
The appellant shall be given at least five days notice of the time and place of
the hearing. The Council shall give the appellant and any other interested
party a reasonable opportunity to be heard in order to show cause why the
determination of the Community Development Director should not be upheld. In
all such cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that
there was no substantial evidence to support the action taken by the Community
Development Director. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall make
a final and conclusive determination.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in §
100.158 of this subchapter, the city shall not enforce compliance with an order
to correct while an appeal therefrom is pending.
('65 Code, § 5-25.11) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.160 REMOVAL OF NEWS RACKS.
   In the case of violations of the provisions of this subchapter relative to
restrictions upon attachments of news racks to property other than that owned
by the owner of the news rack, to fixed objects, or to each other, and upon the
location of news racks, any city employee authorized by the Community
Development Director may, as an alternative to removal pursuant to the
provisions of §
100.159 of this subchapter, remove such attachment and/or move such news racks
in order to restore them to a legal condition.
('65 Code, § 5-25.12) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - )
§ 100.161 PERMIT INDEX FILE.
   The Community Development Director shall keep and maintain an index file of
all permits granted or renewed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 5-25.13) (Ord. 159-C.S., passed - - )
PARADES
§ 100.170 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person who has filed a written application for a parade permit.
   PARADE. The assembly of three or more persons whose gathering is for the
common design and purpose of travelling or marching in procession from one
location to any other location to express feelings and beliefs on current
political, religious, or social issues.
   PARADE PERMIT. Written approval from the Police Chief for a parade or
procession.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom a parade permit is granted pursuant to this
subchapter.
   POLICE CHIEF. The Police Chief or his or her designated agent.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street intended for the use of pedestrians that
is located between the curb lines, or lateral lines of a roadway, and the
adjacent property lines.
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained, when any part is open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
§ 100.171 PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he engages in, participates in, aids,
or commences a pedestrian parade or vehicular parade, or a combination of both,
upon the streets of the city without making written application for and
receiving a parade permit from the Police Chief.
   (B)   Application for a parade permit for a parade of more than 25 persons
or more than three motor vehicles shall be made not less than five days,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, prior to the date and time of
the commencement of the parade. Application for a parade permit for a parade of
25 persons or less and three motor vehicles or less shall be made not less than
48 hours prior to the time of the commencement of the parade.
   (C)   No parade permit shall be required under this subchapter for the
following:
      (1)   The armed forces of the United States of America, the military
forces of the State of California, and the forces of the police and fire
departments acting within the scope of their duties.
      (2)   A funeral procession proceeding by vehicle under the most
reasonable route from a funeral home, church, or residence of a deceased to the
place of service or place of interment.
      (3)   A peaceful demonstration at a fixed location which is not a street.
      (4)   A sidewalk procession which observes and complies with traffic
regulations and traffic control devices, using that portion of a sidewalk
nearest the street, but at no time using more than one-half of the sidewalk.
§ 100.172 APPLICATION FOR PARADE PERMIT; FEE.
   (A)   The application for a parade permit shall contain the following
information and be signed by the applicant and sworn to before an officer
authorized to administer oaths:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and of any
other person, organization, firm, or corporation on whose behalf the
application is made.
      (2)   The date and time of day requested for the parade.
      (3)   The parade's commencement time, the specific route to be travelled,
and the starting and termination points.
      (4)   The estimated number of persons to participate in the parade and
the estimated number of animals that will be used.
      (5)   The estimated number, if any, of animals and riders, animal-drawn
vehicles, floats, motor vehicles, motorized displays, and marching units or
organizations such as bands, color guards, and drill teams.
   (B)   An application for a parade permit must be accompanied by a non-
refundable application fee in an amount established by Council resolution. The
Police Chief may waive the application fee if he finds, in response to an
affidavit by the applicant, that the applicant is unable to pay the application
fee because of indigence.
§ 100.173 ISSUANCE, DENIAL, AND REVOCATION OF PARADE PERMIT.
   (A)   Time requirement. Upon receipt of an application for a parade permit,
the Police Chief shall furnish to the applicant within three days, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, appropriate approval or denial of the
permit.
   (B)   Alternate route. Should the application for a parade permit reveal
that the parade route requested will interfere with the orderly flow of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the Police Chief shall have authority to
establish a reasonable alternate route and regulate the width of the parade.
   (C)   Denial. The Police Chief shall deny a parade permit when the parade
for which the permit is requested would:
      (1)   Begin during, or within two hours after the end of, a parade for
which a permit has been granted and follow a route that passes within one-half
mile of any point of the route of the parade for which a permit has been
granted; or
      (2)   Unreasonably disrupt the orderly flow of traffic, and no reasonable
means of rerouting traffic or otherwise meeting traffic needs is available.
   (D)   Revocation. The Police Chief shall revoke a parade permit if:
      (1)   The parade fails to begin within 30 minutes of the appointed time
of commencement; or
      (2)   The information contained in the application for a parade permit is
found to be false in any material detail.
§ 100.174 APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PARADE PERMIT.
   If the Police Chief denies or revokes a parade permit, this action shall be
final unless the applicant or permittee shall, within two days after the
receipt of notice of the denial or revocation, file with the City Manager a
written appeal. The City Manager shall, within 24 hours after the appeal is
filed, consider all the evidence in support of or against the action appealed
and render a decision either sustaining or reversing the denial or revocation.
The decision of the City Manager shall be final.
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES
      
111.   ADVERTISING
      
112.   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
      
113.   USED CAR DEALERS
      
114.   DANCES
      
115.   DRILLING
      
116.   ENTERTAINMENT; AMUSEMENTS AND GAMES
      
117.   FILMING AND VIDEO TAPING
      
118.   FORTUNE TELLING
      
119.   TAXICABS
      
120.   HORSE RACING HANDICAPPERS
      
121.   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
122.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES
      
123.   SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS; WRECKING BUSINESSES
      
124.   SALES
      
125.   TOBACCO
      
126.   SHOPPING CARTS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License required
   
110.03   License fees as revenue
   
110.04   Permits prerequisite to issuance of licenses
   
110.05   Investigation fee
   
110.06   Issuance of license; form
   
110.07   Term of license
   
110.08   Debtor licensees
   
110.09   License nontransferable; fee for amendment
   
110.10   Posting and carrying
   
110.11   Duplicate license; fee
   
110.12   Exempt licenses
   
110.13   Suspension or revocation; grounds
   
110.14   Suspension or revocation; procedure
   
110.15   Appeals
   
110.16   License fee a debt to city
   
110.17   License limited to lawful businesses
   
110.18   Misrepresentation
   
110.19   Penalties
   
110.20   Remedies cumulative
Fiscal Provisions
   
110.30   Definitions
   
110.31   Revenue measure
   
110.32   License fees not a substitute for other fees
   
110.33   License required; exemption
   
110.34   Separate license for each branch establishment
   
110.35   New licenses; proration of fee
   
110.36   New licenses; affidavit
   
110.37   Renewal licenses; affidavit
   
110.38   Statements nonconclusive; examination of records
   
110.39   Information confidential
   
110.40   Failure to file statements required; determination of fees; notice
   
110.41   Fee classifications; determination
   
110.42   Delinquency
   
110.43   Revocation of license
   
110.44   Additional powers of Finance Director
   
110.45   Audits
   
110.46   Enforcement
   
110.47   Right of entry
Classifications and Fees
   
110.60   Imposition of license fee
   
110.61   Classification A: Manufacturing, processing and wholesale and retail
businesses and services
   
110.62   Classification B: Professions
   
110.63   Classification E: Amusements and laundromats
   
110.64   Classification F: Building trades
   
110.65   Classification R: Renting accommodations
   
110.66   Classification S: Seasonal businesses
   
110.67   Classification T: Motor vehicles
   
110.68   Classification M: Miscellaneous
   
110.69   Classification N: Fortune telling
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LICENSE or LICENSEE. These terms shall mean and include the words “permit”
or “permittee”, or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar
privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this code or other laws or
ordinances.
   PREMISES. Means and includes all lands, structures or places, and the
equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and
any personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in
connection with, any such business conducted on such premises.
('65 Code, § 3-1.101) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in any business liable to a license fee pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter without having secured a proper license as
prescribed in this chapter and without complying with all the regulations of
such business as set forth in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.102) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.03 LICENSE FEES AS REVENUE.
   Any provision of this title relating to the imposition or collection of a
fee for the privilege of engaging in business is a revenue provision solely and
is not intended for regulatory purposes.
('65 Code, § 3-1.102.1) (Ord. 107-C.S., passed - - )
§ 110.04 PERMITS PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.
   No license shall be issued to engage in any business where the provisions of
this chapter, or any other law of the city, require a permit to be obtained as
a prerequisite to engaging in such business until the permit has been obtained.
Any license issued in violation of the provisions of this section shall be
void.
('65 Code, § 3-1.103) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.05 INVESTIGATION FEE.
   Where any provision of this code of ordinances, or other law of the city,
requires a permit to be obtained as a prerequisite to the issuance of a license
to engage in any business, and such provision or other law does not set forth
the fee to be paid for an investigation into the character, reputation, record
or ability of the applicant, a fee established by Council resolution shall be
charged for such investigation, and the full amount shall be retained by the
city, whether such permit shall be granted or denied.
('65 Code, § 3-1.104) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 107-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed - - )
§ 110.06 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; FORM.
   All licenses shall be prepared and issued by the Finance Director. Each
license shall state upon its face the following information:
   (A)   The person to whom issued;
   (B)   The kind of business licensed thereby;
   (C)   The location of such business;
   (D)   The expiration date of such license; and
   (E)   Such other information as shall be deemed necessary by the Finance
Director unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.105) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.07 TERM OF LICENSE.
   The duration of any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this code
shall be limited as follows:
   (A)   Annual. If the license fee is an annual license fee, the license shall
expire on December 31 following the issuance of the license.
   (B)   Daily. If the license fee is a daily license fee, the license shall
expire at midnight of the day on which the license was issued.
   (C)   Other. All license fees which apply to business categories not falling
within the provisions of this section shall be governed by the specific
expiration dates set forth in the applicable sections of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.106) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.08 DEBTOR LICENSEES.
   No license for any ensuing, current or unexpired license period shall
knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of making an application for
any license, is indebted to the city for any unpaid license fee required to be
paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.107) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.09 LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE; FEE FOR AMENDMENT.
   No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this code shall be
transferable; provided, however, where a license is issued authorizing a person
to conduct a business at a particular place, such licensee, upon an application
therefor and paying a fee established by Council resolution, may have the
license previously issued amended so as to authorize the conduct of such
business at another location.
('65 Code, § 3-1.108) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.10 POSTING AND CARRYING.
   All licenses shall be kept and posted in the following manner:
   (A)   Fixed places of business. Any licensee transacting and carrying on a
business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted
in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.
   (B)   No fixed place of business. Any licensee transacting and carrying on
business, but not operating in a fixed place of business in the city, shall
keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on
such business within the city.
   (C)   Motor vehicles. Any licensee using a motor vehicle in connection with
his business shall have affixed to the rear of such motor vehicle in a
conspicuous place, an identifying sticker, to be furnished by the city, showing
that a license has been issued; provided, however, compliance with the
provisions of this division may be waived by the Finance Director where
licensees operate ten or more vehicles within the city.
('65 Code, § 3-1.109) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.11 DUPLICATE LICENSE; FEE.
   A duplicate license may be issued by the Finance Director to replace any
license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed upon the filing of
an affidavit by the licensee to such fact. The licensee shall pay to the
Finance Director a fee, in an amount set by Council, at the time of filing such
affidavit.
('65 Code, § 3-1.110) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed - - )
§ 110.12 EXEMPT LICENSES.
   (A)   Business exempt by state or federal laws. The provisions of this
chapter shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and
carrying on any business exempt, by virtue of the Constitution or applicable
statutes of the United States or of the state, from the payment of such fees as
are set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Interstate commerce.
      (1)   Applications. None of the license fees provided for by this chapter
shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In
any case where a license fee is believed a licensee, or an applicant for a
license, to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the
Finance Director for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be
discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. The application may be made
before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee.
The applicant, by affidavit and supporting testimony, shall show his method of
business and the gross volume, or estimated gross volume, of business; an
estimate of, or its actual allocation as between interstate and intrastate
business; and such other information as the Finance Director may deem necessary
in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such
commerce.
      (2)   Amount of fee. The Finance Director shall then cause an
investigation to be made and, after having obtained the written opinion of the
City Attorney, shall fix as the license fee for the applicant an amount which
is reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if the license fee has already been
paid shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license fee so
fixed. In fixing the license fee to be charged, the Finance Director shall have
the power to base the license fee upon a percentage of gross receipts, or any
measure which will assure that the license fee assessed shall be uniform with
that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does
not exceed the license fee set forth in this chapter. Should the Finance
Director determine the gross receipts measure of the license fee to be the
proper basis, he may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of the
termination of the applicant's business in the city or at the end of each three
month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of
license fee therefor; provided, however, no additional license fee during any
one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an
amount equal to the annual license fee set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Charitable and nonprofit activities. The provisions of this title
shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax to
conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation, event or activity from
any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on for
the benefit of charitable, philanthropic, educational or religious purposes
provided convincing evidence is furnished to the Finance Director which
establishes that not less than 75% of the gross receipts derived from such
business, occupation, event or activity will be devoted to charitable,
philanthropic, educational or religious purposes. The provisions of this
section shall not be deemed to exempt any such institution or organization from
complying with any other provisions of this code requiring a permit from the
city.
   (D)   Verified statements; filing. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant
to the provisions of this section shall file a verified statement with the
Finance Director stating the facts upon which such exemption is claimed.
   (E)   Issuance of exempt licenses. The Finance Director shall, upon a proper
showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person
claiming an exemption pursuant to the provisions of this section without
payment to the city of the license fee set forth in this chapter.
   (F)   Revocation of exempt licenses. The Finance Director, after giving
notice and a reasonable opportunity for a hearing to the licensee, may revoke
any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information
that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption provided for in this
section.
('65 Code, § 3-1.111) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 107-C.S., passed - - )
§ 110.13 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; GROUNDS.
   Any license or permit granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of this
code may be suspended or revoked at any time:
   (A)   For a material false statement contained in the application;
   (B)   For failure to comply with any regulatory provisions contained in the
statutes of the state or the laws of the city regulating such business;
   (C)   For failure to operate such business in an orderly and businesslike
manner in compliance with such orders, rules and regulations as may be
applicable thereto pursuant to the provisions of this code or statutes of the
state; or
   (D)   For conducting such business in an illegal, improper or disorderly
manner or in a manner which endangers the public health, safety, or welfare.
('65 Code, § 3-1.112) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.14 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Authority of the Finance Director. The Finance Director, after giving
the licensee five days notice of the grounds for suspension or revocation, the
time and place of the hearing, and requiring him to show cause why his license
should not be revoked, may suspend or revoke any one or more of the licenses
held by such licensee. Within five days after his decision, the Finance
Director shall notify the licensee thereof.
   (B)   Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Finance Director
may appeal therefrom to the Council in the manner provided in § 110.15 of this
subchapter.
   (C)   Failure to appeal. In the event no appeal is taken by the licensee,
the decision of the Finance Director suspending or revoking such license shall
become final and conclusive on the expiration of 15 days after notification by
the Finance Director of such suspension or revocation.
('65 Code, § 3-1.113) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.15 APPEALS.
   (A)   Filing. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director
or of any other officer of the city made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter may appeal therefrom to the Council within 10 days after notice thereof
by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of appeal, briefly stating in
such notice the grounds relied upon for appeal.
   (B)   Hearing. If such appeal is made within the time prescribed, the City
Clerk shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the Council within 30
days from the date of receipt of such notice of appeal, giving the appellant
not less than ten days notice in writing of the time and place of the hearing.
   (C)   Findings; notice. The findings and determinations of the Council at
such hearing shall be final and conclusive, and, within three days after such
findings and determinations are made, the City Clerk shall give notice thereof
to the appellant.
   (D)   Failure to appeal. In the event no appeal is taken by the permittee,
the decision of the Finance Director shall become final and conclusive on
expiration of the time fixed for appeal in division (A) of this section.
('65 Code, § 3-1.114) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.16 LICENSE FEE A DEBT TO CITY.
   The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the
name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any
delinquent license fee and penalties.
('65 Code, § 3-1.115) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.17 LICENSE LIMITED TO LAWFUL BUSINESSES.
   The payment of a license fee required by the provisions of this code, and
its acceptance by the city, and the issuance of such license to any person
shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business unless he has
complied with all the requirements of this code and all other applicable laws;
nor shall such licensee carry on any business in any building or on any
premises designated in such license in the event such building or premises are
situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such business is in
violation of any law.
('65 Code, § 3-1.116) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.18 MISREPRESENTATION.
   No person shall knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or
employee of the city any material fact in procuring the licenses or permits
provided for in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.117) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.19 PENALTIES.
   Any person engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to
conduct such business shall, in addition to the license fee, pay a penalty in
amount to be set by Council resolution.
§ 110.20 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   The conviction and punishment of any person for engaging in any business
without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve
the person from paying the license fee due and unpaid at the time of such
conviction, nor shall the payment of any license fee prevent a criminal
prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All
remedies prescribed in this chapter shall be cumulative, and the use of any one
or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.118) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
FISCAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AVERAGE NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED. The average number of persons employed
daily in the applicant's business for one year which shall be determined by
ascertaining the total number of hours of service performed by the applicant's
employees in the city during the previous year and dividing the total number of
hours of service thus obtained by the number of hours of service constituting a
year's work of one full-time employee according to the custom or laws governing
such employment. In computing the AVERAGE NUMBER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED, fractions
of numbers shall be excluded.
   BUSINESS. All professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of
calling carried on for profit or livelihood.
   EMPLOYEE. All persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business,
whether as owner, any member of the owner's family, partner, agent, manager or
solicitor, and any and all other persons employed or working in such business.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total amount of the sales price of all sales of
materials, goods, wares or merchandise, and/or the total amount of commission
or other remuneration charged or received for the performance of any act or
service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit is
allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of, or in
connection with, the sales of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included
in GROSS RECEIPTS shall be receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or
nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property
sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or
payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever, receipts of agents, brokers or
trustees received as commissions or fees earned, or charges of any nature made,
or compensation of any nature received for the performance of any services as
agent, broker or trustee, or profits received when such agent, broker or
trustee participates as a principal in any transaction.
     The following shall be excluded from GROSS RECEIPTS:
      (1)   Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;
      (2)   The value of property accepted as part of the purchase price for
subsequent resale;
      (3)   Any taxes collected which are separately stated and collected for
and paid to a governmental agency;
      (4)   Such part of the sales price of property returned by the purchaser
upon recision of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by
credit;
      (5)   Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits
forfeited and taken into the income of the business shall not be excluded;
      (6)   Collections for others where the business is acting as an agent or
trustee to the extent that payments are made to those for whom collected;
      (7)   Sales of real estate by an agent or sales of commodities by a
commission broker except that portion of the sale which represents commissions
or other income to the agent or broker; and
      (8)   The amount of gross receipts which has been the measure of a
license tax paid to any other city.
   HOTEL or ROOMING HOUSE. Any lodging house, hotel, rooming house, dormitory
or public or private club containing six or more guest rooms, and which is
occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by four or more guests,
whether the rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise, and which is
maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping or
rooming accommodations are furnished to the whole or any part of the public,
whether with or without meals.
   PERSON. All domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates,
joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts
businesses or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and
carrying on any business in the city other than as an employee.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person furnishing the public with communications, water,
light, gas, heat, power or other public utility or service subject to
regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the state.
   RENTAL UNIT. A building or portion of a building which is designed, built,
rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied, as the
home or residence of persons living independently of each other.
('65 Code, § 3-1.201) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.31 REVENUE MEASURE.
   The provisions of this chapter are enacted solely to raise revenue for
municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. All other laws and
provisions of this code shall remain in full force and effect so far as their
regulatory provisions are concerned except as to those businesses, occupations
and professions licensed to do business by the state or the United States of
America, or regulated by the state or the United States of America, so as to
completely occupy the field of regulation.
('65 Code, § 3-1.202) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.32 LICENSE FEES NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR OTHER FEES.
   Persons required to pay a license fee for transacting and carrying on any
business or profession pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be
relieved from the payment of any license fee or permit fee for the privilege of
doing such business legally required pursuant to any other provision of this
code except as specifically exempted in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.203) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.33 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   There are hereby imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions,
callings and occupations specified in this chapter license fees in the amounts
prescribed in §§
110.60 et seq. of this chapter. No person shall transact or carry on any
business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first
having procured a license from the city to do so or without complying with any
and all applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require any
person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such
requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the
state.
   (C)   Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business
within the city because of conflicts with applicable statutes or constitutional
provisions of the United States or of the state shall not be liable for payment
of the fees imposed by the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Persons not required to obtain a business license for conducting
business within the city shall include entertainers located outside the city
boundary hired solely by the city for city sponsored events and any Community
Services recreation program individual instructors, coaches, and/or referees.
   (E)   No license shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
until all applicable regulations of other portions of this code or of other
laws have been complied with.
('65 Code, § 3-1.205) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 654, passed 10-1-19)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.34 SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT.
   A separate license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or
location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type
of business at the same location. Each such license shall authorize the
licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the
location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, however,
warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a
business licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be
deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments; and
provided, further, any individual conducting several businesses at one location
may obtain a license for the principal business and include all others therein,
in which event the license fee shall be based on the classification and
schedule applicable to the principal business.
('65 Code, § 3-1.206) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.35 NEW LICENSES; PRORATION OF FEE.
   (A)   The first business license issued to any person shall be prorated from
the first day of the quarter year in which applied for and shall expire on the
December 31 of that year, and the amount of the license fee shall be prorated
in the same manner. Thereafter, the license of such applicant shall be renewed
on a calendar year basis.
   (B)   A business license issued to an itinerant vendor whose principal place
of business is outside the city boundary and is engaging in the selling of
food, services, and/or merchandise at a city sponsored event shall be prorated
to one-quarter of applicable fee. Said license shall be valid for one calendar
quarter and not subject to automatic renewal.
('65 Code, § 3-1.207) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 883, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 654, passed 10-1-19)
§ 110.36 NEW LICENSES; AFFIDAVIT.
   (A)   Application; form. Any person making an application for a license for
a newly established business shall furnish to the Finance Director, for his
guidance in ascertaining the amount of license fees to be paid by the
applicant, a signed written statement upon a form provided by the Finance
Director, setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may
be necessary to determine the amount of the license fees to be paid by the
applicant.
   (B)   Determination of fees. If the amount of the license fees to be paid by
the applicant is measured by gross receipts, the applicant shall estimate the
gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. If the
amount of the license is to be measured by the average number of employees, the
applicant shall estimate the average number of persons employed for the period
to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimates, if accepted by the
Finance Director as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of the
license fee to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the
license fees so determined shall be tentative only. Such person shall, within
30 days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued,
furnish the Finance Director information showing the gross receipts or average
number of persons employed during the period of such license. The license fees
for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the manner set forth
in § 110.37 for ascertaining and paying renewal license fees for other
businesses after deducting from the payment found to be due the amount paid at
the time such first license was issued.
   (C)   Issuance. The Finance Director shall not issue to any such person a
license for the same or any other business until such person shall have
furnished to him the written statement and paid the license fee as required.
('65 Code, § 3-1.208) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.37 RENEWAL LICENSES; AFFIDAVIT.
   In all cases the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the
Finance Director, for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license
fee to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form to be provided
by the Finance Director, written under penalty of perjury or sworn to before a
person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth the amount of gross
receipts from the operation of the applicant's business during the preceding
year or, in the case of those businesses paying according to the number of
employees, the average number of persons employed during the preceding year.
('65 Code, § 3-1.209) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.38 STATEMENTS NONCONCLUSIVE; EXAMINATION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein,
nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by
appropriate action such sums as are actually due and payable pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. Such statement, and each of the several items
therein contained, shall be subject to audit and verification by the Finance
Director, his assistants or authorized employees of the city, who are hereby
authorized to examine, audit and inspect such financial books and records of
any licensee, or applicant for a license, as may be necessary to verify or
ascertain the amount of license fee due in the specific classification, but
such examination, audit or inspection may be made only on specific
authorization of the Council.
   (B)   All licensees, applicants for licenses and persons engaged in business
in the city are hereby required to permit an examination of such books and
records for the purposes and under the conditions set forth in division (A) of
this section.
('65 Code, § 3-1.210) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.39 INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   The information concerning gross receipts furnished or secured pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not
be subject to public inspection. Such information shall be kept so that the
contents thereof shall not be known except to the persons charged with the
administration of the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.211) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.40 FAILURE TO FILE STATEMENTS REQUIRED; DETERMINATION OF FEES; NOTICE.
   (A)   Determination of fees. If any person shall fail to file any required
statement within the time prescribed, or if, after demand therefor made by the
Finance Director, any person shall fail to file a corrected statement, the
Finance Director may determine the amount of license fees due from such person
by means of such information as he may be able to obtain.
   (B)   Notice. If such a determination is made, the Finance Director shall
issue a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by
depositing it in the United States Post Office, postage prepaid, addressed to
the person so assessed at his last known address.
   (C)   Appeals. Such person may, within 15 days after the mailing or serving
of such notice, appeal such determination to the Council in the manner provided
in §
110.15 of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.212) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.41 FEE CLASSIFICATIONS; DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Determination an administrative function. The determination of which
business, or type or class of business, a licensee or applicant for a license
is engaged in, or is about to engage in, or the determination of the average
number of persons employed for computation of the fees to be paid by businesses
or persons in Classification A of §§
110.60 et seq., shall be an administrative function of the Finance Director.
   (B)   Reclassifications. In the event a licensee or an applicant for a
license believes his individual business is not assigned to the proper
classification because of circumstances peculiar to it, as distinguished from
other businesses of the same kind, he may apply to the Finance Director for a
reclassification. Such application shall contain such information as the
Finance Director may deem necessary and require in order to determine whether
the applicant's individual business is properly classified. The Finance
Director shall conduct an investigation and shall assign the applicant's
individual business to the classification shown to be proper on the basis of
such investigation.
   (C)   Reclassifications; notice. The Finance Director shall notify the
applicant of the action taken on the application for reclassification. Such
notice shall be given by serving it personally or by depositing it in the
United States Post Office, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his
last known address.
   (D)   Appeals. The applicant may, within 15 days after the mailing or
serving of such notice, appeal such action to the Council in the manner
provided in §
110.15 of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.213) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.42 DELINQUENCY.
   For failure to pay a license fee when due, the Finance Director shall add a
penalty fee in the amount of 50% of the license fee for the first month of
delinquency and a penalty of 10% of the license fee for each month thereafter
until the license fee is paid. Such penalties shall be assessed on the last day
of each month in which the fee is not paid after it has become due.
('65 Code, § 3-1.214) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 107-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.43 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter may be
revoked by the Finance Director upon the failure of the licensee to pay the
charges imposed by this chapter or to file reports as required by the
provisions of this chapter within 60 days after such charges or reports become
delinquent.
('65 Code, § 3-1.216) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.44 ADDITIONAL POWERS OF FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the Finance Director
shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any
required sworn statement for a period not exceeding 30 days and, in such case,
to waive any penalty which would otherwise have accrued, and shall have the
further power, with the consent of the Council, to compromise any claim as to
the amount of the license fees due. Negligence on the part of the applicant
shall not be sufficient cause.
('65 Code, § 3-1.218) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.45 AUDITS.
   The Finance Director, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him by the
provisions of this chapter, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized
assistants, shall examine, or cause to be examined, all places of business in
the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied
with; provided, however, if an audit is directed pursuant to the provisions of
§
110.38 of this subchapter, such audit shall be undertaken within 30 days but at
a time and place convenient to the licensee to be audited.
('65 Code, § 3-1.219) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.46 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to enforce each and all of the
provisions of this chapter, and the Police Chief shall render such assistance
in such enforcement as may, from time to time, be required by the Finance
Director or the Council.
('65 Code, § 3-1.220) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
§ 110.47 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Finance Director, and each of his assistants, and any police officer
shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any
reasonable time, any place of business required by the provisions of this
chapter to be licensed and demand an exhibition of its license certificate. Any
person having such license certificate theretofore issued in his possession or
under his control, and who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be the duty of the Finance Director, and
each of his assistants, to cause a complaint to be filed against all persons
found to be violating the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.221) (Ord. 810, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CLASSIFICATIONS AND FEES
§ 110.60 IMPOSITION OF LICENSE FEE.
   Every person who engages in business, whether or not at a fixed place of
business within the city, shall pay a license fee, not to exceed $1,050 per
year, based upon the annual gross receipts, the average number of employees, or
other bases upon which to estimate the license fees owing for the ensuing
classifications established by the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 3-1.301) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 107-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.61 CLASSIFICATION A: MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING AND WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
BUSINESSES AND SERVICES.
   All persons in Classification "A" shall pay an annual business license fee
in the amount of $75 for the first person employed, which shall include the
manager, principal employer, one partner or owner, plus $9 for each additional
partner, owner or employee. Classification "A" shall consist of the following:
   (A)   Manufacturing, processing and wholesaling. Any person engaging in the
business of manufacturing, processing or wholesaling;
   (B)   Retail businesses. The following, and other similar business or
persons not listed, maintaining an established business in the city and selling
tangible personal property at retail or conducting a business of a retail
nature;
      (1)   Appliance stores, gas and electric;
      (2)   Automobiles, new and used;
      (3)   Automobiles, accessories;
      (4)   Automobile service stations and garages;
      (5)   Bakeries;
      (6)   Clothing stores;
      (7)   Coffee, tea and extracts;
      (8)   Department stores;
      (9)   Drugstores;
      (10)   Dry goods;
      (11)   Electrical supplies and appliances;
      (12)   Feed and fuel;
      (13)   Fish and poultry;
      (14)   Five and ten and variety stores;
      (15)   Florists and nurseries;
      (16)   Fruit and vegetable stands;
      (17)   Furniture;
      (18)   Furnishings;
      (19)   General merchandise;
      (20)   Gift and novelty shops;
      (21)   Groceries and meats;
      (22)   Hardware, paint and appliances;
      (23)   Jewelry stores and repairs;
      (24)   Laundries;
      (25)   Lumber and building materials;
      (26)   Motion picture theaters and drive-ins;
      (27)   Musical instruments;
      (28)   Newspapers;
      (29)   Paint stores;
      (30)   Pet shops, pet food and pet supplies;
      (31)   Photographers;
      (32)   Plumbing supplies and appliances;
      (33)   Printing;
      (34)   Public dance halls;
      (35)   Shoe stores;
      (36)   Skating rinks;
      (37)   Sporting goods;
      (38)   Stationery and office equipment; and
      (39)   Supplies and equipment.
   (C)   Services. The following, and other similar businesses or persons not
listed, which are considered to be of a service nature;
      (1)   Advertising and advertising agencies (excluding billboards);
      (2)   Accountants (excluding certified public accountants) and auditors;
      (3)   Artists;
      (4)   Auto washing;
      (5)   Auto rentals;
      (6)   Auto parking lots;
      (7)   Barber shops;
      (8)   Beauty parlors;
      (9)   Dancing academies and schools;
      (10)   Dressmaking and tailoring;
      (11)   Gardeners (excluding landscaping);
      (12)   Gymnasiums and health studios;
      (13)   Hospitals (all types);
      (14)   Interior decorators;
      (15)   Laboratories (all types);
      (16)   Musical instructors and schools;
      (17)   Newspapers and newspaper distributors;
      (18)   Nursery day schools;
      (19)   Printing establishments;
      (20)   Public stenographers, mimeographing and multigraphing;
      (21)   Repair services;
      (22)   Massage establishments; and
      (23)   Out-call massage services.
   (D)   Cafes and restaurants. Cafes, restaurants, drive-in cafes, ice cream
parlors and any similar place of business preparing and serving food, beverages
or refreshments for consumption on the premises; and
   (E)   Real estate businesses. Any person engaged in the real estate business
as a real estate broker, real estate salesperson, realtor, business opportunity
broker or salesperson or licensee, or mineral or oil and gas broker,
salesperson or licensee, as defined by the Real Estate Law, Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code §§ 10000 et seq., and having an office or place of business in the city;
provided, however, any such person who sells or offers to sell, lease or rent
real property located in the city, business opportunity contracts or mineral or
oil and gas leases pertaining to any real property located in the city, while
not having an office or place of business in the city, shall pay a business
license fee of $40 per year.
('65 Code, § 3-1.302) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 275-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed - - )
   (F)   Closing-out sales. Except as provided in §
124.018, a license fee in an amount established by Council resolution for each
and every day such sale is to be conducted shall be paid to the Finance
Director prior to obtaining the permit required by the provisions of §
124.016.
('65 Code, § 5-7.03) (Ord. 657, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 654, passed 10-1-19)
§ 110.62 CLASSIFICATION B: PROFESSIONS.
   (A)   All persons in Classification "B" shall pay an annual business license
fee in the amount of $105 for the first person employed, which shall include
the manager, principal employee, one partner or owner. A business license fee
of $60 shall be paid for each additional manager, employee, partner or owner
included in Classification "B." A business license fee of $15 shall be paid for
each additional manager, employee, partner, or owner not included in
Classification "B."
   (B)   Classification “B” shall consist of the following, and other similar
callings or persons not listed, considered to be of a professional nature:
      (1)   Architects;
      (2)   Attorneys;
      (3)   Chiropodists;
      (4)   Certified public accounts;
      (5)   Chiropractors;
      (6)   Dentists;
      (7)   Engineers (all types);
      (8)   Embalmers, funeral directors and morticians;
      (9)   Oculists and opticians;
      (10)   Optometrists;
      (11)   Osteopaths; and
      (12)   Physicians and surgeons.
('65 Code, § 3-1.303) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 860, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 107-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 356-C.S.,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 654, passed 10-1-19)
§ 110.63 CLASSIFICATION E: AMUSEMENTS AND LAUNDROMATS.
   (A)   Bowling lanes. Persons engaging in the business of bowling lanes shall
pay an annual business license fee in the amount of $15 per lane per year, or
portion thereof, but not to exceed a total license fee in the amount of $375.
   (B)   Circuses, tent shows and carnivals.
      (1)   Council permission required. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in, conduct, manage or carry on any circus, tent show or any other kind
of exhibition or performance without first securing a permit from the Council
and paying the license fees set forth in this division (B).
      (2)   Circuses, trained animal shows and sideshows. Every person
exhibiting a circus, or a trained animal show not exhibited as a part of the
circus, shall pay a license fee in the amount of $75 per day and for each
sideshow not included as a part of a circus or trained animal show, $15 per
day.
      (3)   Traveling theatrical performances. Every person carrying on any
traveling theatrical performance under, or surrounded or partially enclosed by
canvas, such as comedy, spoken drama, opera or a concert, shall pay a license
fee in the amount of $30 for the first day and $15 for each additional day.
      (4)   Carnivals. Every person carrying on any carnival or other similar
exhibition consisting of five or less concessions shall pay a license fee in
the amount of $75 for the first day and $30 for each additional day.
      (5)   Amusement rides. Every person carrying on a merry-go-round,
circular swing, roller coaster, Ferris wheel or other similar device for each
such ride, swing or coaster; provided, however, the Council hereby reserves the
right to waive the license fee for any carnival, circus, or ride whenever the
receipts therefrom will be appropriated to any religious, benevolent, or civic
purpose within the city. The amount of the license fee shall be $15 per ride.
   (C)   Coin-operated machines; vending machines. Every individual or firm
whose business is limited exclusively to renting, leasing or operating coin-
operated vending machines shall pay a tax based on 6% of the entire gross
receipts directly attributable to the business activities conducted within the
city, and no minimum license tax shall be imposed upon any business location,
nor shall such license tax be measured by the number of business locations or
machines of the taxpayer within the city. The city may demand an audit of any
such licensee and require him to submit a copy of the State Sales and Use Tax
Returns filed relative to such machines, and a copy of any other tax statement
filed with any government entity by him or by any other individual or firm
owning, renting, leasing or operating such machines, disclosing the gross
receipts received from owning, renting, leasing or operating such machines.
   (D)   Dances. There shall be an additional license fee in the amount of $180
per year, or portion thereof, for public dancing in any establishment where
dancing is incidental to any other business which is licensed.
   (E)   Launderettes, laundromats and wet washes. Every person engaging in the
business of conducting or operating a launderette, laundromat, wet wash or
similar business where the public is permitted to enter to wash and dry clothes
or other materials in individual machines, whether a charge is made through a
coin-operated slot or on a flat fee basis, shall pay a business license fee
based upon the average number of persons employed and the number of individual
machines, counted collectively, that is, each machine shall be counted as an
employee, on the following schedule: For the first person and/or machine, which
shall include the principal partner or owner, $45, plus $.75 for each
additional partner, principal, employee, or machine.
   (F)   Games of skill and science.
      (1)   For every person who is an owner, lessor, or other person having an
interest in such machine or the profits thereof and who does not have a fixed
place of business in the city, but who does business in the placing,
installation, maintenance, or servicing of such machines, an annual license fee
in the amount of $100 per year; and
      (2)   For every person having a fixed place of business within the city
and owning, operating, leasing, or otherwise locating such machines within the
city, an annual license fee computed on the basis of $100 for each such machine
maintained at such fixed place of business.
   (G)   Horse racing handicappers. The license fee for the business, trade,
calling, or occupation of horse racing handicapper shall be $1,000 per year,
payable at the time of the issuance of the license.
('65 Code, §§ 3-1.304, 5-3.05, 5-26.05) (Am. Ord. 140-C.S., passed - - ; Ord.
167-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 206-C.S.,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed - - ; Ord. 810, passed - - ; Ord. 905,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 654, passed 10-1-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.64 CLASSIFICATION F: BUILDING TRADES.
   (A)   Every person, whose principal place of business is not within the
city, who carries on or engages in any trade, calling, profession, avocation or
occupation set forth in this section shall pay to the city the business license
fee prescribed in this section. Such license shall be for one year, or the
remaining portion thereof, commencing on the first day of the month in which
the license is received.
   (B)   Any person engaging in any of the arts, trades, callings, avocations
or occupations of the building trades who is the holder of a state contractor's
license so to do, and whose principal place of business is within the city,
shall carry a city business license in full force and effect at all times. The
first license issued to any such person shall be prorated from the first day of
the quarter in which applied for and shall expire on December 31 of that year.
Thereafter such license shall be renewed on a calendar year basis.
   (C)   For classification and identification and work permitted under such
license, the classification of the State Contractor's License Board shall be
used for classification purposes only.
Classification Fee
Classification                                               Fee
A   General engineering contractors                       $300
B­1   General building contractors                       225
C­4   Boilers, hot water heating, and steam fitting      180
C­6   Cabinet and mill work                              135
C­8   Cement and concrete                                135
C­45   Electrical signs                                  135
C­10   Electric (general)                                180
C­11   Elevator installations                            135
C­12   Excavating, grading, trenching, paving, and surfac135
C-16   Fire protection and engineering                    135
C­15   Floors (wood)                                     135
C­17   Glazing                                           135
C­21   House and building moving and wrecking            135
C­2   Insulation                                         135
C­27   Landscaping                                       135
C­26   Lathing                                           135
C­29   Masonry                                           135
C­23   Ornamental metals                                 135
C­33   Painting and decorating                           135
C­34   Pipelines                                         135
C­35   Plastering                                        180
C­36   Plumbing                                          180
C­38   Refrigeration                                     135
C­39   Roofing                                           135
42   Sewers, sewage disposal, and drain cement pipe laying135
C­43   Sheet metal                                       135
C­50   Steel, reinforcing                                135
C­51   Steel, structural                                 135
C­53   Swimming pools                                    135
C­54   Tile (ceramic and mosaic)                         135
C­20   Warm-air heating, ventilating, and air-conditionin180
C­60   Welding                                           135
C­57   Well drilling                                     135
C­61   Classification specialists                        135
G­1   Gas filters                                        180
S­1   Sandblasting                                       135
V­1   Vocational licenses                                135
   (D)   State licensed contractors shall be required to obtain a city business
license to perform work within the scope of their primary state contractors
classifications, namely:
      (1)   “A” General Engineering Contractor;
      (2)   “B” General Building Contractor; and
      (3)   “C” Specialty Contractor; provided, however, specialty contractors
holding currently valid subclassifications directly related by trade practices
to their primary licenses shall not be required to obtain additional licenses
to perform work in a closely related field. Contractors shall be required to
obtain separate business licenses for each unrelated trade or occupation
performed within the city; and provided, further, itinerant “C” Specialty
Contractors (not having a principal place of business in the city) may prorate
their license fees as follows: two-thirds of the annual license fee for the
first six months and one-third thereof for the next six months of any 12-month
period if the renewal fee is paid before the expiration of the first six months
period.
('65 Code, § 3-1.305) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 860, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed - - )
§ 110.65 CLASSIFICATION R: RENTING ACCOMMODATIONS.
   (A)   Lodging places. Every person engaged in the business of conducting or
operating a hotel, rooming house, boardinghouse, lodging house, bungalow court,
apartment house or any other accommodation for dwelling, sleeping or lodging in
any such place, shall pay for each such place of business a business license
fee per calendar year, or portion thereof, as follows:
      (1)   For one, two, or three rental accommodations, no fee; or
      (2)   For four or more rental accommodations (regardless of occupancy),
$45 plus $6 per rental accommodation over four, not to exceed a total license
fee of $450.
   (B)   Trailer camps and mobile home parks. The business license fee for
trailer camps and mobile home parks, shall be in the amount of $45 per year, or
portion thereof, for three or four trailer or mobile home parking spaces or
lots, plus $6 for each additional parking space or lot over four, whether
occupied or not.
('65 Code, § 3-1.306) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 20-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 346-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 654,
passed 10-1-19)
§ 110.66 CLASSIFICATION S: SEASONAL BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Pumpkin patches. Any person desiring to sell pumpkins in the city,
except a bona fide merchant or other business person in an established business
location, shall pay a business license fee of $150 and post a cash bond for
each location in the amount of $300 to insure the cleaning of the premises at
the expiration of permit. In the event the premises are not left in a “broom
clean” condition, the city may pay the costs of cleaning from such bond.
   (B)   Christmas trees. Any person desiring to sell Christmas trees in the
city, except a bona fide merchant or other business person in an established
business location, shall pay a business license fee of $150 and post a cash
bond for each location in the amount of $300 to insure the cleaning of the
premises at the expiration of permit. In the event the premises are not left in
a “broom clean” condition, the city may pay the costs of cleaning from such
bond.
('65 Code, § 3-1.307) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 23-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed - - )
§ 110.67 CLASSIFICATION T: MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Wholesale deliveries. Every person who does not maintain a fixed place
of business in the city and who delivers any merchandise, such as beverages,
dairy products or food products, to merchants for resale or to restaurants for
consumption, or who delivers any article, goods, wares or merchandise, or who
conducts any business by means of a motor vehicle, and who is not licensed
specifically by the provisions of this chapter, shall pay a license fee of $90
per year, or portion thereof. The provisions of this division shall not apply
to transactions exempt from the imposition of a city license tax by the
provisions of the Cal. Public Utilities Code § 4303.
   (B)   Retail deliveries.
      (1)   Every peddler of fruits, vegetables, poultry, rabbits, eggs,
candies, confections, ice cream, ice cream mix or any other food product or
merchandise or article of any description, who does not have a fixed place of
business in the city, and who travels from place to place within the city in a
truck or vehicle selling, or offering for sale, direct to consumers from such
truck or vehicle shall pay a business license fee of $90 per year for each such
truck or vehicle used; provided, however, farmers, poultry raisers, and
horticulturists who peddle exclusively products grown by them shall be exempt
from such license fee.
      (2)   A warehouse or distribution place where such foodstuffs,
merchandise or articles are received and intended for resale to consumers from
a truck or vehicle shall not be deemed to be a place of business for the
purposes of this division.
   (C)   Junk, garbage, salvage, and rubbish collection. The business license
fee for each junk, garbage, salvage or rubbish collection truck shall be $180
for each calendar year, or portion thereof, for each vehicle used.
   (D)   Taxicabs. The business license fee for each taxicab shall be $45 each
calendar year, or portion thereof, for each vehicle used.
   (E)   Buses for hire. The business license fee for every person engaged in
the business of operating a motor bus for hire in the city shall be as follows:
      (1)   For each motor bus capable of seating more than five and less than
eight passengers, $120 per year.
      (2)   For each motor bus capable of seating more than seven and less than
16 passengers, $150 per year; and
      (3)   For each motor bus capable of seating more than 16 passengers, $180
per year.
   (F)   School buses.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, SCHOOL BUS shall mean any
automobile or other motor-propelled vehicle, except a licensed taxicab, used
for the transportation of school children over the public streets of the city,
whether such school bus is operated as a separate business or as a part of the
business of conducting a school, or otherwise, including the contract services
of the owner or operator of such vehicle with any public or private school, but
not including buses owned or operated by a public school board.
      (2)   The business license fee shall be on the gross receipts basis, as
set forth in Classification A, for receipts from the operation of any part of
the business in the city, whether the address of the business is in the city or
elsewhere.
('65 Code, § 3-1.308) (Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 165-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed - - )
§ 110.68 CLASSIFICATION M: MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   Auctions. Every person carrying on an auction sale of goods, wares,
merchandise or real estate, shall pay a license fee of $150 per day. As an
alternate to the fee set forth in this division, any such person may pay an
annual fee for such license in the sum of $1,900 per year.
('65 Code, § 3-1.309) (Ord. 16-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - -
; Am. Ord. 201-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed - - )
   (B)   Junk dealers. Every person carrying on the business of collecting,
purchasing, selling, or dealing in junk or rubbish shall pay a license fee in
the amount of $80 per year.
   (C)   Wrecking businesses. Every person carrying on the business of wrecking
automobiles, motorcycles, or any other motor vehicle shall pay a license fee in
the amount of $80 per year.
('65 Code, § 5-18.07) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 411, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - )
§ 110.69 CLASSIFICATION N: FORTUNE TELLING.
   Every person engaged in the business of fortune telling, as defined in §
118.01 of this code, shall pay a license fee in the amount of $750 annually.
('65 Code, § 3-1.311) (Ord. 264-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 356-C.S., passed -
- )
Cross-reference:
   Fortune telling, see
Ch. 118
CHAPTER 111: ADVERTISING
Section
   
111.01   Handbill defined
   
111.02   Handbills on inhabited premises
   
111.03   Distribution of handbills on posted premises
   
111.04   Distribution of handbills in public places
   
111.05   Handbills on vehicles
   
111.06   Handbills on vacant or uninhabited premises
   
111.07   Causing or permitting distribution of handbills
   
111.08   Enforcement
§ 111.01 HANDBILL DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, sample or device, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter or literature regardless of content or subject
matter.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15)
§ 111.02 HANDBILLS ON INHABITED PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, throw, place,
scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any premises which are inhabited
without first ensuring that each handbill is so placed or deposited as to be
secure or prevented from being blown or drifting thus becoming litter (provided
however that mailboxes may not be used for such purpose so long as prohibited
by Federal postal laws or regulations).
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS ON POSTED PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether permitted under this chapter or
not, to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or
upon any premises which has posted a sign in a place providing reasonable
notice by bearing the words “no handbills,” or words of similar import.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or
cast any handbill in or upon any public place in the city. It shall not be
unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute any handbill in any public
place to any person willing to accept it.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.05 HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any vehicle.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.06 HANDBILLS ON VACANT OR UNINHABITED PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant including but not limited to fences, lights
and light posts, and utility structures.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.07 CAUSING OR PERMITTING DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any individual, person, partnership, corporation or
other business to cause or to allow, any handbill to be distributed in
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor. Provided, however, that any violation of this chapter may be
charged as an infraction at the discretion of the City Prosecutor.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.001   Intent
   
112.002   Short title
   
112.003   Definitions
   
112.004   Compliance with state and federal laws
   
112.005   Separability
   
112.006   Notices to grantor and grantees
   
112.007   Notices to public
   
112.008   No recourse against grantor
   
112.009   Nonenforcement by the grantor
   
112.010   Theft of services; tampering
Granting of Franchise
   
112.020   Granting
   
112.021   Franchise territory
   
112.022   Use of public streets and ways
   
112.023   Duration
   
112.024   Franchise nonexclusive
   
112.025   Transfer of ownership or control
   
112.026   Renewal of franchise
   
112.027   Police powers
   
112.028   Franchise fees
   
112.029   Forfeiture or revocation of franchise
   
112.030   Termination of franchise following receivership or foreclosure
   
112.031   Franchise required
Franchise Regulations
   
112.040   Regulatory authority
   
112.041   Regulatory responsibility
   
112.042   Public usage of systems
   
112.043   Reservations by grantor
   
112.044   Regulation of subscriber rates
   
112.045   Annual reviews of performance
   
112.046   Reviews of system and services
   
112.047   Access channel management
Financial and Insurance Provisions
   
112.060   Construction bonds
   
112.061   Compliance bonds
   
112.062   Security funds
   
112.063   Indemnification
   
112.064   Insurance
Reports
   
112.075   Annual reports
   
112.076   Plant survey reports
   
112.077   Copies of federal and state reports
   
112.078   Public reports
   
112.079   Complaint files and reports
   
112.080   Privacy reports
   
112.081   Miscellaneous reports
   
112.082   Income tax returns
   
112.083   Inspection of facilities
   
112.084   Business offices and files
   
112.085   Reports open to public inspection
   
112.086   Failure to report
   
112.087   False statements
   
112.088   Cost of reports
Franchise Violations
   
112.100   Remedies for franchise violations
   
112.101   Remedies for franchise violations; procedure
   
112.102   Force majeure; inability of grantees to perform
Operation and Maintenance
   
112.115   Open books and records
   
112.116   Records required
   
112.117   Maintenance and complaints
   
112.118   Rights of individuals
   
112.119   Continuity of service mandatory
   
112.120   Grantee rules and regulations
   
112.121   Rights of tenants of multiple-dwelling units
Design and Construction Provisions
   
112.130   System design
   
112.131   Geographical coverage
   
112.132   Cablecasting facilities
   
112.133   System construction schedule
   
112.134   Delays in construction
   
112.135   Provision of service
   
112.136   Undergrounding cables
   
112.137   Undergrounding in new developments
   
112.138   Undergrounding for multiple-dwelling units
   
112.139   Street occupancy
   
112.140   Construction and technical standards
   
112.141   Areawide interconnection
   
112.142   Parental control locks
Service Provisions
   
112.155   Services to be provided
   
112.156   Basic subscriber television services (BSTS)
   
112.157   Basic subscriber radio service (BSRS)
   
112.158   Institutional service (IS)
   
112.159   Additional subscriber services
   
112.160   Local origination channels
   
112.161   Government access channels
   
112.162   Educational access channels
   
112.163   Public access channels
   
112.164   Community access channels (closed-circuit)
   
112.165   Leased access channels
   
112.166   Universal connections
Rights Reserved to Grantor
   
112.175   Right to purchase systems
   
112.176   Right to inspect records
   
112.177   Right to inspect construction
   
112.178   Right to intervene in legal proceedings
   
112.179   Right to require the removal of property
Rights Reserved to the Grantee
   
112.190   Rights of grantees
Franchise Applications
   
112.200   Franchise applications
   
112.201   Franchise processing costs
State Video Franchises
   
112.300   State franchise required
   
112.301   State franchise fee and video service fees for public educational and
governmental access
   
112.302   Customer service penalties
   
112.303   Procedures for appeal of denial of an encroachment permit
 
   
112.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.001 INTENT.
   The city finds that the development of cable television and communications
systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the people of
the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated
with cable television, the city further finds that the public convenience,
safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers
which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city shall designate.
It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and
specify the means to attain the best possible public interest and public
purpose in such matters, and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof.
('65 Code, § 7-8.101) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.002 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known may be cited as the Cable Television Franchise
Law of the City of San Gabriel.
('65 Code, § 7-8.201) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIBER SERVICE. Any service not included in basic subscriber
television service, basic subscriber radio service or institutional service, as
defined in this section, including, but not limited to, pay cable, interactive
services, cable modem services, and cable telephone services. ('65 Code, § 7-
8.301)
   AGENCY SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives a service in a government or
public agency, school or nonprofit corporation. ('65 Code, § 7-8.302)
   BASIC SUBSCRIBER RADIO SERVICE. The provision to all subscribers of such
audio services as the retransmission of broadcast FM radio signals, the
retransmission of shortwave, weather, news, time and other similar audio
broadcast channels, and the transmission of cablecast radio signals. ('65 Code,
§ 7-8.303)
   BASIC SUBSCRIBER TELEVISION SERVICE.
      (1)   The total of all of the following:
         (a)   The transmission to all subscribers of all broadcast television
channel signals authorized or permitted by the FCC and provided for in a
franchise agreement;
         (b)   The provision to all subscribers of non-broadcast open channel
signals originating from sources outside the cable communications system;
         (c)   The cablecasting to all subscribers of local origination
programming and public, educational, and government access programming; and
         (d)   The transmission to all subscribers of all other cablecasting
open-channel signals.
      (2)    BASIC SUBSCRIBER TELEVISION SERVICE may be offered to subscribers
in one or more tiers or combinations of programs.
('65 Code, § 7-8.304)
   BROADCAST SIGNAL. A television or radio signal which is transmitted over the
air to a wide geographic audience and is received by a cable communications
system off-the-air or by microwave. ('65 Code, § 7-8.305)
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, CATV SYSTEM, BROADBAND
COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK or SYSTEM. A system of antennas, cables, amplifiers,
towers, microwave links, cablecasting studios and other conductors, converters,
equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the primary purpose of
distributing video programming to home subscribers and the secondary purpose of
producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing or distributing audio,
video, digital or other forms of electronic or electrical signals. ('65 Code, §
7-8.306)
   CABLECAST SIGNAL. A non-broadcast signal which originates within the
facilities of the cable communications system. ('65 Code, § 7-8.307)
   CABLE MILE. A linear mile of strand-bearing cable as measured on the street
or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal. ('65 Code, § 7-8.308)
   CHANNEL. A radio frequency band capable of carrying combinations of video,
audio, digital or other non-video signal, including a digitally compressed
channel. ('65 Code, § 7-8.309)
   CLASS IV CHANNEL. A signaling path provided by a cable communications system
to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in
the cable television system. ('65 Code, § 7-8.310)
   CLOSED-CIRCUIT or INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE. Such video, audio, data and other
services provided to institutional users on an individual application, private
channel basis. Such services may include, but shall not be limited to, two-way
video, audio or digital signals among institutions, or from institutions, to
residential subscribers. ('65 Code, § 7-8.311)
   COMMENCE CONSTRUCTION. That time and date when the construction of the cable
communications system is considered to have commenced, which shall be when the
first strand of cable is connected to a utility pole, or the first
undergrounding of cables is initiated, after preliminary engineering (strand
mapping) and after all the necessary permits and authorizations have been
obtained. ('65 Code, § 7-8.312)
   COMMENCE OPERATION. That time and date when the operation of the cable
communications system is considered to have commenced which shall be when
sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the
offering of full service to at least 10% of the dwelling units located within
the service area. ('65 Code, § 7-8.313)
   COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives a service in a place of
business where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade
or profession. ('65 Code, § 7-8.314)
   CONVERTER. An electronic device which converts signal carriers from one form
to another. ('65 Code, § 7-8.315)
   COUNCIL. The governing body of the city. ('65 Code, § 7-8.316)
   EDUCATIONAL CHANNEL or EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel where
educational institutions are the primary designated programmers. ('65 Code, §
7-8.317)
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or
elected successor. ('65 Code, § 7-8.318)
   FRANCHISE. The nonexclusive right granted pursuant to this chapter to
construct and operate a cable communications system along the public ways
within all or a specified area in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever
form granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the
privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required
by other laws of the city. ('65 Code, § 7-8.319)
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. A franchise award ordinance, accepted on the part of
the grantee, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted,
including referenced specifications, franchise applications, and other related
material. The franchise agreement may modify the terms of this chapter by
appropriate amendment. ('65 Code, § 7-8.320)
   FRANCHISE FEE. The fee paid by the grantee to the grantor in consideration
of the use of the public streets and rights-of-way. ('65 Code, § 7-8.321)
   GOVERNMENT CHANNEL or GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel where local
government agencies are the primary designated programmers. ('65 Code, § 7-
8.322)
   GRANTEE. Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under
the granting franchise ordinance and shall include the lawful successor,
transferee or assignee of the grantee. ('65 Code, § 7-8.323)
   GRANTOR. The city as represented by the Council acting within the scope of
its jurisdiction. ('65 Code, § 7-8.324)
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUE.  All cash or other consideration received directly or
indirectly by a grantee and its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, and any
person in which a grantee has a financial interest, or from any source
whatsoever, arising from or attributable to the sale or exchange of cable
services by a grantee within the city or in any way derived from the operation
of its system, including, but not limited to, "Basic Subscriber Television
Service," "Basic Subscriber Radio Service," "Institutional Service,"
"Additional Subscriber Service," leased channel fees, converter rentals or
sales, revenue from cable Internet services, cable modem rentals or sales,
revenue from telephone and other services which may be provided over the Cable
Communications System, studio rental, and advertising revenues. Such gross
revenues shall not be reduced for any purpose other than as provided in this
chapter and shall be the basis for computing the fee imposed pursuant to §
112.028 of this chapter. Such gross revenue shall not include converter
deposits, modem deposits, or refunds to subscribers by the grantee, or items
excluded by Federal Law.
   INITIAL SERVICE AREA. The area of the city which will receive service
initially as set forth in the franchise agreement. ('65 Code, § 7-8.326)
   INSTALLATION. The connection of the system from the feeder cable to the
subscriber's terminal and the provision of service. ('65 Code, § 7-8.327)
   LEASED CHANNEL or LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel available for lease and
programming by persons or entities other than the grantee, including those
portions of other access channels not in use by their designated programmers.
('65 Code, § 7-8.328)
   LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL. Any channel where the grantee is the primary
designated programmer and provides video programs to subscribers. ('65 Code, §
7-8.329)
   MONITORING. Observing a communication signal, or the absence of a signal,
where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer, whether the
signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever;
provided, however, MONITORING shall not include system-wide non-individually
addressed sweeps of the system for the purposes of verifying integrity,
controlling return path transmissions, or billing for pay services. ('65 Code,
§ 7-8.330)
   NON-BROADCAST SIGNAL. A signal which is transmitted by a cable
communications system and which is not involved in an over-the-air broadcast
transmission path. ('65 Code, § 7-8.331)
   OPEN CHANNEL. Any channel which can be received by all subscribers without
the necessity for special equipment. ('65 Code, § 7-8.332)
   PAY CABLE or PAY TELEVISION. The delivery to subscribers, over the cable
communications system, of television signals for a fee or charge to subscribers
over and above the charge for basic subscriber service on a per program, per
channel or other subscription basis. ('65 Code, §
   PENETRATION. The result expressed in percentage obtained by dividing the
total number of potential subscribers in the franchise area into the number of
subscribers receiving service. ('65 Code, § 7-8.334)
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, organization or corporation
or any lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such individual,
partnership, association, organization or corporation. ('65 Code, § 7-8.335)
   PRIVATE CHANNEL or CLOSED-CIRCUIT CHANNEL. Any channel which is available
only to subscribers who are provided with special converter or terminal
equipment to receive signals on such channel. ('65 Code, § 7-8.336)
   PROGRAMMER. A person or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides
program material or information for transmission by video, audio, digital or
other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other storage media, to
subscribers by means of the cable communications system. ('65 Code, § 7-8.337)
   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL or COMMUNITY ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel where any
member of the general public or any noncommercial organization may be a
programmer, without charge, on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory
basis in accordance with FCC regulations. ('65 Code, § 7-8.338)
   REASONABLE NOTICE. A written notice addressed to the grantee at its
principal office or at such other office as the grantee has designated to the
grantor as the address to which notice should be transmitted to the grantee,
which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than four days prior to
that day on which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which
requires the giving of notice. In computing such four days, Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays recognized by the grantor shall be excluded. ('65 Code, § 7-8.339)
   REASONABLE ORDER. A written order not excessive or extreme as to the costs
or time to comply, governed by sound thinking. ('65 Code, § 7-8.340)
   RESIDENT. Any person residing in the city as otherwise defined by applicable
laws. ('65 Code, § 7-8.341)
   RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER. A subscriber who receives service in an individual
dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a
business, trade or profession. ('65 Code, § 7-8.342)
   SALE. Any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. ('65 Code, § 7-8.343)
   SCHOOL. Any educational institution, including primary and secondary schools
and colleges and universities, both public and private. ('65 Code, § 7-8.344)
   SERVICE AREA. The entire geographic area within the franchise territory.
('65 Code, § 7-8.346)
   STREET. Means and includes each of the following which have been dedicated
to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under
public authority or by others and located within the city limits: streets,
roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way
and similar public property and areas which the grantor shall permit to be
included within the definition of street from time to time. ('65 Code, § 7-
8.348)
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who or which
elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by
means of or in connection with the cable communications system. ('65 Code, § 7-
8.349)
   SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED. That sufficient distribution facilities have been
installed by the grantee so as to permit the offering of full network service
to at least 90% of the potential subscribers in the service area. ('65 Code, §
7-8.350)
   TAPPING. Observing a two-way communications signal exchange, where the
observer is neither of the communicating parties, whether the exchange is
observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. ('65 Code,
§ 7-8.351)
(Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 494-C.S., passed 1-19-99)
§ 112.004 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or the franchise
to the contrary, the grantee at all times shall comply with all laws and
regulations of the state and federal government or any administrative agencies
thereof; provided, however, if any such state or federal law or regulation
shall require the grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the grantee
to perform any service, or shall prohibit the grantor from enforcing provisions
of this chapter or the franchise or of any law or regulation, or shall prohibit
the grantee from performing any service in conflict with the terms of the
franchise or of any law or regulation of the grantor, then, as soon as possible
following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the grantor of the point
of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or
regulations of the grantor or the franchise.
   (B)   If the grantor determines that a material provision of this chapter is
affected by any subsequent action of the state or federal government, the
grantor shall have the right to modify and/or interpret any of the provisions
of this chapter to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the
full intent and purpose of this chapter consistent with said regulation or law.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1401) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 494-C.S., passed
1-19-99) 
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.005 SEPARABILITY.
   (A)   Separability of non-material provisions. If any provision of this
chapter or any related agreement is held by any court or by any federal, state
or county agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with
any federal, state or county law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in
effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order
to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, and if such
provision is considered non-material by the grantor, such provision shall be
considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this chapter, and such
holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all the other
provisions of this chapter. In the event such law, rule or regulation is
subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that such
provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with
the laws, rules and regulations then in effect, such provision shall thereupon
return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on the grantee
and grantor provided the grantor shall give the grantee 30 days written notice
of such change before requiring compliance with such provision. ('65 Code, § 7-
8.1402)
   (B)   Separability of material provisions. If any material section of this
chapter, as determined by the grantor, is held to be invalid or preempted by
federal, state or county regulations or laws, the grantor shall negotiate with
the grantee appropriate modifications to the franchise to provide reasonable
relief from such invalidity or preemption, including the payment of liquidated
damages. If the grantee and grantor are unable to reach agreement on such
modifications, the dispute will be submitted to a mutually agreeable
arbitrator, in accordance with state laws, who will determine what
modifications and/or liquidated damages are appropriate. The arbitrator's
decision shall be binding on the parties; provided, however, no decision of the
arbitrator shall require the grantor or grantee to be in violation of any
federal or state law or regulation.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1403) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.006 NOTICES TO GRANTOR AND GRANTEES.
   All notices from the grantee to the grantor pursuant to the franchise shall
be to the office of the City Clerk. The grantee shall maintain within the
franchise area throughout the term of the franchise an address for service of
notices by mail. The grantee shall also maintain within the franchise area a
local office and telephone number for the conduct of matters related to the
franchise during normal business hours.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1404) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.007 NOTICES TO PUBLIC.
   Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to the franchise shall
be by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
area at least ten days prior to the meeting, posting at the offices of the
grantor, and by announcement on at least two channels of the grantee's cable
communications system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for five
consecutive days prior to the meeting.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1405) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.008 NO RECOURSE AGAINST GRANTOR.
   The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the grantor or its
officials, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, cost, expense
or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of the franchise or
because of the enforcement of the franchise.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1407) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.009 NONENFORCEMENT BY THE GRANTOR.
   The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of the permit by reason of any failure of the grantor to enforce
prompt compliance.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1408) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.010 THEFT OF SERVICES; TAMPERING.
   No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable system, may
intentionally or knowingly damage or cause to be damaged any wire, cable,
conduit, equipment or apparatus of the grantee, or commit any act with intent
to cause such damage, or tap, tamper with or otherwise connect any wire or
device to a wire, cable, conduit, equipment, apparatus or appurtenance of the
grantee with the intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the cable
communications system without authorization from or compensation to the
grantee, or obtain cable television or other communications service with intent
to cheat or defraud the grantee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1409(a)) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
GRANTING OF FRANCHISE
§ 112.020 GRANTING.
   (A)   In the event the grantor shall grant to the grantee a nonexclusive,
revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a cable
communications system within the franchise area, such franchise shall
constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable
communications system as required by the provisions of this chapter and the
franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall include those provisions of
the grantee's application for the franchise which are finally negotiated and
accepted by the grantor and grantee.
   (B)   The franchise shall be granted under the terms and conditions of this
chapter, consistent with state law, which are incorporated by this reference as
if fully set forth herein. In the event of conflict between the terms and
conditions of the franchise and the terms and conditions on which the grantor
can grant a franchise, the statutory requirements, without exception, shall
control.
   (C)   The franchise shall be made subject to the general ordinance
provisions now in effect or hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise
shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and laws of the
grantor regarding permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction.
('65 Code, § 7-8.401) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.021 FRANCHISE TERRITORY.
   The grantor may grant a franchise for all or any defined portion of the
city. The service area shall be the entire territory defined in the franchise
agreement. The initial service area shall be that portion of the franchise
territory scheduled to receive initial service as stated in the franchise
agreement.
('65 Code, § 7-8.402) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.022 USE OF PUBLIC STREETS AND WAYS.
   For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications system
in the franchise area, the grantee may erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the
public streets and ways within the franchise territory such wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and
appurtenant to the operation of the cable communications system. Prior to any
construction or alteration, however, the grantee in each case shall file plans
with the appropriate grantor agencies and local utility companies and receive
written approval before proceeding.
('65 Code, § 7-8.403) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.023 DURATION.
   The term of the franchise, and all rights, privileges, obligations and
restrictions pertaining thereto, shall be 15 years from the effective date of
the franchise, unless terminated sooner as provided in this chapter. The
effective date of the franchise ordinance shall be upon its final passage by
the grantor, unless the grantee fails to file, within fifteen (15) days after
the date of final passage, in the appropriate office of the grantor, a written
acceptance of the franchise, in which event the franchise shall be null and
void.
('65 Code, § 7-8.404) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 494-C.S, passed 1-
19-99)
§ 112.024 FRANCHISE NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The franchise shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the
right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable
communications system as the grantor deems appropriate.
('65 Code, § 7-8.405) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.025 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.
   (A)   Transfer of franchises. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter
shall be a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. Such franchise
shall not in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of,
including, but not limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation, receivership or other means, without the prior consent of the
grantor, and then only under such conditions as the grantor may establish. Such
consent as required by the grantor, however, shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
   (B)   Ownership or control. The grantee shall promptly notify the grantor of
any actual or proposed change in, transfer of or acquisition by any other party
of the control of the grantee. The word CONTROL, as used in this division,
shall not be limited to major stockholders but shall include actual working
control in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer
of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any
person or group of persons of 10% of the voting shares of the grantee. Every
change, transfer or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the
franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the grantor shall have
consented thereto which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the
purpose of determining whether the grantor shall consent to such change,
transfer or acquisition of control, the grantor may inquire into the
qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall
assist the grantor in any such inquiry.
   (C)   Foreclosures. The grantor agrees that any financial institution having
a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the
construction and/or operation of the franchise, prior to enforcing any right to
foreclose, shall have the right to notify the grantor that the financial
institution or its designee satisfactory to the grantor will take control and
operate the cable television system. Further, such financial institution shall
also submit a plan for such operation which will insure continued service and
compliance with all franchise obligations during the term the financial
institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall
not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year, unless
extended by the grantor in its discretion, and during such period of time the
financial institution shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer
the franchise to another grantee. If the grantor finds that such transfer,
after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and other public
interest qualities of the applicant, is satisfactory, the grantor will transfer
and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the public
interest. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
   (D)   Preferences for local organizations. The grantor reserves the right,
all other things being equal, in the event of a request for the approval of the
transfer of the ownership of the franchise by the grantee, other than pursuant
to division (C) of this section, to grant preference to any local not-for-
profit organization demonstrating a willingness and capability to meet the
terms and amount of the bona fide offer made to the grantee for the purchase of
the franchise and network. In no event, however, shall the grantor delay a
ruling on any request for the approval of the transfer of the ownership of the
franchise by the grantee for more than 30 days after the receipt of such
request by the grantor.
   (E)   Non-waivers of rights. The consent or approval of the grantor to any
transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights
of the grantor in and to the streets, and any transfer, by its terms, shall be
expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of the franchise.
   (F)   Substantial completion required. In the absence of extraordinary
circumstances, the grantor shall not approve any transfer or assignment of the
franchise prior to the substantial completion of the construction of the
proposed system.
   (G)   Obligations of successors in interest. In no event shall a transfer of
ownership or control be approved without the successor in interest becoming a
signatory to the franchise agreement.
('65 Code, § 7-8.406) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.026 RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Applications. The franchise may be renewed by the grantor upon an
application of the grantee pursuant to the procedures set forth in division (B)
of this section and in accordance with the then applicable laws.
   (B)   Procedures.
      (1)   At least 13 months prior to the expiration of the franchise, the
grantee shall inform the grantor in writing of its intent to seek the renewal
of the franchise.
      (2)   After giving public notice, the grantor shall proceed to determine
whether the grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the
franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, the grantor shall consider
the technical developments and performance of the system, the programming,
other services offered, the cost of services, and any other particular
requirements set forth in this chapter. Also, the grantor shall consider the
grantee's annual reports made to the grantor and the FCC. Industry performance
on a national basis shall also be considered. Provisions shall be made for
public comment.
      (3)   A four-month period shall be provided to determine the grantee's
eligibility for renewal.
      (4)   The grantor shall then prepare, within two months, any amendments
to this chapter the grantor believes necessary.
      (5)   If the grantor finds the grantee's performance satisfactory, a new
franchise may be granted pursuant to this chapter as amended for an additional
period of ten years. Subsequent renewal for ten-year periods may be applied for
by the grantee in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
      (6)   In the event the grantee is determined by the grantor to have
performed unsatisfactorily, new applicants may be sought and evaluated, and a
franchise award may be made by the grantor.
('65 Code, § 7-8.407) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.027 POLICE POWERS.
   (A)   In accepting the franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights
are subject to the police powers of the grantor to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and the grantee
agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the
grantor pursuant to such powers.
   (B)   Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other
present or future lawful exercise of the grantor's police powers shall be
resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of
general application in the jurisdiction or applies exclusively to the grantee
or cable communications system which contains provisions inconsistent with the
franchise shall prevail only if, upon such exercise, the grantor finds an
emergency exists constituting a danger to health, safety, property or general
welfare or such exercise is mandated by law.
('65 Code, § 7-8.408) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.028 FRANCHISE FEES.
   (A)   Annual franchise payments. The grantee of a franchise shall pay to the
grantor an annual fee in an amount as designated in the franchise agreement,
but in no event less than 5% of the annual gross revenues. Such payment shall
be in addition to any other and commence as of the effective date of the
franchise. In the event of a dispute, the grantor, if it so requests, shall be
furnished a statement of such payment by a certified public accountant
reflecting the total amounts of annual gross revenues and the charges,
deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment.
   (B)   Acceptance by the grantor. No acceptance of any payment by the grantor
shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim
the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee
pursuant to this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the
grantee.
   (C)   Failure to make required payments. In the event any franchise payment
or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in this
section, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation:
      (1)   An interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate
equal to the commercial prime interest rate in effect upon the due date; and
      (2)   A sum of money equal to 5% of the amount due in order to defray
those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor by reason of the
delinquent payment.
   (D)   Quarterly payments. The payment due the grantor under this section
shall be computed quarterly, for the preceding quarter, as of March 31, June
30, September 30 and December 31. Each quarterly payment shall be due and
payable no later than 30 days after such dates. Each payment shall be
accompanied by a brief report showing the basis for the computation and such
other relevant facts as may be required by the grantor.
   (E)   Credits. Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the
grantee shall initiate franchise fee payments to the grantor at the minimum
rate specified in the franchise agreement. Such initial payments shall be
credited against payments due in later years of the franchise inasmuch as they
exceed the actual franchise payments due during any year.
('65 Code, § 7-8.409) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.029 FORFEITURE OR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Grounds for revocation. The grantor reserves the right to revoke any
franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and
privileges associated with the franchise in the following circumstances, each
of which shall represent a default in breach under this chapter and the
franchise grant:
      (1)   If the grantee should default in the performance of any of its
material obligations under this chapter or under such documents, contracts and
other terms and provisions entered into by and between the grantor and the
grantee;
      (2)   If the grantee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the performance bond
required by this chapter;
      (3)   If any court of competent jurisdiction, the FCC, or any state
regulator body by rules, decisions or other action determines that any material
provision of the franchise documents, including this chapter, is invalid or
unenforceable prior to the commencement of the construction of the system;
      (4)   If the grantee should frequently violate any orders or rulings of
any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the
franchise, unless such orders or rulings are being contested by the grantee in
a court of competent jurisdiction;
      (5)   If the grantee ceases to provide services for any reason within the
control of the grantee over the cable communications system, the grantee shall
not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of
this chapter in any case in which the performance of any such provision is
prevented for reasons beyond the grantee's control. A fault shall not be deemed
to be beyond the grantee's control if committed by a corporation or other
business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling interest, whether held
directly or indirectly;
      (6)   If the grantee attempts to evade any of the provisions of this
chapter or the franchise agreement or practices any fraud or deceit upon the
grantor;
      (7)   If the grantee's construction schedule is delayed for more than 18
months later than the schedule contained in the franchise agreement; or
      (8)   If the grantee becomes insolvent or unable or unwilling to pay its
debts or is adjudged bankrupt.
   (B)   Procedures prior to revocation.
      (1)   The grantor may make a written demand that the grantee so comply
with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation or
correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the failure, refusal or
neglect of the grantee continues for a period of 60 days following such written
demand, the grantor may place its request for the termination of the franchise
upon a regular meeting agenda of the grantor. The grantor shall cause to be
served upon the grantee, at least ten days prior to the date of such meeting, a
written notice of its intent to request such termination and the time and place
of the meeting, notice of which shall be published at least once ten days
before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the franchise
area.
      (2)   The grantor shall hear any persons interested therein and shall
determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by
the grantee was with just cause.
      (3)   If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, the grantor shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and
manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.
      (4)   If the grantor shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by
the grantee was without just cause, the grantor, by resolution, may declare
that the franchise of the grantee shall be terminated and the bond forfeited
unless there be compliance by the grantee within such period as the grantor may
fix.
   (C)   Disposition of facilities. In the event a franchise expires, is
revoked, or otherwise terminated, the grantor may order the removal of the
system facilities from the franchise area within a reasonable period of time as
determined by the grantor or require the original grantee to maintain and
operate its network until a subsequent grantee is selected.
   (D)   Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that
shall be made by the grantee and shall leave all public ways and places in as
good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee's removal of its
equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical or telephone cable
wires or attachments. The grantor shall inspect and approve the condition of
the public ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and poles
after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provided for in this
chapter and the performance bond provided for shall continue in full force and
effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee
with the terms and conditions of this section.
   (E)   Restoration by the grantor; reimbursement of costs. In the event of
the failure of the grantee to complete any work required by division (C) and/or
division (D) of this section or any other work required by city laws within the
time as may be established and to the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor
may cause such work to be done, and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor the
cost thereof within 30 days after the receipt of an itemized list of such
costs, or the grantor may recover such costs through the security fund provided
by the grantee. The grantor shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable
relief to enforce the provisions of this section.
   (F)   Extended operation. Upon either the expiration or revocation of a
franchise, the grantor may require the grantee to continue to operate the cable
communications system for an extended period of time not to exceed 12 months
after the date of such expiration or revocation. The grantee, as trustee for
its successor in interest, shall continue to operate the cable communications
system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise
agreement and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the
services which may be provided at such time. The grantor shall be permitted to
seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section.
   (G)   Grantor's rights not affected. The termination and forfeiture of any
franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the grantor under the
franchise or any provision of law.
('65 Code, § 7-8.410) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.030 TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE FOLLOWING RECEIVERSHIP OR FORECLOSURE.
   (A)   The franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, at the option of the
grantor, shall cease and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver
or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in a
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless
such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the
expiration of said 120 days or unless:
      (1)   Such receiver or trustee, within 120 days after its election or
appointment, shall have fully complied with all the terms and provisions of
this chapter and the franchise granted and the receiver or trustee within said
120 days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and
      (2)   Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, shall execute an
agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises,
whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and
every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted.
   (B)   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant,
property and equipment of the grantee, or any part thereof, including or
excluding the franchise, the grantor may serve notice of termination upon the
grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise
granted and all rights and privileges of the grantee pursuant to this chapter
shall cease and terminate 30 days after the service of such notice, unless:
      (1)   The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise as
and in the manner provided in this chapter; and
      (2)   Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
grantor to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the
franchise.
('65 Code, § 7-8.411) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.031 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets
in the franchise territory or be allowed to operate without a franchise in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 7-8.412) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
FRANCHISE REGULATIONS
§ 112.040 REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
   The grantor shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the
provisions of this chapter and applicable laws. If the franchise area served by
the cable communications system also serves other contiguous or neighboring
communities, the grantor, at its sole option, may participate in a joint
regulatory agency, with delegated responsibility in the area of cable and
related communications.
('65 Code, § 7-8.501) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.041 REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITY.
   The grantor, if acting jointly with other grantors, may delegate the
following regulatory responsibilities:
   (A)   Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable communications
system franchise;
   (B)   The coordination of the operation of government and education
channels;
   (C)   Providing technical, programming and operation support to public
agency users, such as government departments, schools and health care
institutions;
   (D)   Establishing procedures and standards for institutional operations and
services, the use of dedicated channels, and the sharing of public facilities;
   (E)   Planning the expansion and growth of public cable services;
   (F)   Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other local, state or regional telecommunications networks; and
   (G)   Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications policies.
('65 Code, § 7-8.502) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.042 PUBLIC USAGE OF SYSTEMS.
   If so specified in the franchise agreement, the grantor may utilize a
portion of the cable communications system capacity, and associated facilities
and resources, to develop and provide cable services which will be in the
public interest. In furtherance of this purpose, the grantor may establish a
commission or public corporation to receive and allocate facilities, support
funds and other considerations provided by the grantee and/or others. Such
public corporation, if established, may be delegated the following
responsibilities:
   (A)   To receive and utilize or reallocate for utilization channel capacity,
facilities, funding and other support provided specifically for the public
usage of the cable communications system;
   (B)   To review the status and progress of each service developed for the
public benefit;
   (C)   To reallocate resources on a periodic basis to conform with changing
priorities and public needs; and
   (D)   To report to the grantor annually on the utilization of resources, the
new public services developed, and the benefits achieved for the city and its
residents.
('65 Code, § 7-8.503) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.043 RESERVATIONS BY GRANTOR.
   The grantor reserves the right, at its discretion, from time to time, to
determine if the entity described in §
112.042 of this subchapter is performing its purposes in a manner satisfactory
to the grantor, and, if it is not, the grantor may receive and reallocate all
or a portion of the channel capacity, operation appropriation, and capital
appropriation, including any facilities and equipment purchased previously with
such appropriation, to another entity. A new entity shall be required to comply
in all respects with the legal responsibilities which were assumed under §
112.042.
('65 Code, § 7-8.504) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.044 REGULATION OF SUBSCRIBER RATES.
   (A)   This section shall become effective only in the event that provisions
of Federal Law pertaining to the regulation of subscriber rates are modified by
subsequent legislation so as to permit such regulation by grantor.
   (B)   To the extent permitted by federal and state law, the grantor may
regulate the rates for basic cable service in accordance with the following
procedures.
   (C)   To the extent permitted in subsection (B) of this section, the grantor
shall have the authority to regulate the following rates, fees and charges:
      (1)   Rates for the provision of basic service to subscribers, whether
residential or commercial, including multiple tiers of basic service.
      (2)   Rates for the initial installation or the rental of one (1) set of
the minimum equipment which is necessary for the subscriber's receipt of basic
cable service.
      (3)   Any other rates for the cable services that may become subject to
local regulation.
   (D)   The grantee may petition the Council for a change in rates subject to
regulation by filing a proposed rate schedule with the City Clerk which
petition shall include the justification(s) for the proposed schedule. Said
petition shall be filed at least sixty (60) days prior to the requested
implementation date of the rate change. One (1) copy of the petition shall
remain on file with the City Clerk and be open for public inspection.
   (E)   Within sixty (60) days of the filing of the petition for rate change,
the Council may hold public hearing to consider the proposed rate change, at
which hearing all persons desiring to be heard, including the grantee, shall be
heard on any matter, including but not limited to, the performance of the
grantee, the grantee's cable services and the proposed new rates.
   (F)   Upon notice of any public hearing as provided in subsection (E) of
this section, the grantee shall notify its subscribers of the time, place and
subject matter of the public hearing by announcement on at least two (2)
channels of its cable system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. for
at least five (5) consecutive days prior to the hearing. In addition, notice of
any public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of local general
circulation at least once but not less than seven (7) days before the public
hearing.
   (G)   Within sixty (60) days after said hearing, the Council shall render a
written decision on the grantee's petition, either accepting, rejecting,
modifying or deferring the same and reciting the basis of its decision. The
Council may consider, iner alia, the following factors in approving or
disapproving the petition.
      (1)   The ability of the grantee to render all cable system services and
to derive a reasonable profit therefrom under the existing rate schedule and
under the proposed rate schedule;
      (2)   The revenues and profits derived from all cable system services;
      (3)   The efficiency of the grantee;
      (4)   The quality of the cable service offered by the grantee;
      (5)   The original cost of the cable system less depreciation;
      (6)   A fair rate of return with respect to the cost of borrowing and the
rates of return on investments having similar risks to that of cable
television;
      (7)   The extent to which the grantee has adhered to the terms of this
chapter and the applicable franchise agreement;
      (8)   Fairness to city residents, subscribers and users.
   The Council shall not consider any valuation based upon a franchise or the
grantee's goodwill and these items of value shall neither be amortized as an
expense nor shall a return be paid on them. Any reasonable expense incurred by
the grantor in the rate review process will be paid by the grantee.
   (H)   If no final decision on the grantee's petition has been rendered by
the Council within one hundred eighty (180) days after filing of grantee's
petition, the grantee's petition will be deemed approved, unless the one
hundred eighty (180) day period is extended by mutual agreement between the
grantee and the grantor.
   (I)   The grantee's petition for a rate increase shall include, but not be
limited to, the following financial reports, which shall reflect the operations
in the city:
      (1)   Balance sheet;
      (2)   Income statement;
      (3)   Cash flow statement;
      (4)   Statement of sources and applications of funds;
      (5)   Detailed supporting schedules of expenses, income, assets and other
items as may be required; and
      (6)   Statement of current and projected subscribers and penetration.
   The grantee's accounting records applicable to this cable system shall be
available for inspection by the grantor at all reasonable times. The grantor
shall have access to records of financial transactions for the purpose of
verifying burden rates or other indirect costs prorated to this particular
cable system.
   The documents listed above shall include sufficient detail and/or footnotes
as may be necessary to provide grantor with the information needed to make
accurate determinations as to the financial condition of the cable system. All
financial statements shall be certified as accurate by an officer of the
grantee.
('65 Code, § 7-8.505) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 494-C.S., passed 1-
19-99)
§ 112.045 ANNUAL REVIEWS OF PERFORMANCE.
   (A)   Within 90 days after the first anniversary of the effective date of
each franchise, and each year thereafter throughout the term of the franchise,
the grantor and grantee shall meet publicly to review the performance, quality
of service, and rates of the cable television system. The reports required by §
112.115 through
112.121 of this chapter regarding subscriber complaints, the records of
performance tests, and the opinion survey report shall be utilized as the basis
for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit complaints during the review
meetings, either orally or in writing, and such complaints shall be considered.
   (B)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of the system performance review
meetings, the grantor shall issue findings with respect to the adequacy of the
system performance and quality of service. If inadequacies are found, the
grantor may direct the grantee to correct the inadequacies within a reasonable
period of time.
   (C)   The failure of the grantee, after due notice, to correct the
inadequacies shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and the
grantor, at its sole discretion, may levy any penalty within the scope of this
chapter considered appropriate.
('65 Code, § 7-8.506) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.046 REVIEWS OF SYSTEM AND SERVICES.
   To provide for technological, economic and regulatory changes in the state
of the art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal procedures, to
promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the cable system, and to achieve a
continuing, advanced modern system, the grantor and grantee shall comply with
the following system and services review provisions:
   (A)   The grantor and grantee shall hold a system and services review
session on or about the third anniversary date of the franchise agreement.
Subsequent system and services review sessions shall be scheduled by the
grantor each three years thereafter. All such review sessions shall be open to
the public, and notice shall be given.
   (B)   Sixty days prior to the scheduled system and services review session,
the grantee shall submit a report to the grantor indicating the following:
      (1)   All cable system services which are being provided on an
operational basis, excluding tests and demonstrations, to cities in the United
States with populations over 10,000 which are not provided to the grantor; and
      (2)   A plan for the provision of such services, or a justification
indicating why such services are not feasible for the franchise area.
   (C)   Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review
sessions shall include, but shall not be limited to, the services provided, the
rate structure, free or discounted services, the application of new
technologies, system performance, programming, subscriber complaints, user
complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise, undergrounding
processes, developments in the law and regulatory constraints.
   (D)   Either the grantor or the grantee may select additional topics for
discussion at any such review session.
   (E)   Not later than 60 days after the conclusion of each system and
services review session, the grantor shall issue findings, including
specifically a listing of cable services not then being provided to the grantor
which are considered feasible. The grantor may direct the grantee to provide
such services within a reasonable time, under reasonable rates and conditions.
Failure to provide such directed services may be considered a breach of the
franchise, subject to penalties as provided in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 7-8.507) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.047 ACCESS CHANNEL MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Intent. In order to achieve utilization of access channels which are
in the best public interest, it is the intent of the grantor to ensure that the
access and community channels are governed by an independent, nonprofit entity,
termed the Access Channel Manager, so that such channels may be free of
censorship, open to all residents of the franchise area, and available for all
forms of public expression, community information, and the debate of public
issues.
   (B)   Functions. The Access Channel Manager shall have the following
functions:
      (1)   The responsibility for program production for, and the management
of, the public access channel and all other channels as may in the franchise
agreement be designated for community-based programming. Community channels may
include government and educational access channels, as designated in the
franchise agreement;
      (2)   To assure that the public access and community channels are made
available to all residents of the franchise area on a nondiscriminatory, first-
come, first-served basis;
      (3)   To assure that no censorship or control over the program content of
the public access and community channels exists, except as necessary to comply
with FCC prohibition of material which is obscene, or contains commercial
advertising, or conducts a lottery;
      (4)   To devise, establish, and administer all rules, regulations, and
procedures pertaining to the use and scheduling of the public access and
community channels;
      (5)   To prepare, in conjunction with the grantee, such regular or
special reports as may be required or desirable;
      (6)   To hire and supervise staff;
      (7)   To make all purchases of materials and equipment which may be
required;
      (8)   To develop additional sources of funding, such as foundation or
federal or state grants, to further community programming; and
      (9)   To perform such other functions relevant to the public and
community channels as may be appropriate.
   (C)   Access rules. The Access Channel Manager shall complete a set of rules
for the use of the access and community channels which rules shall be promptly
forwarded to the grantor. The rules shall be prepared in cooperation with the
grantee and confirmed by a contractual agreement between the Access Channel
Manager and the grantee. The rules, at a minimum, shall provide for:
      (1)   Access on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis for
all residents of the franchise area;
      (2)   The prohibition of advertising for commercial or political
purposes, as defined by the FCC;
      (3)   The prohibition of any presentation of lottery information or
obscene or indecent material;
      (4)   Public inspections of the logs of producers, which shall be
retained by the grantee for a period of two years;
      (5)   Procedures by which individuals or groups who violate any rule may
be prevented from further access to the channel; and
      (6)   The free use of such reasonable amounts of channel time,
cablecasting facilities, and technical support as are provided for in the
agreement between the Access Channel Manager and the grantee.
   (D)   Funding for the Access Channel Manager. It is the intent of the
grantor that the Access Channel Manager obtain partial funding from the grantee
to the extent defined in the franchise agreement.
   (E)   Grantee support for the Access Channel Manager. It is the intent of
the grantor that the grantee shall provide ongoing cooperation for the support
of the Access Channel Manager, with the detailed requirements to be specified
in the franchise agreement. As a minimum, the following shall be provided:
      (1)   The grantee shall provide a high-quality cablecasting studio
facility. Such studio shall be separate from the facilities used by the grantee
for local origination, although it may be housed in the same building.
Equipment in such studio shall be comparable to that used by the grantee for
local origination.
      (2)   The grantee shall provide operational and technical personnel to
support the Access Channel Manager in cablecasting activities, with the minimum
level of support as specified in the franchise agreement.
   (F)   Access Channel Manager reports to the grantor. The Access Channel
Manager shall provide a report to the grantor, at least annually, indicating
achievements in community-based programming and services. The Access Channel
Manager also shall provide a special report each time the grantee requests an
increase in rates, indicating the level and quality of the grantee's support,
during the period elapsed since any previous rate increase was implemented.
('65 Code, § 7-8.508) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS
§ 112.060 CONSTRUCTION BONDS.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the granting of the franchise and prior to the
commencement of any construction work by the grantee, the grantee shall file
with the grantor a construction and surety bond in the amount specified in the
franchise agreement in favor of the grantor and any other person who may claim
damages as a result of the breach of any duty by the grantee assured by such
bond. In the event the grantee shall faithfully comply with all applicable
statutes, laws and regulations governing the franchise, and shall faithfully
complete the construction of the facilities contemplated, and shall receive a
certificate of completion from the grantor, the obligation under such bond
shall be void; otherwise it shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   Such bond shall be in the form approved by the grantor and, among
other matters, shall cover the cost of the removal of any properties installed
by the grantee in the event the grantee shall default in the performance of its
franchise obligation.
   (C)   In no event shall the amount of the bond be construed to limit the
liability of the grantee for damages.
('65 Code, § 7-8.601) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.061 COMPLIANCE BONDS.
   (A)   In addition to the performance bond required by §
112.060 of this subchapter, the grantee, at least 30 days prior to the
commencement of the operation, shall file with the grantor a compliance bond in
the amount specified in the franchise agreement in favor of the grantor and any
other person who may be entitled to damages as a result of any occurrence in
the operation or termination of the cable communications system operated under
the franchise agreement, including the payments required to be made to the
grantor pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Such compliance bond shall be in the form approved by the grantor and,
among other matters, shall cover the cost of the removal of any properties
installed by the grantee in the event the grantee shall default in the
performance of its franchise obligation.
   (C)   In no event shall the amount of such bond be construed to limit the
liability of the grantee for damages.
('65 Code, § 7-8.602) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.062 SECURITY FUNDS.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise, the grantee
shall deposit into a bank account established by the grantor, and maintain on
deposit through the term of the franchise, the sum specified in the franchise
agreement as security for the faithful performance by the grantee of all the
provisions of the franchise, and compliance with all orders, permits and
directions of any agency of the grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or
defaults pursuant to this chapter, and the payment by the grantee of any
claims, liens and taxes due the grantor which arise by reason of the
construction, operation or maintenance of the system.
   (B)   Within 30 days after notice to the grantee that any amount has been
withdrawn by the grantor from the security fund pursuant to division (A) of
this section, the grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore
such security fund to the original amount.
   (C)   If the grantee fails, after ten days notice, to pay to the grantor any
taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay to the grantor, within such ten days,
any damages, costs or expenses which the grantor shall be compelled to pay by
reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the franchise;
or fails, after 30 days notice of such failure by the grantee to comply with
any provision of the franchise which the grantor reasonably determines can be
remedied by an expenditure of the security, the grantor may immediately
withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security
fund. Upon such withdrawal, the grantor shall notify the grantee of the amount
and date thereof.
   (D)   The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the
property of the grantor in the event the franchise is canceled by reason of the
default of the grantee or revoked for cause. The grantee, however, shall be
entitled to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains on
deposit at the expiration of the term of the franchise, or upon the termination
of the franchise at an earlier date, provided there is then no outstanding
default on the part of the grantee.
   (E)   The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the security fund
are in addition to all other rights of the grantor, whether reserved by this
chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right
with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the grantor may
have.
('65 Code, § 7-8.603) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.063 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   (1)   The grantee, by the acceptance of the franchise granted pursuant
to this chapter, shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the grantor, and its
officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, from any and all claims,
suits and judgments for damages in any way arising out of or through or alleged
to arise out of or through:
         (a)   The act of the grantor in granting the franchise; and
         (b)   The acts or omissions of the grantee and its servants, employees
or agents.
      (2)   Both such indemnifications shall cover such claims arising in tort,
contracts, violations of statutes, laws or regulations, or otherwise.
   (B)   In the event any such claim shall arise, the grantor shall tender the
defense thereof to the grantee; provided, however, the grantor in its sole
discretion may participate in the defense of such claims at its expense.
('65 Code, § 7-8.604) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.064 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise
insurance in amounts at least as follows:
      (1)   Worker's compensation insurance. Worker's compensation insurance in
such coverage as may be required by the worker's compensation insurance and
safety laws of the state and amendments thereto;
      (2)   Comprehensive general liability. Comprehensive general liability,
bodily injury, each person, $500,000; each occurrence, $2,000,000; and property
damage, each accident, $500,000; and
      (3)   Comprehensive automobile liability. Comprehensive automobile
liability, including non-ownership and hired car coverage, as well as owned
vehicles, with minimum limits as follows: bodily injury, each person, $500,000;
each occurrence, $2,000,000; and property damage, each occurrence, $300,000.
   (B)   The grantee shall furnish the grantor with copies of such insurance
policies and certificates of insurance.
   (C)   Such insurance policies shall name the grantor, and its officers,
boards, commissions, agents and employees, as additional insureds and shall
contain the following endorsement: “It is hereby understood and agreed that
this insurance policy may not be canceled by the surety or the intention not to
renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after receipt by the city by
registered mail of written notice of such intention to cancel or not renew.”
   (D)   The minimum amounts set forth in this section for such insurance shall
not be construed to limit the liability of the grantee to the grantor under the
franchise issued pursuant to this chapter to the amounts of such insurance.
('65 Code, § 7-8.605) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
REPORTS
§ 112.075 ANNUAL REPORTS.
   Within 60 days after the close of the grantee's fiscal year for the
franchise, the grantee shall submit a written annual report, in a form approved
by the grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information:
   (A)   A summary of the previous year's (or, in the case of the initial
report year, the initial year's) activities in the development of the cable
system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during
the reporting year and user participation;
   (B)   A financial statement, audited by and carrying an unqualified opinion
from, an independent certified public accountant, including a statement of
income, revenues, operating expenses, the value of the plant, annual capital
expenditures, depreciation with an attached depreciation schedule, interest
paid, taxes paid, balance sheets, and a statement of the sources and
application of funds, covering all years since the beginning of the franchise;
   (C)   A current statement of the costs of the construction by component
categories;
   (D)   A projected income statement, balance sheet, statement of the sources
and application of funds, and statement of projected construction for the next
two years;
   (E)   A reconciliation between previously projected construction and/or
financial estimates, as the case may be, and actual results;
   (F)   A list of the grantee's officers, members of its board of directors,
and other principals of the grantee;
   (G)   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding 5% or more of
the voting interest in the grantee and its parent, subsidiary, and affiliated
corporations and other entities, if any; and
   (H)   To the extent that money, other than profits, is paid to a parent,
subsidiary, or other person affiliated with the grantee, the amounts of such
payments and the basis for the computation of such amounts (for example, the
basis for computing any management fee or share of “home office” overhead).
('65 Code, § 7-8.1301) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.076 PLANT SURVEY REPORTS.
   Simultaneously with the annual report required by §
112.075 of this subchapter, the grantee shall submit to the grantor an annual
plant survey report which shall be a complete survey of the grantee's plant and
a full report thereon. The report shall include, but not be limited to, a
description and as-built maps of the portions of the franchise area which have
been cabled and have all services available, and appropriate engineering
evaluations, including suitable electronic measurements conducted in conformity
with such requirements, including supervision, as the grantor may prescribe.
The report shall be in sufficient detail to enable the grantor to ascertain
that the service requirements and technical standards of the FCC and/or the
franchise are achieved and maintained. At the grantor's request, but no more
often than once every three years, the grantee and grantor shall agree upon the
appointment of a qualified independent engineer to evaluate the technical
performance of the cable system. The cost of such evaluation shall be borne by
the grantee.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1302) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.077 COPIES OF FEDERAL AND STATE REPORTS.
   The grantee shall submit to the grantor copies of all pleadings,
applications, reports, communications, and documents of any kind, as well as
copies of all decisions, correspondence, and actions, submitted by the grantee
to any federal, state, and local courts, regulatory agencies, and other
government bodies relating to its cable television operations within the
franchise area. The grantee shall submit such documents to the grantor
simultaneously with their submission to such courts, agencies, and bodies and
within five days after their receipt from such courts, agencies, and bodies.
The grantee hereby waives any right to claim confidential, privileged, or
proprietary rights to such documents. However, information otherwise
confidential by law, and so designated by the grantee, which is submitted to
the grantor shall be retained in confidence by the grantor and its authorized
agents and shall not be made available for public inspection.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1303) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.078 PUBLIC REPORTS.
   A copy of each of the grantee's annual and other periodic public reports and
those of its parent, subsidiary, and affiliated corporations and other
entities, as the grantor requests and are reasonably appropriate, shall be
submitted to the grantor within five days following their issuance.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1304) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.079 COMPLAINT FILES AND REPORTS.
   (A)   An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the grantee of any
and all complaints regarding the cable system. A procedure shall be established
by the grantee by the time of the installation of the cable system to remedy
complaints quickly and reasonably to the satisfaction of the grantor. Complete
records of the grantee's actions in response to all complaints shall be kept.
Such files and records shall remain open to the public during normal business
hours.
   (B)   A summary of complaints, identifying the number and nature of
complaints and their disposition, in a form approved by the grantor, shall be
completed for each month and submitted to the grantor by the tenth day of the
succeeding month.
   (C)   The results of an annual opinion survey report which identifies
satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers with cable communications
services offered by the grantee shall be submitted to the grantor no later than
two months after the end of the grantee's fiscal year. The surveys required to
make such reports shall be conducted in conformity with such requirements,
including supervision, as the grantor may prescribe.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1305) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.080 PRIVACY REPORTS.
   The grantee shall submit to the grantor an annual report indicating the
degree of compliance with the privacy provisions of §§
112.115 through
112.121 of this chapter and all steps taken to assure that the privacy rights
of individuals have been protected.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1306) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.081 MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS.
   The grantee shall submit to the grantor such other information or reports in
such forms and at such times as the grantor may request or require.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1307) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.082 INCOME TAX RETURNS.
   The grantee shall submit to the grantor copies of all income tax returns and
reports which are filed with local, state, or federal governments pertaining to
its cable system in the franchise area within five days after the date on which
such reports are filed.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1308) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.083 INSPECTION OF FACILITIES.
   The grantee shall allow the grantor to make inspections of any of the
grantee's facilities and equipment at any time upon one day's prior notice or,
in the case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice, to allow the
grantor to verify the accuracy of any submitted report.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1309) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.084 BUSINESS OFFICES AND FILES.
   The grantee shall maintain an office within five (5) miles of the city and
shall keep complete and accurate books and records. The grantor shall have the
right to inspect at any time during normal business hours all books, records,
maps, plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint logs,
performance test results, and other like materials of the grantee which relate
to the operation of the cable system. Access to such records shall not be
denied by the grantee on the basis that such records contain confidential,
privileged, or proprietary information.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1310) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 494-C.S, passed 1-
19-99)  
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.085 REPORTS OPEN TO PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   All reports required by this subchapter, except as otherwise provided, shall
be available for public inspection in the City Clerk's office during normal
business hours.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1311) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.086 FAILURE TO REPORT.
   The refusal, failure, or neglect of the grantee to file any of the reports
required by this subchapter, or as the grantor may direct, shall be deemed a
material breach of the franchise and shall subject the grantee to all penalties
and remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the grantor under the
franchise or otherwise.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1312) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.087 FALSE STATEMENTS.
   Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made
knowingly by the grantee in any report required by the franchise shall be
deemed a material breach of the franchise and shall subject the grantee to all
penalties and remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the grantor
under the franchise or otherwise.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1313) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.088 COST OF REPORTS.
   All reports and records required by this subchapter shall be furnished at
the sole expense of the grantee.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1314) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS
§ 112.100 REMEDIES FOR FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   If the grantee shall fail to perform any obligation under the
franchise, or fail to do so in a timely manner, the grantor, at its option and
in its sole discretion, may:
      (1)   Assess against the grantee penalties of up to $5,000 per day for
construction delays and up to $1,000 per day for all other violations, which
the grantee hereby agrees to pay, such assessment to be levied against the
security fund provided for in this chapter and collected by the grantor
immediately upon such assessment. The grantor and grantee agree that the amount
of such assessment shall be deemed, without proof, to represent the liquidation
of damages actually sustained by the grantor by reason of the grantee's failure
to perform. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by the grantor of any
other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or under applicable laws,
including, without limitation, its right to recover from the grantee such
additional damages, losses, costs, and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by the grantor by reason of, or
arising out of, such breach of the franchise. Such provision for the assessment
of damages is intended by the parties to be separate and apart from the
grantor's right to enforce the provisions of the construction and compliance
bonds provided for in §§
112.060 through
112.064 of this chapter and is intended to provide compensation to the grantor
for actual damages;
      (2)   For violations considered by the grantor to have materially
degraded the quality of service, order and direct the grantee to issue rebates
or reduce its rates and/or charges to subscribers in an amount solely
determined by the grantor to provide monetary relief substantially equal to the
reduced quality of service resulting from the grantee's failure to perform;
      (3)   Require the grantee to cure all defaults and breaches of its
obligations pursuant to this chapter before the grantee is entitled to increase
any rate or charge to subscribers pursuant to this chapter;
      (4)   Terminate the franchise for any of the causes set forth in §§
112.020 through
112.031 of this chapter; and
      (5)   No penalty shall be imposed by the grantor against the grantee for
any violation of the franchise without the grantee being afforded due process
of law as provided for in §
112.101 of this subchapter.
   (B)   The grantor, in its sole judgment and discretion, may impose any or
all of the measures set forth in this section against the grantee, which shall
be in addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies the grantee has
under the franchise or under any applicable law.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1201) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.101 REMEDIES FOR FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS; PROCEDURE.
   In the event the grantor determines that the grantee has violated any
provision of the franchise, any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this
chapter, or any applicable federal, state, or local law, the grantor may make a
written demand on the grantee that it remedy such violation. If the violation,
breach, failure, refusal, or neglect is not remedied to the satisfaction of the
grantor within 30 days following such demand, the grantor shall determine
whether or not such violation, breach, failure, refusal, or neglect by the
grantee was excusable or inexcusable in accordance with the following
procedure:
   (A)   A public hearing shall be held, and the grantee shall be provided with
an opportunity to be heard upon 30 days written notice to the grantee of the
time and the place of the hearing and the allegations of the franchise
violations.
   (B)   If, after notice is given and at the grantee's option a full public
proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation, breach,
failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was excusable as provided in §
112.102 of this subchapter, the grantor shall direct the grantee to correct or
remedy the same within such additional time, in such manner, and upon such
terms and conditions as the grantor may direct.
   (C)   If, after notice is given and at the grantee's option a full public
proceeding is held, the grantor determines that such violation, breach,
failure, refusal, or neglect was inexcusable, the grantor may assess a penalty
or remedy in accordance with §
112.100 of this subchapter.
   (D)   If, after notice is given and at the grantee's option a full public
proceeding is held, the grantor declares the franchise or any renewal thereof
breached, the parties may pursue their remedies pursuant to the franchise or
any other remedy, legal or equitable.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1202) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.102 FORCE MAJEURE; INABILITY OF GRANTEES TO PERFORM.
   In the event the grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions,
obligations, or requirements of the franchise is prevented or impaired due to
any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such
inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused, and no penalties or
sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof provided the grantee has
notified the grantor in writing within 30 days of its discovery of the
occurrence of such an event. Such causes beyond the grantee's reasonable
control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include, but not be limited to,
acts of God and civil emergencies.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1203) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
§ 112.115 OPEN BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   The grantee shall maintain an office within five (5) miles of the city and
manage all of its operations in accordance with a policy of totally open books
and records. The grantor shall have the right to inspect at any time during
normal business hours all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns,
financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and
other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the
franchise. Access to such records shall not be denied by the grantee on the
basis that such records contain "proprietary" information.
('65 Code, § 7-8.901) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 494-C.S., passed 1-
19-99)  
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.116 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Required. The grantee at all times shall maintain:
      (1)   A record of all complaints received and interruptions or
degradation of service experienced for the preceding three years;
      (2)   A full and complete set of plans, records, and as-built maps
showing the exact location of all cable communications system equipment
installed or in use in the franchise territory, exclusive of subscriber service
drops; and
      (3)   When not otherwise prescribed in this chapter, all matters required
to be filed with the grantor shall be filed with the City Clerk.
   (B)   Other records. The grantor may impose reasonable requests for
additional information, records and documents from time to time.
   (C)   Inspections of property and records. At all reasonable times, the
grantee shall permit an examination by any duly authorized representative of
the grantor of all franchise property, together with any appurtenant property
of the grantee situated within or without the franchise territory. The grantee
shall also permit any duly authorized representative of the grantor to examine
and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the
grantee or under its control concerning the operations, affairs, transactions
or property of the grantee related to its franchise. If any of such maps or
records are not kept in the local office, or upon reasonable request made
available to the grantor, and if the grantor shall determine that an
examination of such maps or records is necessary or appropriate to the
performance of any of its duties, then all travel and maintenance expenses
necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee.
('65 Code, § 7-8.902) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.117 MAINTENANCE AND COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   (1)   The grantee shall maintain an office in the franchise territory
which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed
toll-free telephone, and be so operated to receive subscriber complaints and
requests for repairs or adjustments on a 24-hour per day basis. A written log
shall be maintained listing all complaints and their disposition.
      (2)   The grantee shall provide a state-of-the-art telephone answering
system to receive all construction and service complaints which will assure
that only a minimum of callers shall receive busy signals when telephoning the
office. A sufficient number of customer service representatives will be
provided so that callers are not required to wait beyond reasonable time for
such service. The telephone number of the local office shall be listed in the
telephone directories serving the franchise area. The telephone service shall
be operable to accept complaints 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Inquiries
and complaint calls shall be accepted in person over the telephone 24 hours a
day, seven days a week.
   (B)   The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such
interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur
during periods of minimum use of the system. A written log shall be maintained
for all service interruptions.
   (C)   The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians capable of
responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service within 24 hours
after the receipt of the complaint or request. No charge shall be made to the
subscriber for such service.
   (D)   The grantee shall furnish each subscriber, at the time service is
installed, written instructions which clearly set forth procedures, furnish
information concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints,
including the name, address, and local telephone number of the employee or
employees or agent to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed,
and furnish information concerning the grantor's office responsible for the
administration of the franchise, with the address and telephone number of the
office.
('65 Code, § 7-8.903) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.118 RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, or sex. The grantee shall
comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state, and local laws
and regulations and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination which are hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter
by reference.
   (B)   The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity
requirements of the FCC and state and local regulations as amended from time to
time.
   (C)   No signal of a Class IV cable communications channel shall be
transmitted from a subscriber terminal for the purpose of monitoring individual
viewing patterns or practices without the express written permission of the
subscriber. The request for such permission shall be contained in a separate
document with a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the
permission in full knowledge of its provision. Such written permission shall be
for a limited period of time, not to exceed one year, which shall be renewable
at the option of the subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's
failure to provide or renew such an authorization. The authorization shall be
revocable at any time by the subscriber without a penalty of any kind
whatsoever. Such authorization is required for each type of classification of
Class IV cable television activity planned; provided, however, the grantee
shall be entitled to conduct system-wide or individually addressed “sweeps” for
the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path
transmission, or billing for pay services.
   (D)   The grantee, or any of its agents or employees, without the specific
written authorization of the subscriber involved, shall not sell or otherwise
make available to any party:
      (1)   Lists of the names and addresses of such subscribers; or
      (2)   Any list which identifies the viewing habits of subscribers.
   (E)   The entire system of the grantee shall be operated in a manner
consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility of its
facilities, equipment, channels, studios, and other services to all citizens,
businesses, public agencies, and other entities having a legitimate use for the
network, and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. Allocations of
the use of such facilities shall be made according to the rules or decisions of
the grantee and any regulatory agencies affecting the same.
('65 Code, § 7-8.904) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.119 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving
service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are
honored. In the event the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell
the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to
renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers
receive continuous, uninterrupted service, regardless of the circumstances.
      (2)   In the event of a change of franchisee, or in the event a new
operator acquires the system, the grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new
franchisee, or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all
subscribers. During such period the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues
for any period during which it operates the system and shall be entitled to
reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system.
   (B)   In the event the grantee fails to operate the system for seven
consecutive days without the prior approval of the grantor or without just
cause, the grantor, at its option, may operate the system or designate an
operator until such time as the grantee restores service under conditions
acceptable to the grantor or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor
is required to fulfill such obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall
reimburse the grantor for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues
from the system received by the grantor which are the result of the grantee's
failure to perform.
   (C)   In the event that interruption of service is required by the grantee
for modifications, repairs, or the like, the interruption shall be as brief as
possible and at times when the viewing audience is at a minimum. Records of
such interruptions shall be kept.
('65 Code, § 7-8.905) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.120 GRANTEE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms, and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform
its obligations under the franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to
each and all of its customers; provided, however, such rules, regulations,
terms, and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter or applicable state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. Such
rules, regulations, terms, and conditions shall be submitted to the grantor for
its review, and grantor approval shall be required prior to their becoming
effective.
('65 Code, § 7-8.906) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.121 RIGHTS OF TENANTS OF MULTIPLE-DWELLING UNITS.
   The grantee shall be required to provide service to tenants in individual
units of multiple housing facilities with all services offered to other
dwelling units within the franchise area so long as the owner of the facility
consents in writing, if requested by the grantee, unless the requirements of
consent is removed pursuant to state or federal law, to the following:
   (A)   The grantee's providing of the service to units of the facility;
   (B)   Reasonable conditions and times for the installation, maintenance, and
inspection of the system on the facility premises;
   (C)   Reasonable conditions promulgated by the grantee to protect the
grantee's equipment ; and
   (D)   Nondiscrimination in rental charges, or otherwise, between tenants who
receive cable service and those who do not.
('65 Code, § 7-8.907) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 494-C.S., passed 1-
19-99)
Penalty, see § 112.999
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS
§ 112.130 SYSTEM DESIGN.
   The cable communications system shall be constructed in accordance with the
design requirements contained in the franchise agreement.
('65 Code, § 7-8.701) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.131 GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE.
   The grantee shall design and construct the home subscriber network in such
manner as to have the eventual capability to pass by every single-family
dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling unit, agency and business establishment
within the area of the franchise. Service shall be provided to subscribers in
accordance with the schedules and line extension policies specified in the
franchise agreement.
('65 Code, § 7-8.702) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.132 CABLECASTING FACILITIES.
   The grantee shall provide cablecasting facilities in accordance with the
requirements of the franchise agreement.
('65 Code, § 7-8.703) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.133 SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The grantee shall comply with the requirements of the system
construction schedule contained in the franchise agreement.
   (B)   Service need not be provided where power and telephone utilities are
not available.
   (C)   The grantee shall provide a detailed construction plan indicating the
progress schedule, area construction maps, test plans and projected dates for
offering service. In addition, the grantee shall update such information on a
monthly basis, showing specifically whether schedules are being met and the
reasons for any delay.
   (D)   Failure to begin construction within one year after the award of the
franchise shall be grounds for franchise revocation at the option of the
grantor.
('65 Code, § 7-8.704) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.134 DELAYS IN CONSTRUCTION.
   The grantor, at its sole option, may apply any of the following in
connection with delays in system construction:
   (A)   A reduction in the duration of the franchise on a month-for-month
basis for each month of delay exceeding six months;
   (B)   The forfeiture of construction bonds and/or the assessment of a
penalty not to exceed $5,000 per day levied against the security fund for
delays exceeding one year; and
   (C)   The termination of the franchise for delays exceeding 18 months.
('65 Code, § 7-8.705) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.135 PROVISION OF SERVICE.
   After service has been established by activating trunk cables for any area,
the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within such area
within 30 days after the date of the request.
('65 Code, § 7-8.706) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.136 UNDERGROUNDING CABLES.
   The undergrounding of cables is encouraged. In any event, cables shall be
installed underground at the grantee's cost where existing utilities are
already underground. Previously installed aerial cable shall be undergrounded
in concert, and on a cost-sharing basis, with other utilities when such other
utilities may convert from aerial to underground construction.
('65 Code, § 7-8.707) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.137 UNDERGROUNDING IN NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   In cases of new construction or property development where utilities
are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give the
grantee reasonable notice of such construction or development and of the
particular date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee's
installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided
at the grantee's expense. The grantee shall also provide specifications as
needed for trenching.
   (B)   The costs of trenching and easements required to bring service to the
development shall be borne by the developer or property owner; except that if
the grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals
within five working days after the date the trenches are available, as
designated in the notice given by the developer or property owner, then, should
the trenches be closed after the five day period, the cost of new trenching
shall be borne by the grantee. Except for the notice of the particular date on
which trenching will be available to the grantee, any notice provided to the
grantee by the grantor of a preliminary plat request shall satisfy the
requirement of reasonable notice if sent to the local general manager or system
engineer of the grantee prior to the approval of the preliminary plat request.
('65 Code, § 7-8.708) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.138 UNDERGROUNDING FOR MULTIPLE-DWELLING UNITS.
   In cases of multiple-dwelling units serviced by aerial utilities, the
grantee shall make every effort to minimize the number of individual aerial
drop cables, giving preference to the undergrounding of multiple drop cables
between the pole and the dwelling unit. The burden of proof shall be upon the
grantee to demonstrate why the undergrounding of drop cables is technically or
economically unfeasible.
('65 Code, § 7-8.709) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.139 STREET OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   The grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other
facilities whenever possible and shall not construct or install any new,
different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities, whether on public
property or on privately-owned property, until the written approval of the
grantor is obtained, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the grantee shall
be a vested interest, and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified
by the grantee at its own expense whenever the grantor determines that the
public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
   (B)   The grantee shall notify the grantor at least ten days prior to the
intention of the grantee to commence any construction in any street. The
grantor shall cooperate with the grantee in granting any permit required,
providing such grant and subsequent construction by the grantee shall not
unduly interfere with the use of such streets, and that proposed construction
shall be done in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the laws of the
grantor.
   (C)   All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed
and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in
a safe, adequate and substantial condition and in good order and repair. The
grantee, at all times, shall employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures
and accidents which are likely to cause damages, injuries or nuisances to the
public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be
used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all
members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by
the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual
travel on such public way.
   (D)   The grantee, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the
grantor, shall restore to the standards and specifications of the grantor any
damage or disturbance caused to any public way as a result of operations or
construction on behalf of the grantee.
   (E)   Whenever, in case of fire or other disaster, it becomes necessary in
the judgment of the grantor to remove any of the grantee's facilities, no
charge shall be made by the grantee against the grantor for restoration and
repair, unless such acts amount to gross negligence by the grantor.
   (F)   The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property
at its own expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities,
subject to the supervision and direction of the grantor. The trimming of trees
on private property shall require the written consent of the property owner.
   (G)   The grantee, at its expense, shall protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate or remove any property of the grantee when, in the opinion
of the grantor, the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public
safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or
establishment of street grades, installations of sewers, drains, water pipes,
power lines, signal lines, transportation facilities, tracks or any other type
of structure or improvement by governmental agencies, whether acting in
governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public
improvement, including, but not limited to, the movement of buildings, urban
renewal and redevelopment, and any general program under which the grantor
shall undertake to cause all such properties to be located beneath the surface
of the ground. The grantee in all cases shall have the privilege, subject to
the corresponding obligations, to abandon any property of the grantee in place.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed a taking of the property of the
grantee, and the grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of
anything set forth in this section.
   (H)   Upon the failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any
work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter to be done in any
street, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the grantor, the
grantor, at its option, may cause such work to be done, and the grantee shall
pay to the grantor the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the
grantor to the grantee within 30 days after the receipt of such itemized
report.
   (I)   The grantee shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless absolutely
necessary, and only after written permission has been given by the grantor.
   (J)   The grantee shall install in conduit all cable passing under any major
roadway.
('65 Code, § 7-8.710) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.140 CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Construction standards.
      (1)   Compliance with safety codes. All construction practices shall be
in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and
Health Act of 1970, and any amendments thereto, as well as all state and local
codes where applicable.
      (2)   Compliance with electrical codes. All installations of electronic
equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance
with the provisions of the Basic BOCA Electrical Code as amended.
      (3)   Antennas and towers. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall
be designed for the proper loading as specified in Electronics Industry
Association's R.S.-2-22A Specifications.
      (4)   Compliance with aviation requirements. Antenna supporting
structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in
accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation
Administration and all other applicable state and local codes and regulations.
      (5)   Construction standards and requirements. All of the grantee's plant
and equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, head-end and
distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wires,
cables, coaxial cables, fixtures and appurtenances, shall be installed,
located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired,
maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices,
performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel, so as not to
endanger or interfere with improvements the city may deem proper to make, or to
interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on municipal
properties.
      (6)   Safety and nuisance requirements. The grantee at all times shall
employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted
methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause
damages, injuries or nuisances to the public.
   (B)   Technical standards. The cable communications system shall meet all
technical and performance standards contained in the franchise agreement.
   (C)   Test and compliance procedure. The grantee shall submit, within 60
days after the effective date of the franchise agreement, a detailed test plan
describing the methods and schedules for testing the cable communications
system on an ongoing basis to determine compliance with the provisions of the
franchise agreement. The tests for basic subscriber television services shall
be performed periodically, at intervals no greater than six months, on a
minimum of 20 subscriber television receivers located throughout the service
area. At least eight of such locations shall be at the far end of the
distribution trunk cables. The tests shall be witnessed by representatives of
the grantor, and written test reports shall be submitted to the grantor. If
more than 10% of the locations tested fail to meet the performance standards,
the grantee shall be required to indicate what corrective measures have been
taken, and the entire test shall be repeated for at least 20 different
locations. A second failure of more than 10% may result, at the grantor's
option, in an order to reduce subscriber rates due to degraded service.
   (D)   Special tests. At any time after the commencement of service to
subscribers, the grantor may require additional tests, full or partial repeat
tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's
terminal. Requests for such additional tests shall be made on the basis of
complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or
significant noncompliance, and such tests will be limited to the particular
matter in controversy. The grantor shall endeavor to so arrange its requests
for such special tests so as to minimize hardships or inconvenience to the
grantee or to subscribers.
('65 Code, § 7-8.711) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.141 AREAWIDE INTERCONNECTION.
   (A)   Interconnection required. The grantee shall interconnect origination
and access channels of the cable communications system with any or all other
cable systems in adjacent areas upon the directive of the grantor. The
interconnection of systems shall permit the interactive transmission and
reception of program material and may be done by direct cable connection,
microwave link, satellite or other appropriate method.
   (B)   Interconnection procedure.
      (1)   Upon receiving the directive of the grantor to interconnect, the
grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected system
or systems. The cost shall be borne by both grantees, in the proportion of the
number of channels received to the total number of channels transmitted and
received, under the assumption that benefits accrue primarily through the
receipt of additional channels.
      (2)   In the case of regional or state-wide interconnection, the same
principle shall apply.
   (C)   Relief. The grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to
interconnect, or the grantor may rescind its order to interconnect upon a
petition by the grantee to the grantor. The grantor may grant such request if
it finds that the grantee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain
an approval from the system or systems of the proposed interconnection or that
the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable
increase in subscriber rates.
   (D)   Cooperation required. The grantee shall cooperate with any
interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or city,
county, state or federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established
for the purpose of regulating, financing or otherwise providing for the
interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the franchise
territory.
   (E)   Initial technical requirements to assure future interconnection
capability.
      (1)   All cable communications systems receiving franchises to operate
within the franchise territory shall use the same frequency allocations for
commonly provided television signals.
      (2)   The grantee shall provide local origination equipment which is
compatible throughout the area so that video cassettes or video tapes can be
shared by various systems.
('65 Code, § 7-8.712) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.142 PARENTAL CONTROL LOCKS.
   The grantee shall provide subscribers, upon request, at no charge, with a
parental control locking device or digital code which permits inhibiting the
viewing of selected channels.
('65 Code, § 7-8.713) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
SERVICE PROVISIONS
§ 112.155 SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED.
   The grantee shall provide, as a minimum, the services listed in the
franchise agreement. Such services shall not be reduced without the prior
approval of the grantor.
('65 Code, § 7-8.801) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.156 BASIC SUBSCRIBER TELEVISION SERVICES (BSTS).
   The basic subscriber television service shall include the FCC required
services, the distant television broadcast signals, the imported non-broadcast
signals, and the provision of all other cablecast open-channel signals. Such
service shall be provided to all subscribers at the established BSTS monthly
subscription rates.
('65 Code, § 7-8.802) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.157 BASIC SUBSCRIBER RADIO SERVICE (BSRS).
   The basic subscriber radio service shall include the provision of all audio
services designated in the franchise agreement, including broadcast FM radio
and cablecast FM signals. Such service shall be provided to all subscribers at
the established BSRS monthly subscription rates.
('65 Code, § 7-8.803) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.158 INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE (IS).
   If specified in the franchise agreement, the institutional service shall
include the provision of transmission and/or reception services to
institutional users on a leased channel basis at established IS rates. Such
services may include the distribution of video or non-video signals.
('65 Code, § 7-8.804) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.159 ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIBER SERVICES.
   Additional subscriber services, not included in the BSTS and BSRS services
specified in this subchapter, may be provided, either within the basic
subscription rates, or on a premium basis, subject to applicable FCC
regulations.
('65 Code, § 7-8.805) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.160 LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNELS.
   The grantee shall operate the cablecasting studios on a high-quality,
professional basis for the purpose of providing cablecast programming
responsive to local needs and interests. The emphasis for the local origination
channels shall be on providing programming which is unavailable to viewers on
broadcast television channels.
('65 Code, § 7-8.806) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.161 GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS.
   The grantee shall provide at least one channel for the use of the grantor at
no charge to the grantor. The grantee shall make every effort to provide advice
and technical expertise to aid in the utilization of such channel.
('65 Code, § 7-8.807) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.162 EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS.
   The grantee shall provide at least one channel for the use of the local
educational institutions at no charge. The grantee shall make every effort to
provide advice and technical expertise to aid in the utilization of such
channel.
('65 Code, § 7-8.808) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.163 PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS.
   The grantee shall make at least one channel available to the public at no
charge. The public access channel shall be managed and operated by an
independent, nonprofit entity, the Access Channel Manager, as described in this
chapter. The grantee shall make available for programmers of the public access
channel the facilities listed in the franchise agreement under the terms of a
mutual agreement with the Access Channel Manager.
('65 Code, § 7-8.809) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.164 COMMUNITY ACCESS CHANNELS (CLOSED-CIRCUIT).
   If the cable communications system includes a closed-circuit institutional
network, the grantee shall make at least one two-way channel available for
community and public use at no charge. The community access channel shall be
managed and operated by the Access Channel Manager. The grantee shall make
available for programmers of the community access channel the facilities listed
in the franchise agreement under the terms of a mutual agreement with the
Access Channel Manager.
('65 Code, § 7-8.810) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.165 LEASED ACCESS CHANNELS.
   The grantee shall make available for lease, on a nondiscriminatory basis,
the number of channels specified in the franchise agreement. The grantee shall
not use its franchise position to deny leased access to others who may wish to
offer a non-entertainment service competitive to a service provided by the
grantee. All leased channel service revenues at the subscriber level shall be
included in the gross revenues subject to the franchise fee. Such revenues
shall include monthly or per-use fees charged to users of services by lessees,
but shall not include direct revenues generated by the sale of specific
products offered by such services.
('65 Code, § 7-8.811) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.166 UNIVERSAL CONNECTIONS.
   The grantor may require that all dwelling units within the franchise area be
connected physically to the cable system by the grantee by means of drop cables
terminating at each dwelling unit, whether or not the occupants of the dwelling
unit desire to subscribe to cable service. The cost and charges shall be
determined by the grantor at the time such connection is required. The grantee
shall be entitled to recover the incremental cost of providing a universal
connection.
('65 Code, § 7-8.812) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR
§ 112.175 RIGHT TO PURCHASE SYSTEMS.
   The grantor, in any lawful manner and upon the payment of a fair valuation,
may lawfully purchase, condemn, acquire, take over, and hold the property and
plant of the grantee in whole or in part. If such purchase or taking over shall
be upon the revocation of the franchise or at the expiration of the term of the
franchise, such valuation shall not include any sum for the value of the
franchise or grant under which such plant and property is being operated.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1001) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.176 RIGHT TO INSPECT RECORDS.
   (A)   There shall be kept in the grantor's office a separate record for the
franchise, which record shall show the following information. The grantee shall
provide such information in such form as may be required by the grantor for
such records:
      (1)   The true and entire cost of the construction of equipment, of
maintenance, and of the administration and operation thereof; the amount of
stock issued, if any; the amount of cash paid in, the number of par value
shares, and the amount and character of indebtedness, if any; the rate of taxes
and the dividends declared; the character and amount of all fixed charges; the
allowance, if any, for interest, wear and tear, or depreciation; and all
amounts and sources of income;
      (2)   The amount collected annually from the grantor treasury and the
character and extent of the service rendered therefor to the grantor; and
      (3)   The amount collected annually from other users of service and the
character and extent of the service rendered therefor to them.
   (B)   The books of records kept by the grantor shall be open to public
examination at any time during the business hours of the grantor's office. The
information, in addition to any further data which may be required by the
grantor, shall be furnished by the grantee to the grantor upon request and at
the grantee's own cost and expense.
   (C)   The grantor shall have the right to inspect all books, records, maps,
plans, income tax returns, financial statements, and other like material of the
grantee at any time during normal business hours.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1002) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 112.999
§ 112.177 RIGHT TO INSPECT CONSTRUCTION.
   The grantor shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation
work performed subject to the provisions of the franchise and to make such
tests as the grantor shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms
of the franchise and other pertinent provisions of law.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1003) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.178 RIGHT TO INTERVENE IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS.
   The grantor shall have the right of intervention in any suit or proceeding
to which the grantee is a party, and the grantee shall not oppose such
intervention by the grantor.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1004) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.179 RIGHT TO REQUIRE THE REMOVAL OF PROPERTY.
   At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon
its revocation or expiration as provided for in this chapter, the grantor shall
have the right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all
portions of the cable communications system from all streets and public ways
within the franchise area.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1005) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE GRANTEE
§ 112.190 RIGHTS OF GRANTEES.
   Should the grantee become dissatisfied with any material decision or ruling
of the grantor pertaining to cable communications matters, the grantee may
pursue such other remedies as are available, including the bringing of action
in any court of competent jurisdiction.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1101) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS
§ 112.200 FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS.
   Applicants for a franchise shall submit to the grantor written applications
utilizing the standardized format provided by the grantor, at the time and
place designated by the grantor for accepting applications, and including the
designated application fee.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1501) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
§ 112.201 FRANCHISE PROCESSING COSTS.
   Costs to be borne by the grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to,
all costs of the publication of notices prior to any public meeting provided
for pursuant to the franchise, the publication of the ordinance adopting this
chapter, and any cost not covered by the application fees incurred by the
grantor in its study, preparation of proposal documents, evaluation of all
applications, and processing of the franchise agreement.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1502) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
§ 112.300 STATE FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person may construct, operate, maintain or repair a cable system or
video service provider’s network in the city without first obtaining a state
franchise therefor.
   (B)   A state franchise shall not convey rights other than as specified in
this chapter or in the California Public Utilities Code or other applicable
law; and no rights shall pass by implication.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided by the California Public Utilities Code,
a state franchise shall not include, or be a substitute for:
      (1)   Compliance with generally applicable requirements for the privilege
of transacting and carrying on a business within the city, including, but not
limited to, compliance with the conditions that the city may establish before
facilities may be constructed for, or providing non-video services;
      (2)   Any permit or authorization, other than a state franchise, required
in connection with operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property,
including, but not limited to, encroachment permits, street work permits and
street cut permits; and
      (3)   Any permit, agreement or authorization for occupying any other
property of the city or of any private person to which access is not
specifically granted by the state franchise.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in the California Public Utilities Code,
a state franchise shall not relieve a franchisee of its duty to comply with all
laws, including the ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other laws
of the city, and every state franchisee shall comply with the same. The city
reserves its rights to the lawful exercise of police and other powers the city
now has or may later obtain.
   (E)   The city reserves the right to construct, operate, maintain or repair
its own cable system or video service provider network.
(Ord. 580-C.S., passed 11-4-08)
§ 112.301 STATE FRANCHISE FEE AND VIDEO SERVICE FEES FOR PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL AND
GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.
   As permitted by Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 5870, the city hereby continues and
establishes the following fees.
   (A)   Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of
the city shall pay a fee to the city equal to 5% of the gross revenues of that
state video franchise holder.
   (B)   Effective the first date on which state franchisees begin operating
within the boundaries of the city, each state franchisee shall pay a fee to the
city equal to 1% of gross revenues (“PEG Fee”) of that state video franchise
holder to support capital equipment and operations expenditures used for
public, education and governmental (“PEG”) activities within the city.
   (C)   The PEG Fee shall be paid quarterly no later than 60 days following
the quarter for which the payment is due. The PEG Fee is in addition to the
franchise fee to be paid to the city by the state video service franchise
holders.
   (D)   Gross revenue, for the purposes of divisions (A) and (B) above, shall
have the definition set forth in Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 5860.
(Ord. 580-C.S., passed 11-4-08; Am. Ord. 649, passed 2-5-19)
§ 112.302 CUSTOMER SERVICE PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any holder of a state video service franchise shall comply with all
applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards
pertaining to the provision of video service.
   (B)   The city will provide any holder of a stale video franchise written
notice of any material breach of applicable customer service and protection
standards, and will allow the franchise holder at least 30 calendar days from
the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. A material
breach that is not remedied by the state video franchise holder within the
remedy period shall subject the state video franchise holder to the following
penalties to be imposed by the city:
      (1)   For the first occurrence of a material breach, a penalty of $500
for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $1,500 for each occurrence
of a material breach;
      (2)   For the second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a
penalty of $1,000 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed $3,000
for each occurrence of the material breach; and
      (3)   For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12
months, a penalty of $2,500 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed
$7,500 for each occurrence of the material breach.
   (C)   Any notice and any penalty may be issued or imposed by the City
Manager or designee. Any notice shall be in writing. Notices shall be
transmitted by United States Postal Service certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested and postage prepaid, or by private commercial delivery
or courier service for same day or next business day delivery with delivery and
receipt signature required.
   (D)   The state video service franchise holder may appeal any finding of
material breach or imposition of penalties to the City Council. Any appeal must
be made within ten calendar days of receipt by the state video service
franchise holder of the finding of material breach or the imposition of
penalties, and must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk and the City
Manager or their designee in order to be placed on a City Council agenda for
consideration. Any appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the
appellant believes that the finding of material breach or the imposition of
penalties was inconsistent with statutory requirements.
   (E)   The city and any state video service franchise holder may mutually
agree to extend the time periods specified herein. Any such agreement shall be
in writing and executed by the City Manager or designee and by an authorized
representative of the state video franchise holder.
   (F)   Any penalty imposed on a state video franchise holder shall be paid to
the city. As provided for in Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 5900(g), the city shall
submit one-half of all penalties received from a state video franchise holder
to the Digital Divide Account established by Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 280.5.
(Ord. 580-C.S., passed 11-4-08)
§ 112.303 PROCEDURES FOR APPEAL OF DENIAL OF AN ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   As provided by Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 5885, the city shall either
approve or deny an application from a state video service franchise holder for
an encroachment permit within 60 days of receiving a completed application.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, an ENCROACHMENT PERMIT means any permit
issued by the city relating to construction or operation of facilities relating
to the provision of video service under a state video service franchise.
   (C)   An application for an encroachment permit is considered complete when
the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements for such an
application, including those of the California Environmental Quality Act, Cal.
Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq., Chapter 150 of this code and other
applicable ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Any city denial of an application for an encroachment permit shall be
in writing and shall contain a detailed explanation of the reason for the
denial.
   (E)   An applicant whose application for an encroachment permit has been
denied may appeal the denial to the City Council. Any appeal must be made
within 14 calendar days of receipt by the state video service franchise holder
of the denial, and must be submitted in writing to the City Clerk and the City
Manager in order to be placed on the City Council agenda for consideration. Any
appeal must contain a detailed explanation of why the applicant believes that
the denial was inconsistent with statutory requirements.
(Ord. 580-C.S., passed 11-4-08)
§ 112.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   See §§
112.100 through
112.102 for violations of the franchise agreement and applicable penalties and
§
112.134 for construction violations.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §
112.010 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense.
Each day's violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense.
('65 Code, § 7-8.1409(b)) (Ord. 244-C.S., passed - - )
CHAPTER 113: USED CAR DEALERS
Section
   
113.01   Definition
   
113.02   License required
   
113.03   Conditional use permit required
   
113.04   Certificate required
   
113.05   License application
   
113.06   Revocation
   
113.07   Advertising
   
113.08   Lights
   
113.09   Signs
   
113.10   Records
§ 113.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, USED CAR DEALER shall include the words
SECONDHAND AUTOMOBILE LOT and USED AUTOMOBILE BUSINESS and shall mean the
business or occupation of buying, selling, or offering for sale, consigning to
be sold, or otherwise dealing in more than two motor vehicles (as the term
MOTOR VEHICLE is defined in the California Vehicle Code) in any one calendar
year, which motor vehicles have either been registered or have been driven 100
miles or more; provided, however, this definition shall not be construed to
unjustly penalize a bona fide employee or agent of a dealer who is duly
licensed; and, provided, further, this definition shall include any authorized
agency, dealing in new automobiles as its principal business, for the
incidental sale of used automobiles taken in trade as part of the purchase
price of new automobiles.
('65 Code, § 5-23.01) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 649, passed - - )
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Every person desiring to conduct the business of used car dealer shall
obtain a business license from the city as required by
Chapter 110 of this title and pay the license fee required by §§
110.60 through
110.69 of the provisions.
('65 Code, § 5-23.02) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 649, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 810, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 860, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.03 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Every person desiring to conduct the business of used car dealer shall first
obtain a conditional use permit as required by §
153.151 and §§
153.240 through
153.248 of this code.
§ 113.04 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   A license shall not be granted to any used car dealer unless he has a
dealer's certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Veh. Code §§
11701 through 11714. A license issued to a used car dealer shall be good only
while he has such certificate and shall be automatically revoked without notice
should such certificate be revoked or if at any time such used car dealer does
not have such certificate.
('65 Code, § 5-23.03) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 649, passed - - )
§ 113.05 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain the license required by this chapter
shall file a verified application therefor with the Finance Director. Such
application shall set forth the following information: The name and residence
address of the applicant, if a natural person; or if a corporation, its name,
date and place of incorporation, address of its principal place of business,
and the names of all its officers, together with their respective addresses; or
if a partnership, association or unincorporated company, the names of the
partners or persons comprising the association or company, together with their
respective addresses.
   (B)   All applications for a license shall be signed by a duly authorized
officer on behalf of the corporation, or an authorized general partner of a
partnership. All such applications shall be subject to review and investigation
by the Police Department for a period of 90 days from the date of the
application before a license may be issued.
('65 Code, § 5-23.04) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 649, passed - - )
§ 113.06 REVOCATION.
   In addition to the provisions of §
110.44 of this title, any used car dealer's license may be suspended or revoked
by the Finance Director when it shall appear that the used automobile business
of the person to whom such license was granted is conducted in a disorderly or
improper manner, or in violation of any law of the state or of the city, or
that the person conducting such business is of unfit character to conduct the
same, or that the purpose for which the license was issued is being abused to
the detriment of the public or is being used for a purpose wholly foreign to
that for which the license was issued.
('65 Code, § 5-23.05) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 649, passed - - )
§ 113.07 ADVERTISING.
   No used car dealer shall advertise in any newspaper, or through any other
medium, that he has for sale any motor vehicle which is not actually for sale
at the premises at the time the advertisement is inserted in the newspaper or
medium. Whenever any used car dealer in any advertising medium advertises any
specified motor vehicle, he shall include in such advertising the current
license number of such motor vehicle. Within 24 hours after any motor vehicle
has been sold, the used car dealer shall withdraw any advertisement from any
newspaper or other medium in which such motor vehicle was advertised by him for
sale.
('65 Code, § 5-23.06) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 649, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.08 LIGHTS.
   All lighting shall be subject to the review, including environmental review,
and approval of the Community Development Department.
§ 113.09 SIGNS.
   All signs shall be subject to the city's sign ordinance for retail
establishments. Used car dealers have different amounts and types of allowable
signage than do new car dealers.
§ 113.10 RECORDS.
   The records and books of all used car dealers shall be open at all times to
the Finance Director to determine whether or not the used car dealer has
complied with all the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-23.09) (Ord. 408, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 649, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 114: DANCES
Section
Cafe Dancing
   
114.001   Permit required
   
114.002   Permit application
   
114.003   Issuance of permit
   
114.004   Conditions of permit
   
114.005   Hours limited
   
114.006   Minors
   
114.007   Revocation of permit
Public Dances
   
114.020   Definitions
   
114.021   Permit required
   
114.022   Issuance of permit
   
114.023   Revocation and suspension of permits
   
114.024   Hours limited
   
114.025   Minors
   
114.026   Alcoholic beverages; disorderly conduct
   
114.027   Illumination
   
114.028   Special police officers
   
114.029   Parking lots
   
114.030   Readmission
   
114.031   Rules and regulations
   
114.032   Unlawful dancing
Private Dances
   
114.045   Definitions
   
114.046   Scope
   
114.047   Permit required
   
114.048   Permit application—applicants other than bona fide hotels
   
114.048.5   Permit process—bona fide hotels
   
114.049   Investigation by Police Chief
   
114.050   Application; referral to Fire Department
   
114.051   Issuance of permit; delegation of authority
   
114.052   Private clubs; hours limited
   
114.053   Minors
   
114.054   Alcoholic beverages; disorderly conduct
   
114.055   Special police officers
   
114.056   Parking lots
   
114.057   Readmission
   
114.058   Rules and regulations
   
114.059   Unlawful dancing
Youth Dances
   
114.070   Definition
   
114.071   Scope
   
114.072   Permit required
   
114.073   Permit application
   
114.074   Referral to Fire Department
   
114.075   Designation of number of participants
   
114.076   Designation of age group
   
114.077   License; fees
   
114.078   Minors
   
114.079   Hours limited
   
114.080   Alcoholic beverages
   
114.081   Special police officers
   
114.082   Parking lots
   
114.083   Readmission
   
114.084   Rules and regulations
   
114.085   Unlawful dancing
   
114.086   Nonprofit
CAFE DANCING
§ 114.001 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, conduct, permit, or carry
on any dance or dancing in any public cafe or restaurant in the city, whether
such dance or dancing shall be incidental to the serving of food or not,
without first securing a permit from the Council and paying the license fee
required by
Chapter 110 of this title.
('65 Code, § 5-9.101) (Ord. 445, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
General business licenses, see Ch. 110
§ 114.002 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to maintain, conduct, permit, or carry on any dance or
dancing in any cafe or restaurant in the city shall file a written application
with the Council so to do on a form provided therefor by the City Clerk.
('65 Code, § 5-9.102) (Ord. 445, passed - - )
§ 114.003 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   If, in the opinion of the Council, the applicant is of good moral character
and the location of the cafe is such that the dance or dancing shall not be a
detriment to the neighborhood wherein it is proposed to be conducted, a permit
may be issued to maintain, conduct, permit, or carry on a dance or dancing in
such cafe or restaurant.
('65 Code, § 5-9.103) (Ord. 445, passed - - )
§ 114.004 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   Any such permit so issued shall be issued upon the conditions that no vulgar
or suggestive dancing shall be allowed and that no drunken or disorderly
conduct shall be permitted thereat.
('65 Code, § 5-9.104) (Ord. 445, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.005 HOURS LIMITED.
   No dance or dancing in any public cafe or restaurant shall be conducted or
permitted between the hours of 1:45 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.
('65 Code, § 5-9.105) (Ord. 445, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 595, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 871, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 185-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.006 MINORS.
   (A)   A person under 21 years of age shall not enter, be, or remain on or in
any premises on or in which alcoholic beverages are sold or served and for
which a permit is required or has been issued pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter except when such person is accompanied by:
      (1)   His spouse over 21 years of age;
      (2)   His parents; or
      (3)   His guardian;
   (B)   Provided, however, neither the provisions of this section nor of §
114.051 of this chapter shall prevent a minor person from being in a bona fide
hotel, cafe, or other place where meals are regularly served and where a public
dance or entertainment is being held in the event such minor does not
participate in such dance or entertainment.
('65 Code, § 5-9.106) (Ord. 445, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.007 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any violation of the provisions of this subchapter shall be grounds for the
revocation by the Council of any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 5-9.107) (Ord. 445, passed - - )
PUBLIC DANCES
§ 114.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC DANCE. A gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing
is participated in and to which premises the public is admitted.
   PUBLIC DANCE HALL. A place where dancing is regularly conducted on certain
days as a business, whether for profit or not, and to which the public is
admitted, either with or without charge, or at which the public is allowed to
participate in the dancing, either with or without charge.
('65 Code, § 5-9.201) (Ord. 12, passed - - )
§ 114.021 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or assist in conducting any
public dance hall or public dance in the city without first securing a written
permit from the Council therefor.
('65 Code, § 5-9.202) (Ord. 12, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.022 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Permits to conduct public dance halls or public dances in the city may be
issued by the Council upon the written application of any person for himself or
on behalf of any association of persons or corporation. The Council shall first
satisfy itself that the conduct of such dance hall or public dance will comport
with the public welfare and, for this purpose, may consider any facts or
evidence bearing on the place where the proposed public dance hall or public
dance is to be located, the character, reputation, and moral fitness of those
who will be in charge, and any other facts or evidence intended to enlighten
the Council in this respect.
('65 Code, § 5-9.203) (Ord. 12, passed - - )
§ 114.023 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.
   Whenever the Council shall issue any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter, such permit may be revoked at any time
thereafter by the Council if the Council becomes satisfied that the conduct of
such public dance hall or public dance does not, or will not, comport with the
public welfare for any reason, or, in the case of a public dance hall, that the
same has been conducted in an illegal, improper, or disorderly manner. The
Council may make rules governing public dance halls and may revoke or suspend
permits issued for any public dance hall where the proprietor or person in
charge thereof violates, or permits any infraction of any of such rules or any
law of the state or of the city; provided, however, no permit for a public
dance hall shall be so revoked or suspended unless a hearing, and notice
thereof, shall be given the permittee.
('65 Code, § 5-9.205) (Ord. 12, passed - - )
§ 114.024 HOURS LIMITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or assist in conducting a
public dance hall or a public dance between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. of any day.
('65 Code, § 5-9.206) (Ord. 12, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 865, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.025 MINORS.
   (A)   To be accompanied. A person under 18 years of age shall not enter, be,
or remain on or in the premises of a public dance hall or at a public dance
except when such person is accompanied by:
      (1)   His spouse over 18 years of age;
      (2)   His parent;
      (3)   His guardian; or
      (4)   Another member of his immediate family or other person over 18
years of age and with the written permission of his parent or guardian.
   (B)   Responsibility of permittees; public dance and dance hall. It shall be
unlawful for the permittee of a public dance hall or a public dance to allow
any such minor person to be in or dance in any public dance hall or any public
dance unless such minor is accompanied by a person as described in this
section.
   (C)   Responsibility of other dance licensees and permittees. It shall be
unlawful for any licensee or permittee under the provisions of this chapter to
permit or allow any person to enter or be on any premises contrary to the
provisions of this section or §
114.006 of this chapter.
   (D)   Exceptions. The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section
shall not apply to:
      (1)   A dancing school except when conducting a public or private dance
other than regular instruction; or
      (2)   Any youth dance for the holding of which a permit has been granted
pursuant to §§
114.070 through
114.086 of this chapter and which is conducted in full compliance with the
provisions of said subchapter.
('65 Code, § 5-9.207) (Ord. 12, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.026 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   Possession; disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to
take any form of alcoholic liquor into any public dance hall or into any
premises where a public dance is held, and it shall be unlawful for any person
in charge, or assisting in the conduct, of any public dance hall or any public
dance to permit therein any person who has any form of alcoholic liquor in his
possession, or to permit any intoxicated, boisterous, or disorderly person to
enter, be, or remain in, or to assist in, any such public dance hall or public
dance.
   (B)   Intoxicated persons; disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any
person in an intoxicated condition to enter, be, or remain in any public dance
hall or public dance or for any person to conduct himself in a boisterous or
disorderly manner in a public dance hall or public dance.
   (C)   Sale and consumption on premises. The provisions of this section shall
not prohibit the legal sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages at a private
dance held pursuant to licenses and permits issued, pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, to the owners or lessees of a place or premises holding a
valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act of the state.
('65 Code, § 5-9.208) (Ord. 12, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, see Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 23000 et seq.
§ 114.027 ILLUMINATION.
   Except while a floor show or specialty dance is in progress, all public
dance halls and public dances shall be lighted throughout to an intensity of
not less than three footcandles during all hours of operation.
('65 Code, § 5-9.209) (Ord. 12, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.028 SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The proprietor or permittee conducting a public dance hall, public
dance, or a private dance may be required by the Police Chief, as a condition
to the issuance of a permit, to provide one or more police officers to attend
such public dance hall, public dance, or private dance during such time as
dances are conducted for the purpose of preserving order and preventing the
violation of any law of the state or of the city. The presence of such police
officers at any public dance hall, public dance, or private dance shall not
relieve the proprietor or permittee, or any of his employees, from their
responsibility for any violation of any law. The Police Chief shall assign for
such purpose regular police officers, or he may require private patrol
services.
   (B)   The proprietor or permittee shall be required to pay for such police
services a sum sufficient to defray the cost to the city of furnishing such
services, such cost to be determined by the City Manager. The proprietor or
permittee shall deposit such sum with the City Treasurer at the time of the
issuance of the permit.
('65 Code, § 5-9.210) (Ord. 12, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 871, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 111-C.S., passed - - )
§ 114.029 PARKING LOTS.
   Every person conducting a public dance hall or public or private dance who
owns, operates, or controls any parking lot adjacent to the premises where such
dance is conducted, and where such parking lot is used in connection therewith,
shall adequately and uniformly light such parking lot to an intensity of not
less than one footcandle.
('65 Code, § 5-9.211) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.030 READMISSION.
   No person who has left any public dance hall or public or private dance
shall be readmitted unless:
   (A)   An admission charge not less than that charged to patrons entering
such public dance hall or public dance for the first time is again paid; or
   (B)   The permit specifically provides that such readmission may be
permitted.
('65 Code, § 5-9.212) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.031 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Police Chief may adopt such rules and regulations relating to the
conduct of public dance halls, public dances, and private dances for which a
permit or license is required as may be proper or necessary for the maintenance
of public order, the promotion of public morals, comportment with the public
welfare, and the orderly conduct of such places, or the better enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter relating to such places. ('65 Code, § 5-9.213)
(Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.032 UNLAWFUL DANCING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dance, or to permit any other person
to dance, after being instructed by a police officer to stop such dancing
because such dancing is not permitted on such premises.
('65 Code, § 5-9.214) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
PRIVATE DANCES
§ 114.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BONA FIDE HOTEL. Any hotel with 200 or more guest rooms and five or more
banquet or meeting rooms.
   DANCING CLUB. Any club or association of persons which conducts dances,
other than public dances, for its members or bona fide guests.
   DANCING SCHOOL. Any school, class, or classes wherein dancing is the
principal subject taught.
   PRIVATE DANCE. A gathering of persons in or upon any premises where dancing
is permitted either as the main purpose for such gathering or as an incident to
some other purpose and to which premises only members, pupils, or bona fide
guests of a particular dancing club or dancing school are admitted; provided,
however, dancing by the occupants of, and guests at, a private residence shall
not be considered a private dance, and no license or permit shall be required
for a dance at such private residence.
   SINGLE DANCE. An individual private dance, including wedding receptions, or
public dance conducted by any person, dancing club, dancing school, or
association of persons, dancing clubs, or dancing schools, which dance, if
authorized, shall result in not more than three such dances being held by such
person or group of persons in any three-month period.
(‘65 Code, § 5-9.301) (Ord. 871, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 547-C.S., passed 4-20-
04)
§ 114.046 SCOPE.
   Except as specifically otherwise provided in this subchapter, all of the
provisions of §
114.020 through 114.033 of this chapter shall apply to the provisions contained
in this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 5-9.302) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.047 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, dancing club, dancing school, or bona fide hotel shall conduct,
permit, operate, or assist in conducting any public dance hall, public dance,
or private dance without first securing a written permit from the Council or
Chief of Police and paying the license and application fee. No dance permit is
required for dances held at the Adult Recreation Center or Grapevine Park.
(‘65 Code, § 5-9.303) (Ord. 871, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 547-C.S., passed 4-20-
04; Am. Ord. 611-C.S., passed 3-18-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   
General business licenses, see Ch. 110
§ 114.048 PERMIT APPLICATION—APPLICANTS OTHER THAN BONA FIDE HOTELS.
   (A)   Verification. Every application for the permit required by the
provisions of §
114.047 of this subchapter shall be verified by the oath of the applicant on
forms furnished by the Police Chief. If the applicant is a corporation,
verification shall be by a duly authorized officer thereof; if an association
or partnership, verification shall be by each member thereof; and if a club,
verification shall be by the person having charge of such club.
   (B)   Filing. The application shall be completed and filed not less than 15
days before the date of the proposed dance.
   (C)   Information required. The application shall clearly show whether the
persons attending, or expected to attend, the dance are to be limited in any
manner as to membership or guests of the membership of the applicant, the
number expected to attend, and whether admittance shall be by written or
printed invitation or by the sale of tickets at the door of the premises. Such
application shall further show from what general geographical area the members,
or guests of the members of the applicant, are expected to be invited to
attend.
   (D)   Information required; premises to be used. When the application shows
that the applicant has rented or plans to rent any premises owned or leased by
another person or organization, the application shall specifically show the
name and address of the agent of the owner or lessee and that such agent,
owner, or lessee has full knowledge of the purpose for which the premises are
to be used.
(‘65 Code, § 5-9.304) (Ord. 871, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 547-C.S., passed 4-20-
04)
§ 114.048.5 PERMIT PROCESS—BONA FIDE HOTELS.
   (A)   A bona fide hotel may apply to the City Council for a single permit to
allow dancing on its premises in conjunction with banquet service. The
application shall be on a form furnished by the Chief of Police and shall be
verified by the appropriate officer per the requirements of §
114.048(A). The annual fee for a bona fide hotel dance permit shall be $200.
   (B)   Along with its application, a bona fide hotel must submit a security
plan for the review and approval of the Chief of Police. Such plan shall
contain provisions detailing full-time on-site security for the premises and
banquet and event security deployment and procedures. If the permit is granted,
the Chief of Police is authorized to review the security plan on a continuing
basis and require such modifications to such plan as he deems required by the
facts and circumstances.
   (C)   The application shall contain a site plan that clearly shows the areas
in which dancing will be permitted.
   (D)   A bona fide hotel dancing permit shall be limited to prohibit dancing
from the hours of 1:45 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   (E)   A bona fide hotel dancing permit shall be subject to suspension or
revocation where conditions imposed are not strictly followed. The appeal
process shall be as stated in §§
30.10 et seq. of this code.
(Ord. 547-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.049 INVESTIGATION BY POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief is hereby authorized to fully investigate the character and
reputation of the applicant, and the officers and employees of the applicant,
in the same manner and to the same extent as provided in §
114.020 through 114.033 of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-9.305) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.050 APPLICATION; REFERRAL TO FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   All applications for such permits shall be referred to the Fire Department
for report as to the suitability and safety of the premises and number of
persons permitted in the premises pursuant to the provisions of the fire code.
('65 Code, § 5-9.306) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.051 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   The authority to issue permits to conduct private dances may be delegated by
the Council to the Police Chief.
('65 Code, § 5-9.307) (Ord. 12, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.052 PRIVATE CLUBS; HOURS LIMITED.
   No establishment licensed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter or
§§
114.020 through
114.032 of this chapter may allow the premises to be used for the purpose of
conducting a private club between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
('65 Code, § 5-9.308) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.053 MINORS.
   The provisions of §
114.025 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-9.309) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.054 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   The provisions of §
114.026 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-9.310) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.055 SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   The provisions of §
114.028 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-9.311) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.056 PARKING LOTS.
   The provisions of §
114.029 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-9.312) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.057 READMISSION.
   The provisions of §
114.030 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-9.313) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.058 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of §
114.031 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-9.314) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.059 UNLAWFUL DANCING.
   The provisions of §
114.032 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-9.315) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
YOUTH DANCES
§ 114.070 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning, YOUTH DANCE shall mean a nonprofit public dance
or private dance to which only persons under the age of 21 years are admitted
as participants. Such dances shall be considered single dances as defined in §
114.045 of this chapter, unless otherwise determined by the Police Chief or
Council.
('65 Code, § 5-9.401) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.071 SCOPE.
   Except as specifically otherwise provided in this subchapter, all of the
provisions of this chapter pertaining to dances shall apply to youth dances.
('65 Code, § 5-9.402) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.072 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, dancing club, or dancing school shall conduct, permit, operate,
or assist in conducting or operating any youth dance without first securing a
written permit from the Council or Police Chief and paying the license fee,
unless exempted, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 110 of this title; provided, however, the Council may, by motion or
resolution, provide reasonable application fees to pay the cost of processing
the application.
('65 Code, § 5-9.403) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
General business licenses, see Ch. 110
§ 114.073 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions of §
114.048 of this chapter shall apply; provided, however, a permit for a youth
dance shall be issued only to an adult sponsoring group which has been approved
by the Police Chief.
   (B)   In addition to any other information required, the application for a
permit to hold a youth dance shall show the names of at least one male and one
female chaperon at least 21 years of age for each 30 persons permitted in the
premises. Such chaperons shall attend the dance and be present for the full
time of such dance or furnish a substitute satisfactory to the Police Chief.
('65 Code, § 5-9.404) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.074 REFERRAL TO FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   Before a permit for a youth dance shall be issued, a report shall be
obtained from the Fire Department which shall include a statement as to the
maximum number of persons permitted within such premises.
('65 Code, § 5-9.405) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.075 DESIGNATION OF NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS.
   The permit for a youth dance shall specify the maximum number of persons
permitted in the premises. Such number shall not exceed the number specified by
the Fire Department.
('65 Code, § 5-9.406) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.076 DESIGNATION OF AGE GROUP.
   The permit for a youth dance shall designate the age group permitted to
participate in such dance. No more than a five year difference in age may exist
between the oldest and youngest participant.
('65 Code, § 5-9.407) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.077 LICENSE; FEES.
   No license shall be required to hold a youth dance conducted pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter; provided, however, the Council may, by motion or
resolution, provide for reasonable application fees to pay the cost of
processing the application.
('65 Code, § 5-9.408) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.078 MINORS.
   If a permit is issued for a youth dance pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter, and such dance is conducted in full compliance with the provisions
of this subchapter, a minor may attend such dance even if not accompanied by
his parent, guardian, or spouse where such minor is within the designated age
group indicated on the permit.
('65 Code, § 5-9.409) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.079 HOURS LIMITED.
   No dancing shall be conducted or permitted at a youth dance:
   (A)   Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. where the maximum age of
the participants is 14 years; or
   (B)   Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. where the maximum
age of the participants is over 14 years; provided, however, the provisions of
this section shall not apply to an annual high school senior class party
conducted under the supervision of high school officials and adult sponsors of
such senior class party.
('65 Code, § 5-9.410) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.080 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   A permit shall not be issued to conduct a youth dance in or on any premises
in or on which any alcoholic beverages are sold unless all facilities for such
sale are securely locked during the entire time such dance is in progress and
the applicant satisfies the Police Chief that such facilities shall be so
locked and that under no conditions will any alcoholic beverages be sold,
served, or permitted on the premises during the time such dance is being held.
('65 Code, § 5-9.411) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.081 SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   The provisions of §
114.028 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-9.412) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.082 PARKING LOTS.
   A permit shall not be issued for any youth dance if any parking lot adjacent
thereto, which is available for use during such dance, is not lighted to an
intensity of at least one footcandle. The provisions of this section shall not
require that a parking lot be available.
('65 Code, § 5-9.413) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.083 READMISSION.
   No person who has left any youth dance shall be readmitted unless:
   (A)   An admission charge not less than that charged to patrons entering
such youth dance for the first time is again paid; or
   (B)   The permit specifically provides that such readmission may be
permitted.
('65 Code, § 5-9.414) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.084 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of §
114.031 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-9.415) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.085 UNLAWFUL DANCING.
   The provisions of §
114.032 of this chapter shall apply.
('65 Code, § 5-9.416) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
§ 114.086 NONPROFIT.
   Youth dances shall not be conducted for the profit of any person.
('65 Code, § 5-9.417) (Ord. 871, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 115: DRILLING
Section
   
115.01   Definition
   
115.02   Permit required
   
115.03   Conditions of permit; revocation
   
115.04   Bond
§ 115.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, PERSON shall include, in addition to the
definition set forth in §
10.05 of this code, the United States of America, or any instrumentality
thereof, the state, or any political subdivision or special district thereof,
or any other municipal or public corporation.
('65 Code, § 5-15.01) (Ord. 197, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 835, passed - - )
§ 115.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or prospect for water, oil, or
any other substance within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Council.
('65 Code, § 5-15.02) (Ord. 197, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 835, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.03 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT; REVOCATION.
   The Council in granting any such permit may impose reasonable conditions as
to the hours of drilling, the operation of machinery, the suppression of noise,
and the elimination of dust, smoke, fumes, odors, or vibrations in order that
the peace, health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city may be
preserved and the value of surrounding or adjacent property maintained. Any
violation of such conditions, or any of them, shall be cause for revocation of
the permit.
('65 Code, § 5-15.03) (Ord. 197, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 835, passed - - )
§ 115.04 BOND.
   The Council, in its discretion, may require the posting of a bond to assure
the performance of the conditions referred to in §
115.03 of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-15.04) (Ord. 197, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 835, passed - - )
CHAPTER 116: ENTERTAINMENT; AMUSEMENTS AND GAMES
Section
General Provisions
   
116.001   Operation of card rooms unlawful
Amusement Machines
   
116.010   Definitions
   
116.011   Unlawful machines; exceptions
   
116.012   Permits issued not authorization of unlawful games
   
116.013   Games of skill and science; permit required
   
116.014   Games of skill and science; permit application
   
116.015   Games of skill and science; license fees
   
116.016   Games of skill and science; investigation of permit application by
Police Department
   
116.017   Games of skill and science; permit application; recommendation of
games advisory committee
   
116.018   Games of skill and science; permit application; notice of hearing
   
116.019   Games of skill and science; permit application; Council hearing
   
116.020   Games of skill and science; permit conditions
   
116.021   Games of skill and science; grounds for permit revocation
   
116.022   Games of skill and science; permit revocation; hearing; interim
suspension
   
116.023   Games of skill and science; revocation upon conviction
   
116.024   Games of skill and science; permit issuance following revocation
   
116.025   Games of skill and science; term of licenses
   
116.026   [Reserved]
   
116.027   Confiscation of games following conviction
   
116.028   Conditional use permits required for operation of game arcade
   
116.029   Requirements for operation of game arcades
Fiestas, Fairs, Carnivals, Nonprofit Fundraisers and Other Special Events
   
116.039   Exemption for nonprofit organization casino events
   
116.040   Permit required
   
116.041   Temporary use permit application
   
116.042   Issuance
   
116.043   Denial and revocation of permit
Poolrooms and Billiard Rooms
   
116.055   Conditional use permit required
   
116.056   Permit required
   
116.057   Permit application
   
116.058   Consideration; issuance
   
116.059   Form of permit
   
116.060   Permit fee
   
116.061   Posting of permit
   
116.062   Location of premises; entrances
   
116.063   Premises open to inspection
   
116.064   Hours of operation
   
116.065   Minors
   
116.066   Violation; revocation of permit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.001 OPERATION OF CARD ROOMS UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, manager, agent,
employee, or otherwise, to open, operate, maintain, carry on, or conduct any
card room or game room where any poker game, card game, or similar game is
played, carried on, conducted, or permitted.
('65 Code, § 5-6.01) (Ord. 403, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   
Gambling unlawful, see § 130.06
AMUSEMENT MACHINES
§ 116.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANY GAME SIMILAR TO A MARBLE GAME. This phrase shall mean:
      (1)   Any miniature mechanical bowling game device, by whatever name
called; and
      (2)   Any table, cabinet, or mechanical device equipped for the playing
of any game whereby any marble, ball, pellet, or any tangible moving object is
propelled, rolled, shot, or released toward a goal, pin, set of pins, or other
objective by means of any plunger, ejector, mechanical bat, or mechanical hand,
or by means of any other striking or releasing mechanism which is affixed or
attached to the table or cabinet, or which is an integral part of the
mechanical device, or which is mechanically manipulated, controlled, or guided;
either of which is so contrived that at the conclusion of the operation or play
thereof, a result is visible or otherwise discernible so as to permit or make
practical the paying off or awarding of a prize or reward upon the operation or
play of the game. ANY GAME SIMILAR TO A MARBLE GAME shall not include the games
defined in this section as “games of skill and science.”
   CASINO EVENT. A fundraising event conducted by a nonprofit organization
which includes controlled games, as that term is defined in Cal. Penal Code §
337j(e).
   CLAW, HOOK OR GRAB MACHINE. Any amusement machine or device so designed that
articles placed or heaped therein for the purpose of the game may be grabbed,
hooked, or otherwise displaced, recovered, or removed by the operation of any
contrivance simulating in miniature a power shovel, clamshell, dragline, or
similar excavating tool or machine.
('65 Code, § 5-3.01(a), (b)) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
   GAME ARCADE. Any business location in which there are more than three coin-
or token-operated amusement devices or games of skill and science, or any
combination thereof, available for use by members of the public and/or business
invitees, but shall not include any business location where the floor area
devoted to such games is not in excess of 5% of the net floor area occupied by
such business, and where the games are conducted in the same room or rooms as
the principal business and are not operated in a separate room or partitioned
area and does not exceed 10 games. ('65 Code, § 5-3.21) (Ord. 234-C.S., passed
- - ; Am. Ord. 236-C.S., passed - - )
   GAME OF SKILL AND SCIENCE.
      (1)   Any game participated in by one or more players:
         (a)   For any prize, gift, or award of anything of value; or
         (b)   To produce any mechanically or electrically scored result,
visible or otherwise discernible at the conclusion of the operation or play
thereof, so as to permit or make practical the paying off or awarding of a
prize or reward;
      Where and when any charge is made by the person conducting, operating, or
maintaining such game, or any consideration is paid by any player for the right
to play or participate in any such game, and the dominating factor in
determining the result of such game is dependent upon the skill of the players
and not upon chance; provided, however, in any case where the result of such
game may be dependent to some extent upon the judgment, intelligence, or
adroitness of the player, but nevertheless the dominating factor in determining
the result of such game is chance, such game shall not be considered as a game
of skill and science but shall be considered as a game of chance.
      (2)    GAME OF SKILL AND SCIENCE shall not include any athletic games not
played upon a table, cabinet, or mechanical device, billiards and pool games
played upon billiard and pool tables of standard size and dimensions, the games
of chess and checkers, all legal playing card games of skill and science, and
athletic sporting events.
   HORSE RACING MACHINE. Any mechanically operated amusement machine or device
contrived to simulate in miniature the running of a horse race or any other
race run by beasts, human beings, or machines, or which is contrived to put in
motion any number of objects or symbols which then do, or appear to, run or
move against each other in the manner of a miniature race, or which is designed
to represent by symbols the running of any race and the order of the finish
thereof.
   MARBLE GAME. Any table, cabinet, or stand equipped for the playing of a game
whereby marbles or balls are, with the aid of a mechanical plunger or other
affixed device, propelled, released, shot, or rolled so as to drop or come to
rest in holes, clots, cups, or traps, resulting in a score or tally being
electrically or otherwise registered or shown, which score or tally depends
upon the course followed or point reached by the marble or ball or upon the
contact points touched by it along its course, or upon any combination of such
factors.
   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION. This phrase shall have the same meaning as defined
in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code § 19986(h).
   PIN GAME. Any table, cabinet, or mechanism equipped for the playing of any
game whereby any marble, ball, pellet, or other moving object is propelled,
released, rolled, or shot along, over, or above a surface set with pins, pegs,
or other obstructions or irregularities which deflect or impede the course of
the moving object, or which may divert or direct it beyond the control of the
player.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A circus, fair, carnival, festival, casino event, or other
type of gathering that is intended to or likely to be of substantial size, and
is unlike the activities usually associated with the subject property.
(‘65 Code, § 5-3.01(c) - (f)) (Ord. 905, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 648, passed 10-
2-18)
§ 116.011 UNLAWFUL MACHINES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any
person to keep, maintain, install, place, or possess in any place of business
or in any place of public resort:
      (1)   Any pin game, marble game, or any game similar to a marble game,
any claw, hook, or grab machine, or any horse race machine, the operation of
which game or machine is controlled, permitted, or made available by placing
therein a coin, plug, disk, key, or token, or which is let for use, operation,
or play upon the payment or delivery of anything of value therefor or upon the
making of any purchase, except “flipper-type” pin games and other similar games
determined to be games of skill by the Appellate Courts of the state;
      (2)   Any mechanical device or mechanically operated contrivance for the
playing of any game of chance, the use or operation of which is controlled,
permitted, or made available by placing therein any coin, plug, disk, key, or
token, or which is let for use, operation, or play upon the payment or delivery
of anything of value therefor or upon the making of any purchase; and
      (3)   Any machine, contrivance, appliance, device, game, ticket, chance,
share, interest, instrument, or article operated, used, kept, possessed,
placed, or maintained in violation of the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 330a
or any section enumerated in Cal. Penal Code Chapter 9, Title 9, Part 1.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the keeping,
possessing, or exhibiting of any such mechanical contrivance not permitted or
allowed to be operated, manipulated, or played, except as incident to a
demonstration for the purposes of sale.
('65 Code, § 5-3.02) (Ord. 905, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 206-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.012 PERMITS ISSUED NOT AUTHORIZATION OF UNLAWFUL GAMES.
   No permit issued by the Council shall authorize the conduct of any game
which is prohibited by the Cal. Penal Code, or by any other law of the state,
or by the provisions of this code, or by any other law of the city, and any
permit issued in violation of such provisions shall be void.
('65 Code, § 5-3.18) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
§ 116.013 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as set forth in division (B) of this section, no person shall
place, install, keep, maintain, conduct, carry on, permit, or allow the
operation, maintenance, conduct, or carrying on of any game of skill and
science unless such person is the holder of a valid and unexpired permit in
full force and effect issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any person
committing any act otherwise prohibited by division (A) of this section if
there are at all times located on the premises on which said person is acting a
total of three or less games of skill and science.
('65 Code, § 5-3.03) (Ord. 905, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 313-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.014 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The contents of all applications for such permits shall be in writing and
shall be made by all persons interested in such game, whether as lessor,
lessee, owner, agent, principal, concessionaire, or otherwise; if an
individual, by the individual; if a partnership of any kind, by all of the
members of such partnership; or if an unincorporated association or a
corporation, by each and all of the officers thereof. The application shall
contain the following information:
   (A)   The name and residence of each and all persons required to sign such
application;
   (B)   The place of business where such proposed game of skill and science
will be operated, maintained, or conducted;
   (C)   The name of the game;
   (D)   A detailed description of all equipment, apparatus, materials, or
devices used in playing such game;
   (E)   A detailed description of the method of playing or operation;
   (F)   A statement that the applicant, if granted a permit, shall not permit
or allow the game proposed to be operated or maintained to be played or
operated in any mode other than as described in the application or by the use
of any other than as described in the application or by the use of any other
equipment, apparatus, or device other than as described and referred to in the
application; and
   (G)   A statement of all persons having any legal or equitable interest in
the ownership of such machine or in the profits thereof.
('65 Code, § 5-3.04) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
§ 116.015 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; LICENSE FEES.
   No such application shall be accepted for filing unless the applicant, at
the time of offering such application for filing, pays to the Finance Director
the license fee as set forth in §§
110.63.
§ 116.016 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; INVESTIGATION OF PERMIT APPLICATION BY
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Each application for a permit to operate, maintain, or conduct a game of
skill and science shall be submitted to the Police Department for
investigation.
('65 Code, § 5-3.06) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
§ 116.017 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; PERMIT APPLICATION; RECOMMENDATION OF
GAMES ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Games Advisory Committee established. There is hereby established the
Games Advisory Committee which shall be composed of the City Manager, the City
Attorney, and the Police Chief.
   (B)   Decisions; standards. Each application shall be submitted to the Games
Advisory Committee for majority approval or denial. In reaching a decision, the
Committee shall be guided by the standards set forth in § 116.019 of this
subchapter. The decision of the Committee shall be considered as a
recommendation only, and the final decision shall be made by the Council as set
forth in this subchapter; provided, however, if no person files with the
Council an objection to, or appeal of, the decision of the Games Advisory
Committee within ten days after the decision thereof, the decision of the Games
Advisory Committee shall be deemed final and conclusive upon all persons. If
the Games Advisory Committee shall fail to arrive at a decision within 30 days
after the application has been submitted, the application shall be set for a
hearing by the Council as set forth in §
116.018 of this subchapter.
   (C)   Decisions; notices. The decision of the Games Advisory Committee shall
be announced by written letter addressed to the applicant.('65 Code, § 5-3.07)
(Ord. 905, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 243-C.S., passed - - )
§ 116.018 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; PERMIT APPLICATION; NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   Posting. Upon the appeal or objection to, or non-action of the Games
Advisory Committee, the Council shall cause the application to be set for a
public hearing not sooner than 12 days, nor more than 30 days, after the filing
of such application. Notice of the fact such application has been filed shall
be posted on the premises where it is proposed to conduct, carry on, or operate
any such game of skill or science, and a copy of such notice so posted shall be
published once in a newspaper of general circulation which circulates in the
city.
   (B)   Form. The notice shall be entitled “Notice of Hearing on Application
for Permit to Carry on Games of Skill and Science” which, for the purpose of
posting, shall be printed in letters not less than one inch in height, and such
notice shall be substantially in the following form:
      Notice is hereby given that on the             day of                   ,
19         , at the hour of               , in the hearing room of the City
Council, to wit: the Council Chamber in the San Gabriel City Hall, 425 South
Mission Drive, San Gabriel, California, the said Council will conduct a hearing
upon the application of (name of applicant) to conduct at (location named in
application), in the City of San Gabriel, a game briefly described as follows:
_____________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________,

full details of method of play of same being set out in the application
heretofore filed with said Council and now open for public inspection at the
office of the City Clerk in the City Hall at San Gabriel, California. Any
person having objections to the granting of said permit, at any time prior to
the date above named, may file with the City Council his objection in writing,
giving his reason therefor, and he may appear at the time and place of said
hearing and be heard relative thereto.
(‘65 Code, § 5-3.08) (Ord. 905, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 243-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-6-16)
§ 116.019 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; PERMIT APPLICATION; COUNCIL HEARING.
   (A)   Filing written protests. Any person interested, at any time after the
filing of such application and before the public hearing, may file written
protests against the granting of any such permit, and the Council, in
considering the application, shall give consideration to all such protests so
filed.
   (B)   Issuance of permits. If, from the consideration of the application,
such protests as may be on file, and such other information as may be brought
before the Council, the Council finds that the game proposed to be conducted is
a game of skill and science and that such game is not prohibited by the
provisions of Cal. Penal Code Title 9, Part 1, Chapter 10, or any other law of
the state, or the provisions of §
116.011, or any other law of the city, and the Council further finds that the
applicant is of good moral character and repute, that the conducting,
operating, or maintaining of such game at the location described in the
application will comport with the public welfare, and that such game may be so
operated without causing or creating neighborhood nuisance problems of
excessive noise, heavy traffic, or gambling, the Council may grant such
application and issue a permit to conduct the game.
   (C)   Denial of permits. If the Council fails to so find, the application
for a permit shall be denied; or if, in making its determination of the
question as to whether the game proposed to be operated, conducted, or
maintained is a game of skill and science or a game of chance, the Council is
of the opinion that although the result of such game is dependent to some
extent upon the judgment, practice, intelligence, or adroitness on the part of
the participants in such game, but nevertheless the dominating factor in
determining the result of such game is chance, the Council shall find that the
proposed game is a game of chance and not a game of skill and science, and the
application for a permit shall be denied.
('65 Code, § 5-3.09) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
§ 116.020 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall
be issued only to the person named in the application and shall not be
assignable or transferable either to another machine or another location.
Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, such permit shall be valid until
revoked or suspended and shall be issued upon and subject to the following
conditions:
      (1)   That the permittee shall not permit or allow the game authorized to
be played in any manner other than the manner described in detail in the
application;
      (2)   That no equipment, apparatus, device, material, or contrivance of
any kind be used in the conduct or playing of such game which such equipment is
not described or referred to in the application;
      (3)   That the permittee shall not give or award any prize, award, or
gift to any participant in any such game which prize, award, or gift is money,
tokens, checks, warrants, certificates, or chips exchangeable for money by the
permittee, his agents, or employees;
      (4)   That the permittee shall not enter into any agreement, combine, or
understanding with any person whatsoever to the effect that either the
permittee, his agents, or someone acting for and on behalf of himself as
contractor or otherwise shall buy any gift, prize, or award given or awarded by
any participant in any game, or exchange any such gift, prize, or award for
money;
      (5)   That the permittee shall keep posted on such machine a decal issued
by the city indicating the licensing of such machine; and
      (6)   That, if there is any change of ownership in a proprietorship, a
partnership, or more than 50% of a corporation owning, managing, or otherwise
responsible for the operation of such game, a new permit shall be required
forthwith.
   (B)   Each of the conditions set forth in this section shall be incorporated
in and made a part of each permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (C)   No person shall conduct, operate, or maintain any such game, or permit
or allow the conducting, operation, or maintenance of any game, in any manner
or mode except in accordance with, and in strict conformance with, each and all
of the conditions set forth in this section.
('65 Code, § 5-3.10) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.021 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; GROUNDS FOR PERMIT REVOCATION.
   No permit required by the provisions of this subchapter shall be issued, and
any permit issued shall be revoked or suspended by the Council, if any of the
following conditions exist or occur:
   (A)   That the applicant for a permit, as the case may be, has knowingly
made any material misstatement in his application for a permit;
   (B)   That the holder of any permit has violated any of the provisions of
this subchapter;
   (C) That any condition exists which would have been grounds for denial of
the application for a permit;
   (D)   That it appears that the continued operation, maintenance, or
conducting of any such game will not comport with the public welfare;
   (E)   That the permittee expressly permits the public or patrons to use the
licensed machine for gambling purposes; or
   (F)   That the operation of the game has created a neighborhood nuisance of
excessive noise, heavy traffic, or gambling.
('65 Code, § 5-3.11) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
§ 116.022 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; PERMIT REVOCATION; HEARING; INTERIM
SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No permit shall be revoked for any cause until a public hearing has
been held thereon and the permittee has been given five days notice in writing
of the time and place of such hearing.
   (B)   The notice may be given by depositing the same in the United States
mail in the city, postage prepaid, directed to the applicant at the address
stated in his application or by delivering the same to the permittee
personally; provided, however, any permit may be suspended by the Police Chief
pending the holding of such public hearing. The Police Chief shall cause a
written notice of such temporary suspension to be delivered to the permittee
personally or shall deposit a copy of such notice of temporary suspension in
the United States mail in the city within 24 hours after the service of same.
The action of the Police Chief in such case shall be passed upon by the Council
at its next regular meeting at which time the Council may continue the
suspension in effect and order a public hearing thereon or dissolve the order.
('65 Code, § 5-3.12) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
§ 116.023 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; REVOCATION UPON CONVICTION.
   If the permittee, or any agent, employee, or servant of the permittee acting
for and on behalf of such permittee in connection with the operation,
maintenance, or conduct of any game, is convicted in any court of competent
jurisdiction in the state of having violated any law of the state prohibiting
or regulating gaming or of having violated any law of the city prohibiting
gambling, all permits issued to such permittee shall be revoked without a
hearing or previous notice by the Council forthwith upon the filing of a
certified copy of the final judgment of conviction of the court with the
Council.
('65 Code, § 5-3.13) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
§ 116.024 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; PERMIT ISSUANCE FOLLOWING REVOCATION.
   No person shall be issued any permit pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter if, within one year next preceding the date of filing the
application for a permit, any such permit previously issued to the applicant
has been revoked as provided in this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 5-3.14) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
§ 116.025 GAMES OF SKILL AND SCIENCE; TERM OF LICENSES.
   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. New licenses shall be
issued on or before February 1 of each year upon the payment of the annual
license fees set forth in §
116.015 of this subchapter, and, if not issued, it shall be necessary for the
applicant to file a new application for a permit and to pay all the fees set
forth in said §
116.015.
('65 Code, § 5-3.15) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
§ 116.026 [RESERVED].
§ 116.027 CONFISCATION OF GAMES FOLLOWING CONVICTION.
   When any person has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation
of the provisions of this chapter, or of any law of the state, which offense
involves the operation, use, maintenance, or possession of any game or article
prohibited by the provisions of this chapter and declared to be a nuisance,
such game or article shall be destroyed by the Police Chief after the plea or
after the judgment of conviction has become final.
('65 Code, § 5-3.20) (Ord. 905, passed - - )
§ 116.028 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS REQUIRED FOR OPERATION OF GAME ARCADE.
   No person shall operate a game arcade in the city without first obtaining,
in addition to all other licenses and permits required by this code, a
conditional use permit for such use in the manner provided for in §§
153.240 through
153.248.
('65 Code, § 5-3.22) (Ord. 234-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 236-C.S., passed - -
)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.029 REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION OF GAME ARCADES.
   No game arcade shall be operated within the city unless the game arcade
complies with all of the following conditions and requirements:
   (A)   Game machines shall be located no closer than 12 inches from any wall
assembly separating the arcade from any adjacent building or portion of a
building. Where game machines are located along one side of an aisle, such
aisle shall be a minimum of 72 inches in width and shall be unobstructed. Where
game machines are located on both sides of any aisle, the aisle shall be not
less than 96 inches in width and shall be unobstructed, and such open areas
shall be unobstructed. The maximum number of game machines in any game arcade
shall not exceed one machine for every 40 square feet of gross floor area
allotted to the game arcade operations.
   (B)   No game arcade shall be maintained or operated unless all portions of
the interior of such game arcade, except the rest rooms thereof, are plainly
visible from the outside of the building through unobstructed windows or glass
doors. All windows and glass doors which provide a view of the interior of the
premises shall remain unobstructed at all times. All entrances and interior
areas shall be adequately lighted, and the lighting plan shall be approved by
the Community Development Department prior to the commencement of such
business.
   (C)   Each game arcade shall provide a minimum of two toilet and lavatory
facilities accessible to customers, employees, and business invitees.
   (D)   No game arcade shall be open for business except between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays and between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Fridays and Saturdays, except that no person
under 18 years of age may enter, be, or remain in any part of a game arcade
during such times as the San Gabriel Unified School District is conducting its
regular education program.
   (E)   During the hours of operation, arcades having one to nine machines
shall have one attendant; arcades with ten through 18 machines shall have one
attendant plus a uniformed security guard; arcades with 19 through 30 machines
shall provide an additional attendant or uniformed security guard; and arcades
with 31 or more machines shall provide attendants and security guards as
required by the conditional use permit. All security guards and attendants
shall be adults. Such security guards and attendants shall first be subject to
approval by the Police Department and to a background check as required by the
Police Chief. No such security guard or attendant shall be approved unless the
Police Chief determines that such proposed security guard or attendant has not
been convicted of any offense involving gambling or any offense against minors
or against the public peace during the preceding five years.
   (F)   The following noise control conditions shall apply:
      (1)   Wall separations. The arcade shall be separated from adjacent
occupiable areas by a wall assembly extending from the floor to the roof, with
a sound transmission class (STC) of at least 56, per American Society of
Testing and Materials (ASTM) designations E-90 or E-336 and E-413.
      (2)   Intrusive noise. The operation of the arcade shall be conducted in
a manner so that the intrusive sound level in adjacent occupiable areas shall
not exceed the following noise standards for the cumulative periods:
 
Nature or Character                  Noise Standard Which Shall Not be Exceeded
of Intrusive Noise                   Commercial Areas Residential Areas
Cumulative period of 30 minutes in   45 dB(A)         40 dB(A)
any hour
Cumulative period of 15 minutes in   50               50
any hour
Cumulative period of five minutes in 55               50
any hour
Cumulative period of one minute in   60               55
any hour
Any time                             65               60
 
      (3)   Ambient sound level. If the ambient sound level within the adjacent
area exceeds the applicable standard for the cumulative period specified in
division (F)(2) of this section, the applicable standard for such period shall
be the ambient sound level.
      (4)   Pure or impulsive noise. If the source of noise emits a pure or
impulsive noise, the noise standard for the applicable period shall be reduced
by five decibels.
      (5)   Measurement period and sound level meters. For the purposes of the
enforcement of the conditions set forth in this division, a sound level meter
which satisfies the requirements of American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) S1.4-1971 (or the most recent revision thereof) Type S2A meter shall be
used. The measurement period shall be any one-hour period during the hours of
operation of the arcade.
   (G)   Bicycle racks shall be provided within 25 feet of any game arcade and
shall provide a total of at least one bicycle stall for every two games located
within the arcade. Bicycle racks shall not be located in any required
landscaped areas, entrances, exits, walkways to buildings, driveways, within
any legally required parking space, public way, or in such a fashion as to
obstruct any entrance or exit to any premises.
   (H)   A person shall not enter, be, or remain in any part of a game arcade
while in the possession of, consuming, using, or under the influence of any
alcoholic beverage or drug. No licensee, manager, or supervisory employee shall
permit any such person to enter or remain on the premises. Smoking and the sale
of tobacco products on the premises shall be prohibited. A sign shall be posted
inside the arcade stating in letters at least two inches high: “No Smoking. No
Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages.” In addition to the lettered signs,
universal symbol signs prohibiting smoking and consumption of alcoholic
beverages shall be posted.
   (I)   A game arcade shall have a minimum of 750 square feet of floor space
available for the operation of such arcade.
   (J)   No game arcade may be located closer than 300 feet from any bar,
tavern, or cocktail lounge holding an on-sale alcoholic beverage license and
primarily engaged in the business of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages
on the premises.
   (K)   No conditional use permit for a game arcade shall be granted for a
period longer than two years.
   (L)   (1)   The Planning Commission, upon a showing of good cause at the
time it grants any conditional use permit for a game arcade, may modify or
delete any condition otherwise required by this section if the Planning
Commission finds that such condition imposes an undue hardship upon the
applicant and such requirement, as applied to his proposed business location,
is unnecessary for the protection of the health, safety, or welfare of the
public, the patrons of the establishment, or surrounding residences or
businesses.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may impose any additional condition upon
the granting of any such conditional use permit which the Planning Commission
determines is necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes set forth in
this section.
('65 Code, § 5-3.23) (Ord. 236-C-S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
FIESTAS, FAIRS, CARNIVALS, NONPROFIT FUNDRAISERS
AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 116.039 EXEMPTION FOR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION CASINO EVENTS.
   The prohibition of games by the provisions of this chapter and §
130.06 of this code shall not apply to casino events that comply with state law
and the permit requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 648, passed 10-2-18)
§ 116.040 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or carry on any special event
or public celebration in the city without first securing a temporary use permit
in accordance with this subchapter.
(‘65 Code, § 5-11.01) (Ord. 532, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 648, passed 10-2-18)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.041 TEMPORARY USE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Community Development Director shall prescribe the items to submit
and information to provide in the temporary use permit application, and may
promulgate policies, guidelines, and procedures that are consistent with this
subchapter.
   (B)   A complete permit application shall be filed no later than 60 days
before the planned special event.
   (C)   Applications for casino events shall include a copy of any agreement
with a supplier of gaming equipment and services, and shall demonstrate
compliance with applicable state law, including, without limitation, approval
by the Bureau of Gambling Control and registration with the Registry of
Charitable Trusts. A temporary use permit shall not be issued if it will result
in more than three days in which the applicant has conducted casino events in
any calendar year.
   (D)   Application fees shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The
fee schedule may specify a lower fee for applications that are properly and
timely filed by nonprofit organizations.
   (E)   If an application is withdrawn, the city may authorize a partial
refund of fees based on the processing costs incurred to date.
   (F)   The Community Development Director shall refer the application to
relevant departments, including the City Manager, Police, Fire and Finance for
review and recommended conditions. Conflict with another event in the city may
justify denial of a permit for a specific date.
   (G)   Submitted applications shall become part of the administrative record
which shall include copies of correspondence, notices and actions in connection
with the application.
(‘65 Code, § 5-11.02) (Ord. 532, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 648, passed 10-2-18)
§ 116.042 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Decisions by the Community Development Director to grant or deny an
application for temporary use permit shall be in the form of a written
determination letter. The decision, including any conditions of approval, shall
be supported by written findings that the event will be conducted in a lawful
manner with adequate protection of the public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare.
   (B)   The temporary use permit may require as conditions of approval that
the applicant provide a surety bond and liability based on the proposed event
and the nature of the subject property and surrounding properties. Conditions
of approval may provide for recovery of actual costs incurred for services
provided by the city related to the event, including without limitation, costs
of law enforcement, traffic control, and cleanup. An advance deposit of the
estimated amount of cost recovery may be required.
(‘65 Code, § 5-11.03) (Ord. 532, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 648, passed 10-2-18)
§ 116.043 DENIAL AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Within ten days after a permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the
decision of the Community Development Director to the Planning Commission, and
may subsequently appeal the decision of the Planning Commission to the City
Council by filing an appeal with the City Clerk using the city’s appeal form
together with the required processing fee. Appeals shall be heard in the same
manner as provided for in §§
30.10 et seq., except that a public hearing shall not be required.
   (B)   Upon finding that a permitted temporary use has become detrimental to
the public health, safety or welfare, the Community Development Director may
revoke a temporary use permit. The decision of the Community Development
Director shall be final, subject only to judicial review as provided by law.
(Ord. 648, passed 10-2-18)
POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS
§ 116.055 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a poolroom or billiard room
without first having obtained a conditional use permit as required in §
153.151 of this code.
§ 116.056 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal, officer, clerk,
agent, or employee, either for himself or for any other person, to engage in,
conduct, carry on, or maintain the business, trade, occupation, or calling of
conducting a poolroom or billiard room in the city without first having
procured a permit from the Council so to do.
('65 Code, § 5-16.01) (Ord. 85, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.057 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to procure a permit for conducting or maintaining in the
city a poolroom or billiard room shall make an application therefor in writing
to the Council. Such application shall set forth the name of such person, or,
if the applicant shall be an association, the names of the members thereof, or,
if the applicant shall be a corporation, the names of the officers thereof, and
the location where it is proposed to conduct such poolroom or billiard room.
('65 Code, § 5-16.02) (Ord. 85, passed - - )
§ 116.058 CONSIDERATION; ISSUANCE.
   Such application for a permit shall be considered by the Council as soon as
convenient after the application shall have been received. The determination of
the Council upon such application, when so made, shall be conclusive unless
reconsidered by the Council in the same manner other acts of the Council are
reconsidered; provided, however, not more than one pool and billiard room shall
be licensed in a block. Upon such permit being granted by the Council, the
Council shall direct the City Clerk to issue such permit upon the payment of
the permit fee specified in this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 5-16.03) (Ord. 85, passed - - )
§ 116.059 FORM OF PERMIT.
   The permit shall contain the name of the person, firm, corporation, or
association to whom the same is issued, the date of its expiration, the amount
paid therefor, the date of the granting of the permit by the Council, and the
location for which the permit shall have been granted. Such license shall be
signed by the City Clerk and shall have the seal of the city attached thereto.
('65 Code, § 5-16.04) (Ord. 85, passed - - )
§ 116.060 PERMIT FEE.
   The permit fee for the business, trade, calling, or occupation of conducting
such poolroom or billiard room shall be in an amount established by Council
resolution, payable in advance at the issuance of the permit.
('65 Code, § 5-16.05) (Ord. 85, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - )
§ 116.061 POSTING OF PERMIT.
   Such permit shall be posted in some conspicuous place in such poolroom or
billiard room where the permit may be readily seen.
('65 Code, § 5-16.06) (Ord. 85, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.062 LOCATION OF PREMISES; ENTRANCES.
   No permit to conduct, carry on, or maintain such poolroom or billiard room
shall be granted for any other place or locality other than a room or place
situated on the ground floor of the building wherein the poolroom or billiard
room is proposed to be conducted. The street door or entrance to such poolroom
or billiard room shall be so constructed that the public walking along or being
on the street in front of such poolroom or billiard room may at all times see
the occupants of such poolroom or billiard room and the contents thereof from
the street or sidewalk in front of the premises.
('65 Code, § 5-16.07) (Ord. 85, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.063 PREMISES OPEN TO INSPECTION.
   Such poolroom or billiard room shall at all times be open to inspection by
the Police Chief, police officers, and Code Enforcement Officer.
('65 Code, § 5-16.08) (Ord. 85, passed - - )
§ 116.064 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   All such permits shall be made conditional upon the daily closure of the
poolroom or billiard room at or before the time specified in the approved
permit. The poolroom or billiard room shall remain closed until the opening
time specified in the approved permit. During the hours which the poolroom or
billiard room is closed, no patrons shall remain on the premises for any
purpose.
('65 Code, § 5-16.09) (Ord. 85, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 437-C.S., passed 9-20-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.065 MINORS.
   Such permits shall be made conditional that no minor under the age of 18
years shall be permitted to play in such poolroom or billiard room or to remain
therein, either as an employee, guest, visitor, spectator, or otherwise.
('65 Code, § 5-16.10) (Ord. 85, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 454, passed 9-19-95)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.066 VIOLATION; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   If any person permitted by the provisions of this subchapter shall permit
any minor under the age of 18 years to play at or remain in such poolroom or
billiard room, or if any such person shall open such poolroom or billiard room
to the public, or permit the public to play therein or remain therein, between
the hours permitted in the permit, or if any such person shall employ any minor
under the age of 18 years to work in or about such poolroom or billiard room,
such permit shall be immediately revoked. ('65 Code, § 5-16.11) (Ord. 85,
passed - - )
CHAPTER 117: FILMING AND VIDEO TAPING
Section
   
117.01   Purpose and intent
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   Film Permit Coordinator
   
117.04   Permit required
   
117.05   Exceptions
   
117.06   Application form
   
117.07   Time for filing application
   
117.08   Permit fee and city service use fee schedule
   
117.09   City buildings and facilities fees
   
117.10   Application review and permit conditions
   
117.11   Notification
   
117.12   Insurance
   
117.13   Hold harmless
   
117.14   Permit amendments
   
117.15   Suspension
   
117.16   Revocation
§ 117.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to provide requirements and procedures to
facilitate filming and video taping within the city, to assure that such
activity is consistent with the public health, safety and general welfare and
the protection of property.
('65 Code, § 4-12.01) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NEWS PURPOSES. The filming or video taping for television news broadcasting
by reporters, photographers or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news
service or similar entity, of news events concerning those persons, scenes, or
occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest to be viewed
within 24 hours. This does not include magazine or documentary programs.
   STUDIOS. An established or fixed place of business where filming or video
taping for motion pictures or television production is regularly conducted upon
the premises.
('65 Code, § 4-12.02) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.03 FILM PERMIT COORDINATOR.
   The City Manager shall designate a Film Permit Coordinator who will be
responsible for issuing film and video taping permits. The Film Permit
Coordinator will be responsible for coordinating needed services between city
departments to assist the permittee in fulfilling the requirements of the
permit. The Film Permit Coordinator may also assign a designee to assist in the
application review and permit issuing.
('65 Code, § 4-12.03) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
117.05 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business or activity of filming, video taping or producing motion pictures on
motion picture film or electronic video tape for public exhibition as motion
pictures or for television, at any place in the city, other than at or in an
established motion picture or television studio, without a permit from the Film
Permit Coordinator. A copy of the permit must be posted on site during the
entire time of the filming or video taping. The film site shall be open to
inspection by city employees at any time during the preparation, shooting and
strike.
('65 Code, § 4-12.04) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   The filming or video taping of motion pictures solely for private or
family use.
   (B)   The filming or video taping of motion pictures for use in a criminal
investigation, civil proceeding, and emergencies such as fires, floods, police
actions, and the like.
   (C)   The filming, video taping or production of motion pictures for news
purposes.
   (D)   Education, government and public access and local organization
programs for cable television systems franchised within the city.
   (E)   Any other activity deemed in the public interest by the Film Permit
Coordinator.
('65 Code, § 4-12.05) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.06 APPLICATION FORM.
   The Film Permit Coordinator shall develop an appropriate application form
and furnish it to anyone who desires a film permit.
('65 Code, § 4-12.06) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.07 TIME FOR FILING APPLICATION.
   An applicant must submit a application at least two working days prior to
the date on which such person desires to conduct filming activity, including
preparation, shooting and strike days. If the activity interferes with traffic
or involves road closures, stunts or special effects, an application must be
submitted at least four working days in advance. Written authorization from all
property owners where filming will occur shall be attached to the permit
application. Permit application information may be given by the applicant to
the city over the telephone.
('65 Code, § 4-12.07) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.08 PERMIT FEE AND CITY SERVICE USE FEE SCHEDULE.
   The permit fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
Subject to the approval of the City Manager, the Film Permit Coordinator shall
prepare on an annual basis, to be revised as needed, a city service use fee
schedule which shall set forth daily charges of all city services utilized in
connection with such filming or video taping. The permit fee and minimum
service use fees shall be collected before the approved permit is issued. The
film company will be billed by the city for any service fees used over the
minimum after the filming is completed. Payment of said fees is due within ten
days of billing. In the event that weather conditions or other circumstances
beyond the control of the applicant require that the date(s) or time(s) of the
proposed filming or video taping be altered, no additional application or fees
shall be required because of such alteration of the date(s) or time(s) so long
as the Film Permit Coordinator is given reasonable notice of the alteration.
('65 Code, § 4-12.08) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.09 CITY BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES FEES.
   Fees for city-owned buildings and facilities used by applicants during their
filming or video taping shall be established by City Council resolution. This
fee shall be paid by the applicant to the Film Permit Coordinator before the
permit is issued.
('65 Code, § 4-12.09) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.10 APPLICATION REVIEW AND PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   Before granting any permit pursuant to this chapter, the Film Permit
Coordinator shall review the application and determine that such filming or
video taping will not unreasonably interfere with the public health and safety
or unreasonably endanger any property. The Film Permit Coordinator will also
determine if special circumstances exist and may impose conditions to the
issuance of the permit. Special conditions include:
   (A)   Noise. Filming activities which produce unusual noise such as gunfire,
sirens, public address systems, bull horns, construction, or other loud noises,
may be regulated to mitigate the effects of the activity.
   (B)   Aircraft. Aerial filming and/or helicopter landings are not permitted
without explicit written permission from the City Manager in addition to any
permits required from the Federal Aviation Administration. This written
authorization shall be filed with the application.
   (C)   Public safety personnel. Police and/or fire personnel requirements
shall be determined by those departments. The expense for the required
personnel will be collected from the permittee according to the city service
use fee schedule. Public safety employees shall enforce all city regulations
and are employees of the city, not the permittee.
   (D)   Streets and sidewalks. The applicant must obtain approval from the
Film Permit Coordinator to park equipment and vehicles in zones that do not
permit parking, to park trucks over three tons on city streets between 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and to string cable across sidewalks. The applicant must
take reasonable safety precautions to ensure vehicle and pedestrian traffic
will be adequately warned of any hazards.
   (E)   Traffic control. Any filming that will impair the normal flow of
traffic must be authorized on the permit. Police officers shall be required of
sufficient force to ensure the safety of the public and the permittee's
employees. The permittee must obtain permission from the City Manager for any
road closures. Restricted parking signs shall be posted by the Street
Department, upon request from the applicant, at least 24 hours before filming
is to begin. The expense for traffic control and street posting shall be
collected from the permittee according to the city service use fee schedule.
   (F)   Clean-up. The permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion
with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the
cleanup of trash and debris. The site shall be returned to its original
condition at the conclusion of filming before leaving the site. The applicant
may be required to post a refundable bond, as determined by the city, to ensure
cleanup and restoration of any public property.
('65 Code, § 4-12.10) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.11 NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide
notification on a designated city form to the following affected persons:
      (1)   If filming outside at any time, all residents and businesses on
both sides of the block within 200 feet of the site and all adjoining
properties to the rear of the site.
      (2)   If filming in residential areas between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
all residents on both sides of the block within 300 feet and all adjoining
properties to the rear of the site.
      (3)   If filming activities will exceed two days including preparation,
shooting and strike, all residents and business on both sides of the block
within 300 feet of the site and all adjoining properties to the rear of the
site.
   (B)   No notifications shall be required if filming or video taping is to
take place at the Civic Auditorium.
   (C)   All notifications shall be completed 48 hours in advance of filming
activities. Response to notification from affected persons shall be evaluated
as part of the film application review.
   (D)   The Film Permit Coordinator may waive all or parts of the notification
requirements with the approval of the City Manager.
('65 Code, § 4-12.11) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.12 INSURANCE.
   The applicant shall, at its sole expense, provide the city with evidence of
insurance for general liability and workers compensation benefits for accidents
or injuries which occur or are sustained in the course of carrying out this
activity. The insurance policy shall not be less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit. The certificate of insurance must name the city as an additional
insured.
('65 Code, § 4-12.12) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.13 HOLD HARMLESS.
   The applicant shall agree to indemnify, defend and hold the city free and
harmless from any and all liability, claims, damages or injuries to any person
or property, including injury to the applicant's employees and all claims which
arise from or are connected with the negligent performance of or failure to
perform work or other obligations of the permitted activity, or are caused or
claim to be caused by the negligent acts of the city, its agents or employees,
and all expenses of investigating and defending against the same.
('65 Code, § 4-12.13) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.14 PERMIT AMENDMENTS.
   Minor additions, corrections or alterations to a permit shall be made
available by way of application for an unlimited number of amendments, also
known as “riders,” which shall be attached to the original permit in writing.
However, a permit cannot be extended or amended by rider after the completion
of the filming activity. Significant changes to the original permit shall
require a new permit application.
('65 Code, § 4-12.14) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.15 SUSPENSION.
   Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be subject to
immediate suspension if it is found necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety or general welfare. In the event of such a suspension, the Film
Permit Coordinator shall within one working day cause to be served upon the
permit holder a written statement containing the grounds for the suspension.
The permit holder may appeal to the City Manager regarding the suspension.
('65 Code, § 4-12.15) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
§ 117.16 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Manager or his designee may revoke a film permit issued
pursuant to this chapter under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Where it is determined that the permittee violated or failed to
comply with any of the applicable ordinances, resolutions, or regulations of
the city;
      (2)   Where it is determined that the permittee violated or has failed to
comply with any of the terms or conditions of the film permit;
      (3)   Where it is determined that the film permit was granted pursuant to
false or fraudulent information contained in the film permit application;
      (4)   Where it is subsequently determined that the filming activity will
fail to meet the criteria enumerated in this chapter for granting a film
permit; or
      (5)   Where it is determined that the preservation of the public health,
safety and general welfare demand revocation of the permit.
   (B)   The decision of the City Manager or his designee to revoke a film
permit shall be final.
('65 Code, § 4-12.16) (Ord. 407-C.S., passed - - )
CHAPTER 118: FORTUNE TELLING
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Permit and compliance with conditions required
   
118.03   Permit applications
   
118.04   Investigations
   
118.05   Hearings and decisions by Council
   
118.06   Issuance of permits
   
118.07   Exceptions
Cross-reference:
   
Classification N: Fortune telling, see § 110.69
   
Permitted use, see § 153.151
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOR PAY. For a fee, reward, donation, loan, or receipt of anything of value.
   FORTUNE TELLING. Telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures, or furnishing
of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of
knowledge by means of any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance,
clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea
leaves, or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury,
astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind reading, telepathy, or other craft, art,
science, card, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or
substance, crystal gazing, or magic of any kind or nature.
('65 Code, § 5-12.01) (Ord. 264-C.S., passed - - )
§ 118.02 PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in, or
practice fortune telling or cause the same to be done for pay without having
first obtained a permit from the Council and without having posted and
maintained in full force and effect a surety bond as required by §
118.06 of this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall violate any of the terms and conditions of a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter, nor any of the regulations and provisions
within this chapter. Each day such violations occur shall constitute a separate
offense.
('65 Code, § 5-12.02) (Ord. 264-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 118.03 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Every natural person who, for pay, actively conducts, engages in, carries
on, or practices fortune telling shall file a separate verified application for
a permit with the Finance Director. The application shall contain:
   (A)   The name, home and business address, and home and business telephone
number of the applicant;
   (B)   The record of convictions for violations of law, excluding minor
traffic violations;
   (C)   The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the Police
Department; and
   (D)   The address, city and state, and the approximate dates where and when
the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with
others.
('65 Code, § 5-12.03) (Ord. 264-C.S., passed - - )
§ 118.04 INVESTIGATIONS.
   Upon the filing of the application, it shall be referred by the Finance
Director to the Police Department for an investigation, report, and
recommendation. The investigation shall be conducted to verify the facts
contained in the application and any supporting data. The investigation shall
be completed and a report and recommendation made in writing to the Council
within 14 days after the filing of the application, unless the applicant
requests or consents to an extension of the time period. If the report
recommends the denial of the permit to the applicant, the grounds for the
recommended denial shall be set forth. At the time of the filing of the report
and recommendation with the Council, a copy thereof shall be served personally
or by certified mail by the Finance Director to the applicant, accompanied by a
notice to the applicant who may request to be heard when the Council considers
the application and report.
('65 Code, § 5-12.04) (Ord. 264-C.S., passed - - )
§ 118.05 HEARINGS AND DECISIONS BY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Council shall consider the application and the report and
recommendation at a hearing held at a regularly scheduled meeting on or before
the fifteenth day after the filing of the report and recommendation referred to
in §
118.04 of this chapter.
   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to all
parties by the Finance Director at least three days prior to the hearing.
   (C)   Any interested party shall be heard upon a reasonable request.
   (D)   The city shall have the burden of proof to show that the permit should
be denied.
   (E)   The decision of the Council to grant or deny the permit shall be in
writing and, if adverse to the applicant, shall contain findings of fact and a
determination of the issues presented.
   (F)   Unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time, the
Council shall make its order denying or granting the application with in 15
days after the completion of the hearing on the application for the permit and
shall notify the applicant of its action by personal service or certified mail.
   (G)   Any member of the Council who is absent from the hearing or has not
read or heard the record of the proceedings shall not vote on the decision.
('65 Code, § 5-12.05) (Ord. 264-C.S., passed - - )
§ 118.06 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The Council shall approve the issuance of the permit if it finds that:
      (1)   All information contained in the application and supporting data is
true;
      (2)   The applicant has not, within the previous six months, been
convicted of any violation of this chapter or any law relating to fraud or
moral turpitude;
      (3)   The applicant appeared in person at the hearing; and
      (4)   The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all the conditions
of the permit and this chapter.
   (B)   The Council shall deny the permit only if it cannot make each of the
findings set forth in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   If the Council approves the permit, the Finance Director shall
thereafter issue the permit when:
      (1)   The fee required by §
110.69 of this title has been paid; and
      (2)   The applicant has posted with the City Clerk a surety bond in the
principal sum amount of $10,000, executed as surety by a good and sufficient
corporate surety authorized to do a surety business in the state and as a
principal by the applicant. The form of the bond shall have been approved by
the City Attorney and shall have been given to insure good faith and fair
dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any or
all loss, damage, theft, or other unfair dealings suffered by any patron of the
applicant within the city during the term of the permit.
   (D)   The term of the permit shall not exceed one year. A renewal
application shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the expiration of the
permit and shall be processed in the same manner as a new application. The
Council, in its discretion, may grant a permit for a period of less than one
year and may impose such reasonable conditions upon the granting of such permit
as, in the discretion of the Council, based upon the evidence presented in
connection with the application for the permit, are necessary for the
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
('65 Code, § 5-12.06) (Ord. 264-C.S., passed - - )
§ 118.07 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person solely by
reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining
the public by demonstrations of mind reading, mental telepathy, thought
conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings at public places and in the
presence of and within the hearing of other persons at which no questions are
answered, as part of such entertainment, except to permit all persons present
at such place to hear such answers.
   (B)   No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any permit for
conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such
person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium,
healer, or clairvoyant, collectively referred to as minister in this section,
from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and
holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principals
which is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided that:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, the fees,
gratuities, emoluments, and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for
and paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious
association as defined in this division.
      (2)   The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona
fide church or religious association, as defined in this division, shall file
with the Finance Director a copy of the minister's certificate of ordination
with the minister's name, age, street address, and telephone number in the city
where the activity set forth in this division is to be conducted.
      (3)   Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this
division, may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a
percentage basis pursuant to an agreement between the church and the minister
which agreement is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of
such church or religious association. ('65 Code, § 5-12.07) (Ord. 264-C.S.,
passed - - )
CHAPTER 119: TAXICABS
Section
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   Permit required
   
119.03   Permit application
   
119.04   Issuance
   
119.05   (Reserved)
   
119.06   Suspension and revocation
   
119.07   Insurance
   
119.08   Parking spaces or stands
   
119.09   Fares; overcharging; nonpayment
   
119.10   Soliciting passengers; misrepresentation of vehicle
   
119.11   Investigation of complaints
   
119.12   Rules and regulations
§ 119.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER. Every person in charge of or operating any passenger-carrying
vehicle, either as agent, employee, or otherwise, under the direction of the
owner.
   OWNER. Every person, firm, or corporation having the use, control of, or
right to use or control any passenger-carrying automobile or motor-propelled
vehicle under ownership, lease, or otherwise.
   TAXICAB. Every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle used for the
transportation of passengers over the public streets of the city and not over a
defined route, irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the
boundary limits of the city at rates for distance traveled or for waiting time,
or for both, and such vehicle is routed under the direction of the passenger or
of such persons hiring the same.
('65 Code, § 5-22.01) (Ord. 290, passed - - )
§ 119.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the
business of operating a motor vehicle for hire without first securing a permit
for the business from the City Council so to do.
('65 Code, § 5-22.02) (Ord. 290, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 408, passed - -; Am.
Ord. 476-C.S., passed 12-17-96)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.03 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating a motor vehicle
in the city for hire shall first file with the Council a written application
setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the name under which it is
proposed to conduct such business, the location of the principal place of
business of the applicant, the number, make, and model of the vehicles to be
used, the rates or fares to be charged, and such other information as the
Council may from time to time require.
('65 Code, § 5-22.03) (Ord. 290, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 408, passed - - )
§ 119.04 ISSUANCE.
   If the Council is satisfied that the public convenience justifies the
operation of such business in the city and that the applicant is a proper
person to conduct the same, it shall direct the Finance Director to issue a
permit to the applicant upon the payment of the license fee set forth in §§
110.60 through
110.69 of this title.
('65 Code, § 5-22.04) (Ord. 290, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 408, passed - - )
§ 119.05 (RESERVED)
§ 119.06 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   The Council may revoke or suspend the permit granted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter to any person who violates any of the provisions of
this chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-22.06) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
§ 119.07 INSURANCE.
   Prior to issuance of a permit by the Finance Director, the applicant shall
provide evidence of the insurance coverage required under the city's insurance
coverage standards as promulgated by the City Manager.
§ 119.08 PARKING SPACES OR STANDS.
   The traffic provisions regarding the time limit for parking automobiles
shall not apply to vehicles being operated pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, provided such vehicles are parked in the spaces designated by the City
Engineer therefor.
('65 Code, § 5-22.08) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
§ 119.09 FARES; OVERCHARGING; NONPAYMENT.
   (A)   Overcharging. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor
vehicle for hire to charge or collect a fare larger than that set forth in the
application filed with the city. ('65 Code, § 5-22.09)
   (B)   Nonpayment. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to
pay the legal fare for a taxicab after having hired the same. ('65 Code, § 5-
22.10)
(Ord. 408, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.10 SOLICITING PASSENGERS; MISREPRESENTATION OF VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person soliciting patronage for any taxicab to
misrepresent by word, sign, insignia, or badge the true identity of the vehicle
for which such patronage is sought.
('65 Code, § 5-22.11) (Ord. 290, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.11 INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
   The City Manager's Office shall receive and investigate complaints from any
person regarding taxicab operations in the city. Upon completion of his
investigation, the City Manager shall forward his report to the City Council
who may take appropriate action after affording the licensee an opportunity,
during a regularly schedule City Council meeting, to respond to the complaints.
('65 Code, § 5-22.12) (Ord. 290, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 476-C.S., passed 12-17-
96)
§ 119.12 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Council shall have the authority to adopt such rules and regulations as
may be necessary for the convenient and proper operation or management of
taxicabs.
('65 Code, § 5-22.13) (Ord. 290, passed - - )
CHAPTER 120: HORSE RACING HANDICAPPERS
Section
   
120.01   Permit required
   
120.02   Permit applications
   
120.03   Consideration of application; issuance
   
120.04   Form of permit
   
120.05   License fee
   
120.06   Suspension or revocation
   
120.07   Appeals
§ 120.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal, officer, clerk,
agent, or employee, either for himself or for any other person, to engage in,
conduct, carry on, or maintain the business, trade, occupation, or calling of a
horse racing handicapper in the city without first having procured a permit
from the Council so to do.
('65 Code, § 5-26.01) (Ord. 167-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.02 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Any person desiring to procure a permit to engage in, conduct, carry on, or
maintain the business, trade, occupation, or calling of a horse racing
handicapper shall make an application therefor in writing to the Council. Such
application shall set forth the name of such person or, if the applicant shall
be an association, the names of the members thereof, or, if the applicant shall
be a corporation, the names of the officers thereof, and the location where it
is proposed to conduct such business. Such application shall contain such
additional information as may be prescribed by the City Manager, including, but
not limited to, the names of all persons who shall be employed in such
business, their addresses, past employment record, record of any arrests or
convictions for other than minor traffic violations, and any other information
of a similar nature which shall be necessary in order to ascertain the moral
character of such persons.
('65 Code, § 5-26.02) (Ord. 167-C.S., passed - - )
§ 120.03 CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   Such application for a permit shall be considered by the Council as soon as
convenient after the application shall have been received and an application
fee in an amount established by Council has been paid. Such application fee
shall defray the costs of the investigation of the application and shall be
non-refundable. The determination of the Council upon such application, when so
made, shall be conclusive, unless reconsidered by the Council in the same
manner other acts of the Council are reconsidered. Upon such permit being
granted by the Council, the Council shall direct the Finance Director to issue
such permit upon the payment of the license fee set forth in this chapter. The
permit, if granted, shall remain in effect until revoked or until the permittee
allows his license to expire without timely renewal.
('65 Code, § 5-26.03) (Ord. 167-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed -
- )
§ 120.04 FORM OF PERMIT.
   The permit shall contain the name of the person, firm, corporation, or
association to whom the permit is issued, the date of its expiration, the
amount paid therefor, the date of the granting of the permit by the Council,
and the location for which the permit shall have been granted. Such permit
shall be issued by the Finance Director.
('65 Code, § 5-26.04) (Ord. 167-C.S., passed - - )
§ 120.05 LICENSE FEE.
   The business license fee for the occupation of horse racing handicapper
shall be as set forth in §
110.63 of this code.
§ 120.06 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   Any license or permit granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Finance Director at any time:
   (A)   For a material false statement contained in the application;
   (B)   For failure to comply with any regulatory provision contained in the
statutes of the state or the laws of the city regulating such business;
   (C)   For failure to operate such business in an orderly and businesslike
manner in compliance with such orders, rules, and regulations as may be
applicable thereto pursuant to the provisions of this code or statutes of the
state; or
   (D)   For conducting such business in an illegal, improper, or disorderly
manner or in a manner which endangers the public welfare.
('65 Code, § 5-26.06) (Ord. 167-C.S., passed - - )
§ 120.07 APPEALS.
   Any decision of the Finance Director shall be subject to an appeal to the
Council as otherwise provided in this code.
('65 Code, § 5-26.07) (Ord. 167-C.S., passed - - )
CHAPTER 121: ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
Class 2 Licenses
   
121.01   Definitions
   
121.02   Class 2 license required
   
121.03   Sale/transfer prohibited
   
121.04   Application for a Class 2 license/renewal
   
121.05   Investigation
   
121.06   Recommendation
   
121.07   City Council decision
   
121.08   Granting or denial of Class 2 license
   
121.09   Inspection
   
121.10   Expiration of license/renewal
   
121.11   Operating conditions
   
121.12   Continuing duty to supply information
   
121.13   Revocation/renewal denial
   
121.14   Hearing on revocation of license
   
121.15   Moratorium on reapplying after revocation or denial
   
121.16   Regulations nonexclusive
   
121.17   Public nuisances
Business Permits
   
121.30   Permit/license required
   
121.31   Application
   
121.32   Meetings, hearings, and notices
   
121.33   Requirements for permit issuance
   
121.34   Measurement of distance
   
121.35   Inspections
   
121.36   Revocation
   
121.37   Moratorium after revocation
 
   
121.99   Penalty
CLASS 2 LICENSES
§ 121.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the words, terms, and phrases shall have the following meanings:
   ADULT ARCADE. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines,
for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Any establishment which, as a regular
and substantial course of conduct, displays and/or distributes adult
merchandise, books, periodicals, magazines, photographs, drawings, sculptures,
motion pictures, videos, slides, films, or other written, oral or visual
representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on a
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical parts.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, lounge, restaurant or similar establishment
which features as a regular and substantial course of conduct any type of live
entertainment, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, or other photographic
reproductions or visual representations, which are characterized by an emphasis
on the exposure, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical parts.
   ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL. A hotel or motel which:
      (1)   Features as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides to
its patrons through television, cable or satellite transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, photographic reproductions or other medium,
material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical parts; and
      (2)   Rents, leases or lets any room for less than a six hour period or
more than once in a 24-hour period.
   ADULT MOTEL STUDIO. Any premise where there is furnished, provided or
procured a figure model or models who pose for the purpose of being observed,
viewed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, filmed, video-
taped, or similarly depicted by any person who pays a consideration or gratuity
in any form for the right or opportunity to so depict or observe the figure
model. ADULT MODEL STUDIO shall not include any live art class or any studio or
classroom which is operated by any public agency, or any private educational
institution authorized to issue and confer a diploma or degree under Cal. Educ.
Code §§ 94300 et seq.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the
total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any establishment which as a regular or substantial
course of conduct performs or operates as an adult bookstore, adult theater,
adult motion picture arcade, adult cabaret, adult model studio, adult hotel/
motel, or any other business establishment which as a regular and substantial
course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or
entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. ADULT-
ORIENTED BUSINESS does not include those uses or activities, the regulation of
which is preempted by state law. ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS shall also include any
establishment which, as a regular or substantial course of conduct, provides or
allows performers, models, actors, actresses, or employees to appear in any
place in lingerie or similar attire which does not opaquely cover specified
anatomical parts.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment
which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances
which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.
   CLASS 2 LICENSE. A license issued by the City Council for the operation of
an adult-oriented business.
   INDIVIDUAL VIEWING AREA. Any area designed for occupancy of one person for
the purpose of viewing performances, pictures, movies, videos or other
presentations.
   LICENSEE. The person or entity to whom a Class 2 license is issued.
   PERSON. Person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, or any
other forms of business organization or group(s).
   PERSON WHO HAS ENGAGED IN DISQUALIFYING CONDUCT. A person who:
      (1)   Within the two years immediately preceding the date of filing of
the application in question or the date of the revocation notice provided
pursuant to §
121.13, has been convicted of any misdemeanor or felony offense which relates
directly to the operation of an adult-oriented business;
      (2)   Within the two years immediately preceding the date of filing of
the application in question or the date of the revocation notice provided
pursuant to §
121.13, has been found to be maintaining a nuisance in connection with an
adult-oriented business or has been subject to an injunction against the
conducting or maintaining of a nuisance under any applicable laws, including
Cal. Penal Code §§ 11225 et seq.;
      (3)   Within the two years immediately preceding the date of filing of
the application in question or the date of the revocation notice provided
pursuant to §
121.13, has been convicted of any offense or has been released from custody for
an offense which is classified as an offense involving sexual crimes against
children, sexual battery or abuse, rape, distribution of material harmful to
minors, prostitution, pandering or lewd conduct, including, but not necessarily
limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under Cal. Penal
Code § 290.
   QUALIFYING INTEREST. If the applicant is a corporation, each officer,
director, and stockholder owning a minimum of 10% of the stock of the
corporation; if the applicant is a partnership, each partner, including limited
partners; if the applicant is some other form of business enterprise, all
individuals owning a minimum of a 10% ownership interest therein.
   REGULAR AND SUBSTANTIAL COURSE OF CONDUCT and REGULAR AND SUBSTANTIAL
PORTION OF ITS BUSINESS.  Any adult-oriented business where one or more of the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   The area(s) devoted to the display of sexually oriented material or
merchandise exceeds 15% of the total display area of the business. This section
shall not apply to any video store or bookstore which physically separates
sexually oriented material from non-sexually oriented material and does not
advertise such sexually oriented material; or
      (2)   The business presents any type of live entertainment characterized
by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical parts, or
performers, models or employees appearing in public dressed only in lingerie,
on any four or more separate days within any 12 month period; or
      (3)   At least 25% of the annual gross receipts (as defined by §
110.30) of the business are derived from the sale, trade, rental, display or
presentation of services, products, sexually oriented material or merchandise,
or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas. This section shall not apply to any video store or bookstore which
physically separates sexually oriented material from non-sexually oriented
material and does not advertise such sexually oriented material.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A structure which is used primarily for religious
worship and related religious activities;
   SCHOOL. Any child care facility, day care facility or a public or private
institution of learning for minors, which offers instruction in those courses
of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained
pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition
includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school,
senior high school or any special institution of education, but it does not
include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including
a community or junior college, college or university.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MATERIAL. Any element of sexually-oriented merchandise, or
any books, periodicals, magazines, photographs, drawings, sculptures, motion
pictures, videos, slides, films, or other written, oral or visual
representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical parts.
   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MERCHANDISE. Sexually-oriented implements and
paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually-
oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices,
anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and
similarly sexually-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily
for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL PARTS shall mean:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES shall mean:
      (1)   Actual or simulated sex acts including intercourse, oral
copulation, anal intercourse, oral or anal copulation, bestiality, direct
physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship, anilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia,
cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pedophilia, piquerism, sodomy, or
zooerastia; or
      (2)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
      (3)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breast; or
      (4)   Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the
infliction of pain; or
      (5)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or
      (6)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation; or
      (7)   Striptease, or the removal of clothing; or
      (8)   The wearing of transparent or diaphanous clothing, including models
dressed only in lingerie to the point where specified anatomical areas are
exposed.
('65 Code, §§ 5-31.01, 9-3.3001) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.02 CLASS 2 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or permit to be conducted an
adult-oriented business without first obtaining a Class 2 license from the City
Council. In addition to each Class 2 license that is required, an adult-
oriented business is also required to obtain an adult-oriented use permit in
accordance with §§
121.30 through 121.37 and a business license in accordance with
Chapter 110 of this code.
('65 Code, § 5-31.02) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.03 SALE/TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   No Class 2 License shall be sold, transferred, or assigned by any license
holder, or by operation of law, to any other person, group, partnership,
corporation or any other entity, and any such sale, transfer or assignment, or
attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a
voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall be thereafter null
and void. For purposes of this section, an acquisition by any person, group,
partnership or other entity of at least 10% of the adult-oriented business
shall be considered a sale, transfer or assignment.
('65 Code, § 5-31.03) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.04 APPLICATION FOR A CLASS 2 LICENSE/RENEWAL.
   Applicants for a Class 2 license or a renewal thereof shall file a written
application, signed under penalty of perjury, on a form provided by the Police
Department. Said application or renewal form shall be accompanied by a fee in
an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council. The information
requested in items (A), (C), (F) and (G) as to the applicant shall be supplied
for all individuals with a qualifying interest as well as for the person(s)
having management or supervision of the adult-oriented business. The
application shall contain the information specified below:
   (A)   The name and birthdate of the applicant; if the applicant is a
corporation, the name shall be exactly as set forth in its Articles of
Incorporation;
   (B)   The location and assessor's parcel number at which the business is to
be conducted;
   (C)   The residence address of the applicant;
   (D)   A detailed description of the type of adult-oriented business to be
conducted, including the number of persons engaged in the business;
   (E)   The name(s) and birthdate(s) of the person(s) having the management or
supervision responsibility of applicant's business;
   (F)   Whether the applicant is a person who has engaged in disqualifying
conduct as defined in §
121.01 above and if so, the dates and details relating to the disqualifying
conduct;
   (G)   Whether the applicant holds or has previously held any other permits,
licenses, or entitlements for an adult-oriented business from another city or
county, and if so the names and locations of such businesses and whether such
permit, license or entitlement is still in effect or has been suspended,
revoked, or abandoned.
('65 Code, § 5-31.04) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.05 INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt of an application properly filed, the Police Department shall
immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to any other city
departments or other agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and
building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an
investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed adult-oriented
business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in
this chapter. Said investigation shall be completed within 25 days of receipt
of the application by the Police Department. At the conclusion of its
investigation, each department or agency shall forward its recommendation on
the application to the Police Department, and in the event of disapproval,
state the reasons therefor.
('65 Code, § 5-31.05) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.06 RECOMMENDATION.
   Based on its own investigation and that of the other departments or agencies
responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and laws, the
Police Chief shall make a final recommendation to the City Council as to
whether said application should be approved, conditionally approved or denied.
('65 Code, § 5-31.06) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.07 CITY COUNCIL DECISION.
   (A)   The City Council shall hold a hearing on the Class 2 license
application within 45 days of the city's receipt of a complete application.
This time period may not be extended and the hearing may not be continued
without the written authorization of the applicant.
   (B)   At the hearing, the applicant and the city shall be entitled to
present relevant evidence, testify under oath, and call witnesses who shall
testify under oath. The city shall not be bound by the traditional rules of
evidence, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the City
Council's determination.
   (C)   Within 10 calendar days of the conclusion of its hearing, the City
Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the issuance of the Class
2 License based upon the requirements contained in this chapter. Conditions may
only be imposed to ensure compliance with the requirements contained in this
chapter.
   (D)   The applicant shall be provided with written notification of the City
Council's decision and the reasons therefor within three working days of the
date of the City Council's decision. The notice shall specify that the decision
of the City Council is final and that any judicial action challenging the
decision must be commenced within 90 days after the date of the decision in
accordance with Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.6.
   (E)   Notices shall be provided to the applicant by personal service or by
registered mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid.
('65 Code, § 5-31.07) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.08 GRANTING OR DENIAL OF CLASS 2 LICENSE.
   The City Council shall grant a Class 2 license to the applicant unless it
finds at least one of the following conditions present:
   (A)   That an applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a Class 2 license;
   (B)   That an applicant is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct
as defined in §
121.01;
   (C)   That an adult-oriented business permit has been denied for the
proposed use at the proposed location;
   (D)   That an applicant is under 18 years of age.
('65 Code, § 5-31.08) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.09 INSPECTION.
   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Community Development
Department, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an
adult-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at
any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult-
oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the
provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection
of the premises at any time it is occupied or opened for business.
('65 Code, § 5-31.09) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.10 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE/RENEWAL.
   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in §
121.04. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license shall not be affected. ('65 Code, § 5-31.10)
(Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.11 OPERATING CONDITIONS.
   An adult-oriented business which is granted a Class 2 license shall adhere
to the following operating conditions:
   (A)   A manager(s) or other responsible individual must be present at all
times the business is operating.
   (B)   No person may be employed by the adult-oriented business if within the
last two years that individual is a person who has engaged in disqualifying
conduct as defined in §
121.01.
   (C)   No adult-oriented business may be used for the purpose of conducting a
private club during such hours as the business is not open to the public.
('65 Code, § 5-31.11) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.12 CONTINUING DUTY TO SUPPLY INFORMATION.
   Licensees shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application
information required by this section in the event that said information changes
in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with
said continuing duty within 30 days from the date of such change, by
supplementing the application on file with the Police Department, shall be
grounds for revocation of the license.
('65 Code, § 5-31.12) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.13 REVOCATION/RENEWAL DENIAL.
   A Class 2 license shall be revoked or a renewal application shall be denied
if any of the following exist:
   (A)   Any ground exists which would have constituted grounds for denial of
the original application under §
121.08;
   (B)   The adult-oriented business has not been operated in accordance with
the requirements of §
121.11;
   (C)   If, on one or more occasions within a 12 month period, a person or
persons has (have) been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor offense, which
offense has occurred as a result of or has originated from such persons'
activity on the premises or property on which the adult-oriented business is
located, and the person or persons were employees or agents of the adult-
oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;
   (D)   If the licensee or any employee of the licensee has knowingly allowed
prostitution, or solicitation for prostitution, on the premises;
   (E)   The adult-oriented business has been operated in violation of any of
the requirements of this chapter and, if the violation is of a continuous
nature, the business continues to be operated in violation of such provision
for more than 10 days following the date written notice of such violation is
mailed or delivered to the licensee, or if the violation is of a noncontinuous
nature two or more additional violations of the same provision, or four or more
violations of any other of the provisions of this chapter occur within any 12
month period;
   (F)   That the adult-oriented business has employed minors;
   (G)   That the adult-oriented business permit for the use has been suspended
or revoked.
('65 Code, § 5-31.13) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.14 HEARING ON REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Revocation notice. Upon determining that the grounds for permit
revocation exist, the Police Chief shall furnish written notice of the
revocation to the licensee. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons
for the revocation, and shall state that the Licensee may file an appeal of the
Police Chief's decision with the City Clerk within 20 calendar days after the
date of the notice. Absent a timely appeal, the revocation by the Police Chief
is final. A timely decision shall stay the revocation pending final decision by
the City Council.
   (B)   Appeal. Upon receipt of a written appeal and an appeal fee set in an
amount to be determined by the City Council, the City Clerk shall schedule a
hearing on the appeal to be heard before the City Council within 30 calendar
days of receipt of such request.
   (C)   Hearing. At the hearing, the licensee and the city shall be entitled
to present relevant evidence, testify under oath, and call witnesses who shall
testify under oath. The City Council's determination shall be based on the same
factors as specified in §
121.13 above. The City Council shall not be bound by the traditional rules of
evidence, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the City
Council's determination. Within 10 calendar days of the conclusion of the
hearing, the City Council shall rule on the appeal and set forth its decision
in writing, along with the reasons therefor. The applicant shall be provided
with written notification of the City Council's decision and the reasons
therefor within three workings days of the City Council's decision. The notice
shall specify that the decision of the City Council is final and that any
judicial action to challenge the decision must be commenced within 90 days
following the date of the decision in accordance with Cal. Civ. Proc. Code §
1094.6.
   (D)   Notices. Notices shall be provided by personal service or by
registered mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid.
('65 Code, § 5-31.14) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.15 MORATORIUM ON REAPPLYING AFTER REVOCATION OR DENIAL.
   If a Class 2 license has been revoked or denied, the applicant or any other
person who is required to submit information in connection therewith may not be
issued a new Class 2 license for a minimum period of two years from the date of
revocation or denial, unless the City Council finds that the basis for such
revocation or denial has been corrected.
('65 Code, § 5-31.15) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.16 REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The regulations set forth in this chapter are not intended to be exclusive
and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other
regulations pertaining to the operation of adult-oriented businesses as adopted
by the City Council.
('65 Code, § 5-31.16) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.17 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the penalties set forth at §
121.99(A), any adult-oriented business which is operating in violation of this
subchapter or any provision thereof is hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation.
('65 Code, § 5-31.18) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
BUSINESS PERMITS
§ 121.30 PERMIT/LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No adult-oriented business shall be permitted to operate, engage in, conduct
or carry on business within the city unless the owner of the business first
obtains an adult-oriented business permit, a Class 2 entertainment license and
a business license from the city.
('65 Code, § 9-3.3002) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.31 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applicants for an adult-oriented business permit shall file a written
application on a form supplied by the Community Development Department, signed
by the property owner or authorized representative under penalty of perjury.
Said application form shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee in an amount
set by resolution of the City Council. The applicant shall submit mailing
labels for all real property owners within a 300 foot radius of the real
property boundaries on which the adult-oriented business it to be located. Said
mailing labels shall be as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll or as
shown on more recent records of the county assessor or tax collector.
   (B)   The application shall contain the information specified below:
      (1)   The name(s) and mailing addresses of the property owner(s) and
proposed business operator(s);
      (2)   The property location, including assessor's parcel number;
      (3)   The name and nature of the business and activities proposed to be
conducted on the property;
      (4)   The proposed hours of operation;
      (5)   The form(s) of security proposed;
      (6)   The manner of enforcing age restrictions;
      (7)   A detail floor plan showing the location of all walls and
partitions, including the height and the material of construction;
      (8)   The location of all doors and windows, including sizes, materials,
and coverings if any;
      (9)   All exterior elevations, including colors, signage and any other
appurtenances; and
      (10)   All other information required to provide an explanation as to how
the proposed project will comply with the requirements contained in §
121.33.
('65 Code, § 9-3.3003) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.32 MEETINGS, HEARINGS, AND NOTICES.
   The Planning Commission and City Council shall hold public hearings on the
adult-oriented business permit application.
   (A)   The matter shall be noticed for public hearings as required by Cal.
Gov't Code § 65091.
   (B)   At the hearings, the permittee and the city shall be entitled to
present relevant evidence, testify under oath, and call witnesses who shall
testify under oath. The city shall not be bound by the traditional rules of
evidence, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the
Planning Commission's recommendation or the City Council's determination.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall hold at least one duly noticed public
hearing within 45 days from the date on which a completed application is
submitted and accepted by the Community Development Department and shall make a
recommendation that the City Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the adult-oriented business permit application based on the requirements
contained in §
121.33. This time period may not be extended and the hearing may not be
continued without the written authorization of the applicant.
   (D)   Within 30 days of the recommendation being made by the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall hold at least one duly noticed public
hearing. This time period may not be extended and the hearing may not be
continued without the written authorization of the applicant.
   (E)   Within 20 calendar days of the conclusion of its hearing, the City
Council shall adopt a resolution approving, conditionally approving, or denying
the issuance of the adult-oriented business permit based upon the requirements
contained in §
121.33. For the purposes of this chapter, conditions may only be imposed to
ensure compliance with the requirements contained in §
121.33.
   (F)   The applicant shall be provided with written notification of the City
Council's decision and the reasons therefor within five working days of the
date of the City Council's decision. The notice shall specify that the decision
of the City Council is final and that any judicial action challenging the
decision must be commenced within 90 days after the date of the decision in
accordance with Cal. Civ. Proc. Code § 1094.6.
   (G)   Notices shall be provided to the applicant by personal service or by
registered mail, return receipt requested.
('65 Code, § 9-3.3004) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.33 REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The City Council shall issue an adult-oriented business permit if the
following requirements are met:
   (A)   The adult-oriented business shall be located in the M-1 zone.
   (B)   The adult-oriented business shall not be located within 150 feet of
any residential zone (R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3) or any actual residential use
approved by the city.
   (C)   The adult-oriented business shall not be located within 300 feet of
any lot upon which there is properly located a religious institution, public
park, or school.
   (D)   The adult-oriented business shall comply with all applicable
development and design standards for the M-1 Zone. However, if the adult-
oriented business is the sole use on a lot, no landscaping shall exceed 30
inches in height, except trees with foliage not less than six feet above the
ground notwithstanding any landscaping requirements to the contrary.
   (E)   The adult-oriented business shall comply with the city's sign
regulations.
   (F)   The adult-oriented business shall not be located in any portable or
mobile structure or pushcart.
   (G)   The adult-oriented business shall not conduct or sponsor any special
events, promotions, festivals, concerts, or other similar events which would
increase the demand for parking beyond the approved number of spaces for the
particular use.
   (H)   The adult-oriented business shall not conduct any massage,
acupuncture, tattooing, acupressure, fortune telling or escort services on the
premise nor shall any such business be conducted from the same premise as the
adult-oriented business.
   (I)   The adult-oriented business shall provide a security system that
visually records and monitors all parking lot areas. Recordings made pursuant
to this requirement shall be required to be maintained for a minimum of a 14
day period.
   (J)   All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business which are accessible
to the public shall be open to public view at all times, with the exception of
restroom facilities. “Accessible to the public” shall include, but not be
limited to, those areas which are only accessible to members of the public who
pay a fee and/or join a private club or organization.
   (K)   The adult-oriented business shall not display any sexually-oriented
material of sexually-oriented merchandise which would be visible from any
location other than from within the adult-oriented business.
   (L)   The adult-oriented business shall not allow admittance of any person
under the age of 18 if no liquor is served, or under the age of 21 if liquor is
served and shall be posted accordingly at the entrance to the adult-oriented
business.
   (M)   The adult-oriented business shall not operate between the hours of 2:
00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (N)   The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate
restroom facilities for male patrons and employees and female patrons and
employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the
restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited
from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair,
maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be
free from any adult-oriented material. Restrooms shall not contain television
monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction
equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable
to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of
adult-oriented material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as
an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom
facilities to its patrons or the general public.
   (O)   All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a
minimum of 15 foot-candle, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at
ground level. However, such lighting shall not be installed so as to prevent
the viewing of adult material in an individual viewing area or in an adult
arcade or theater.
   (P)   No solicitation of trade may be made at or near the entrance to the
adult-oriented business by any means other than signage which complies with the
city's sign regulations.
   (Q)   All required permits and licenses shall be conspicuously posted at a
location where they may be observed by any member of the public.
   (R)   Any adult-oriented business which allows customers to remain on the
premises while viewing any live, filmed or recorded entertainment, or while
using or consuming the products or service supplied on the premises, shall
conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   At least one security guard shall be on duty outside the premises,
patrolling the grounds and parking areas, at all times while the business is
open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 50 persons, an
additional security guard shall be on duty inside the premises. The security
guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing
compliance by patrons with the requirements of this chapter, and notifying the
Police Department and Code Enforcement Officer of any violations of law
observed. Any security guard required by this division shall be uniformed in
such manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public.
No security guard required pursuant to this division shall act as a doorperson,
ticket seller, ticket taker, or admittance person while acting as a security
guard hereunder;
      (2)   No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept
open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be
covered with opaque covering at all times; and
      (3)   Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen the
interior of the premises from public view for each door used as an entrance/
exit to the business.
   (S)   The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult arcades
which provide one or more viewing area(s) or any adult-oriented business which
has at least one individual viewing area:
      (1)   The application for the adult-oriented business permit shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan specifying the location
of one or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting
fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not
be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area
with no dimension greater than eight feet. Each diagram shall be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a
designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal
dimensions of all areas of the interior of the adult-oriented business to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches;
      (2)   At least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present;
      (3)   The interior shall be configured in such a manner so that there is
an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If two or more
manager's stations are designated, then the interior shall be configured in
such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least
one of the manager's stations. The view required in this division must be by
direct line of sight from the manager's station. No alteration in the
configuration or location of a manager's station(s) may be made without the
prior approval of the Community Development Director;
      (4)   All individual viewing areas within the adult-oriented business
shall be visible from a continuous and visually accessible main aisle in a
public portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door,
curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person
from seeing into the individual viewing area are visible at all times in order
to enforce all rules and regulations;
      (5)   No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person
at any one time; and
      (6)   Individual viewing areas shall be operated and maintained without
any hole or other opening or other means of direct communication or visual or
physical access between the interior space of two or more individual viewing
areas.
   (T)   The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented
businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or
involving specified sexual activities:
      (1)   No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult-
oriented business except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level of the
floor which is separated by a distance of at least six feet from the nearest
area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within six feet of
the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. “Entertainer” shall
mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult-
oriented business, or any person who, without any compensation or other form of
consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented
business;
      (2)   Separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are
exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use;
      (3)   An entrance/exit shall be provided for entertainers which is
separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons;
      (4)   Access shall be provided for entertainers between the stage and the
dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate
access is not physically feasible, a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle shall
be provided for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with
a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers
capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact
between patrons and entertainers;
      (5)   No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall
have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact
with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such
entertainer; and
      (6)   Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained
establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this
division.
('65 Code, § 9-3.3005) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
Penalty, see § 121.99
§ 121.34 MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE.
   (A)   The distance between an adult-oriented business and the uses listed in
§
121.33(A) and (B) above shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest property line of the parcel on which
the adult-oriented business is located to the nearest property line of such
uses.
   (B)   Once an adult-oriented business lawfully obtains an adult-oriented
business permit to locate in the M-1 zone, the subsequent establishment of any
use listed in §
121.33(A) or (B) above within the restricted distances shall not render the
adult-oriented business non-conforming.
('65 Code, § 9-3.3006) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.35 INSPECTIONS.
   The permittee shall permit officers of the city, Los Angeles County, and
each of their authorized representatives to conduct unscheduled inspections of
the premises of the adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law at any time the adult-oriented business is open for
business or occupied.
('65 Code, § 9-3.3007) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.36 REVOCATION.
   (A)   Revocation grounds. The Director of Community Development shall revoke
an adult-oriented business permit when he or she discovers that any of the
following have occurred:
      (1)   The adult-oriented business has been operated in violation of any
of the requirements of this chapter, or if the violation is of a noncontinuous
nature, the business continues to be operated in violation of such provision
for more than 10 days following the date written notice of such violation is
mailed or delivered to the permittee, or if the violation is of a noncontinuous
nature two or more additional violations of the same provision, or four or more
violations of any other of the provisions of this chapter occur within any 12
month period; or
      (2)   The application is found to contain incorrect, false or misleading
information; or
      (3)   A court of competent jurisdiction has found the adult-oriented
business to constitute a public nuisance.
   (B)   Revocation notice. Upon determining that the grounds for permit
revocation exist, the Director of Community Development shall furnish written
notice of the revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall summarize the
principal reasons for the revocation, and shall state that the permittee may
file an appeal of the Director's decision with the City Clerk within 20
calendar days after the date of the notice. Absent a timely appeal, the
revocation by the Director of Community Development is final. A timely appeal
shall stay the revocation pending final decision by the City Council.
   (C)   Appeal. Upon receipt of a written appeal and an appeal fee set in an
amount to be determined by the City Council, the City Clerk shall schedule a
public hearing on the appeal to be heard before the City Council within 30
calendar days of receipt of such request. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be
provided as required by Cal. Gov't Code § 65091 and to any other interested
party who has requested such notice.
   (D)   Hearing. At the hearing, the permittee and the city shall be entitled
to present relevant evidence, testify under oath, and call witnesses who shall
testify under oath. The City Council's determination shall be based on the same
factors as specified in §
121.35 above. The City Council shall not be bound by the traditional rules of
evidence, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the City
Council's determination. Within 10 calendar days of the conclusion of the
hearing, the City Council shall rule on the appeal and set forth its decision
in writing, along with the reasons therefor. The applicant shall be provided
with written notification of the City Council's decision and the reasons
therefor within three working days of the City Council's decision. The notice
shall specify that the decision of the City Council is final and that any
judicial action to challenge the decision must be commenced within 90 days
following the date of the decision in accordance with Cal. Civ. Proc. Code §
1094.6.
   (E)   Notices. Notices shall be delivered by personal service or sending the
same, certified mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, to the
permittee as that name and address appear on the permit. In addition, the
notice of revocation shall be posted at the location of the adult-oriented
business.
('65 Code, § 9-3.3008) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.37 MORATORIUM AFTER REVOCATION.
   If an adult-oriented business permit is revoked, no adult-oriented business
permit shall be issued for the same location for a period of two years.
('65 Code, § 9-3.3009) (Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
§ 121.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any firm, corporation or person, whether as principal, agent, employee
or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of §§
121.01 through
121.17 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more
than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of the
provisions of §§
121.01 through
121.17 shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which
such violation is committed or continued. ('65 Code, § 5-31.17)
   (B)   Every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the
owner, permittee, or operator or employee of the permittee, or whether acting
as a mere helper for the owner, permittee employer or operator, or whether
acting as a participant or worker in any way, who operates or conducts or who
participates in the operation of an unpermitted adult-oriented business, or who
violates any provisions of §§
121.30 through
121.37, including but not limited to any provision of §
121.33, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than
$1,000 for each offense or imprisoned for not more than six months in the
county jail for each offense, or both. Each day the violation continues shall
be regarded as a separate offense for which the full penalty may be imposed.
   (C)   Any establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the
provisions of §§
121.30 through
121.37 is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney may, in
addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an
action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and
enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other
steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant
such relief as will abate or remove such adult-oriented business and restrain
and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining such an
establishment contrary to provisions of §§
121.30 through
121.37. ('65 Code, § 9-3.3001)
(Ord. 433-C.S., passed 9-6-94)
CHAPTER 122: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
   
122.01   Findings and purpose
   
122.02   Definitions
   
122.03   Exceptions
   
122.04   Business license and other permits required
   
122.05   Floor plans required
Massage Practitioners and Massage Therapists
   
122.15   CAMTC certificate required
Certificates of Operation and Operator Permits
   
122.30   Certificate of operation and operator permit requirement
   
122.31   Operator permit
   
122.32   Certificate of operation
   
122.33   Suspension, revocation and nonrenewal of operator permits and
certificates of operation
   
122.34   Appeals to City Manager
   
122.35   Notices
Operation and Facility Requirements
   
122.50   Operational requirements
   
122.51   Building and facility requirements
   
122.52   Inspections
 
   
122.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 122.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds and declares as follows:
   (A)   The requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are
reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the city, while recognizing massage as a legitimate business interest that
provides benefits to its patrons in a therapeutic setting.
   (B)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of the State
Constitution, Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 37100, 51030 et seq., Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§§ 460, 4600 through 4620 (The Massage Therapy Act) and 16000, and § 13 of the
Chiropractic Act (initiative measure approved by the electors November 7, 1922,
as amended).
   (C)   There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by persons
improperly trained and/or educated in providing massage services, and this
chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss.
   (D)   There is opportunity for acts of prostitution, lewdness, and other
unlawful sexual activity to occur in massage establishments, as well as
problems relating to human trafficking in massage establishments. Courts have
long recognized massage as a pervasively regulated activity and that massage
establishments are often brothels in disguise. The establishment of reasonable
standards for issuance of permits and restrictions on operations would serve to
reduce the risk of illegal activity and would thereby benefit the public
health.
   (E)   The provisions of this chapter are intended to enhance the efficient
processing of permits for massage establishments, owners and managers and the
ongoing regulation of those permittees and certificate holders by the city. The
provisions of this chapter in no way limit the authority of the city to inspect
massage establishments or conduct investigations to ensure permittees are
complying with applicable rules and regulations.
   (F)   The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are
intended, in part, to stop the practice of businesses quickly changing
ownership in name upon the discovery of criminal activity by the city.
   (G)   The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are
intended to be in addition to the requirement of a valid business license
issued pursuant to Title XI,
Chapter 110 of the San Gabriel Municipal Code and the requirement to obtain a
conditional use permit pursuant to
Chapter 153.
   (H)   The regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter are
intended to discourage massage establishments from degenerating into houses of
prostitution, and the means utilized in this chapter bear a reasonable and
rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved within the confines
allowed by state law.
   (I)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and
compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any state or local
laws or regulations that are uniformly applied to other professional or
personal service businesses.
   (J)   The California Massage Therapy Council (“CAMTC”) can better, and more
efficiently, regulate massage technicians in order to best protect the public
and it is in the public interest to require that all persons providing massage
in the city have a certificate from the CAMTC. However, in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare of the residents and visitors to the City of
San Gabriel, it is necessary for the city to additionally regulate massage
establishment businesses.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CALIFORNIA MASSAGE THERAPY COUNCIL or CAMTC. The nonprofit organization
created to regulate and issue massage practitioner and therapist certificates
pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 4600 et seq.
   CAMTC CERTIFICATE. A massage practitioner or massage therapist certificate
issued by the CAMTC.
   CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION. The certificate issued by the Finance Director
entitling a business to be operated as a massage establishment.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the City of San Gabriel, or his or
her designee.
   CITY. The City of San Gabriel.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or his or her designee, including a hearing
officer.
   COMPENSATION. The payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit,
exchange, or gift of money or anything of value.
   CONVICTION or CONVICTED. A conviction following a guilty plea, nolo
contendere plea, or judgment or verdict where the time for appeal has elapsed
or conviction has been affirmed on appeal, irrespective of an order granting
probation following that conviction, suspending the imposition of sentence, or
of a subsequent order under Cal. Penal Code § 1203.4 allowing the applicant to
withdraw his or her plea of guilty or nolo contendere and to enter a plea of
not guilty, or dismissing the accusation or information.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person, other than a massage practitioner, massage therapist,
or operator, who renders any service, with or without compensation, to the
operator or agent of an operator of a massage establishment relating to the
day-to-day operation of the massage establishment whether as an employee or
independent contractor.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR. The Finance Director of the city, or his or her designee.
   MAIN ENTRY DOOR. A door from the outside of the establishment leading into
the reception area.
   MANAGER. The person(s) designated by the owner of the massage establishment
to act as the representative and agent of the owner in managing day-to-day
operations with corresponding responsibilities. Evidence of management
includes, but is not limited to, the ability of the individual to direct or
hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules
or purchase supplies, and ensure that the massage establishment complies with
the requirements of this code and of other laws. A MANAGER may also be an
owner. A MANAGER must have a valid operator permit.
   MASSAGE. Any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial,
health, hygienic, or relaxation purpose. MASSAGE includes, but is not limited
to, treatment by means of manual pressure, acupressure, friction, stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, with or without the aid of or
by means of any mechanical, electronic, or electrical apparatus or appliance,
and with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments, aromatics, antiseptics, oils,
powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations. MASSAGE
specifically includes the application of any of these methods to the scalp,
neck, or feet of any individual. (Some persons practicing MASSAGE may be exempt
from all or parts of the permit requirements; please consult §
122.03).
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any enterprise or establishment having a fixed place
of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be
engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any of the activities set forth in the
definition of MASSAGE in this section.
   MASSAGE PRACTITIONER. A person who is certified as such by the CAMTC in
accordance with the Massage Therapy Act.
   MASSAGE TECHNICIAN. A massage practitioner or massage therapist certified by
CAMTC.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. A person who is certified as such by the CAMTC in
accordance with the Massage Therapy Act.
   MASSAGE THERAPY ACT. Chapter 406 of the 2013-2014 Legislative Session, as
the same may be amended from time to time.
   OPERATOR. All persons who own or manage a massage establishment.
   OPERATOR PERMIT.  The permit issued by the Chief of Police allowing a person
to own or manage a massage establishment.
   OUT-CALL MASSAGE. Any business or enterprise that engages in or performs
massage for any form of consideration or in exchange for anything of value
whatsoever at a location other than a massage establishment.
   OWNER. All of the following:
      (1)   The sole proprietor of a massage establishment, i.e., where the
owner is the only person performing massage at that establishment;
      (2)   In the case of a general business, each owner of the business;
      (3)   In the case of a corporation, each stockholder holding more than
10% of the corporation and each officer and director of the corporation;
      (4)   In the case of a partnership, each partner, excluding limited
partners owning less than 10% of the partnership, and where a partner is a
corporation, the provisions pertaining to a corporate applicant in division (3)
above apply.
   PATRON. An individual on the premises of a massage establishment for the
purpose of receiving a massage.
   PERMIT. An operator permit or certificate of operation, unless the context
indicates otherwise.
   PERMITTEE. Any person who has obtained a certificate of operation or
operator permit from the city.
   PERSON WHO HAS ENGAGED IN DISQUALIFYING CONDUCT. A person who:
      (1)   Within ten years preceding the date of filing of the application in
question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within ten years preceding
the date of the revocation notice, has been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person
is required to register under the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 290;
         (b)   Conduct in violation of Cal. Penal Code §§ 266h, 266i, 314, 315,
316, 318, 653.22, 653.23, or § 647(a), (b), or (d);
         (c)   An attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above
mentioned offenses;
         (d)   When the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere to a charge of a violation of Cal. Penal Code §§ 415, 602, or any
lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for,
any of the previously listed crimes;
         (e)   Any crime committed while engaged in the management or ownership
of a massage establishment or the practice of massage;
         (f)   A violation of Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11550 or any offense
involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled
substance specified in Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057
or 11058; or
         (g)   Any offense under a statute of any state or ordinance of any
city or county, which is the equivalent of any of the aforementioned offenses,
including Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 4609(a).
      (2)   Within ten years preceding the date of the filing of the
application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within ten
years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has had any massage
establishment, operator, technician, practitioner, therapist, or trainee
certificate, license, or permit issued by any state, local agency, or other
licensing authority, including the CAMTC: denied, revoked, or suspended for any
reason other than lack of sufficient education; or has had to surrender such a
certificate, license, or permit as a result of pending criminal charges or
administrative proceedings for suspension or revocation of any such
certificate, license, or permit;
      (3)   Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application
in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years
preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been convicted in a court of
competent jurisdiction of any of the following:
         (a)   Any crime, other than an infraction or those listed above,
involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with the intent to substantially benefit
himself or another, or substantially injure another;
         (b)   Any crime, other than an infraction or crimes relating to those
offenses listed above, where the crime or act is substantially related to the
management or ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage,
including a violation of the Massage Therapy Act;
      (4)   Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting
or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Cal. Penal Code §§ 11225 through 11235
as the same may be amended from time to time, or any similar provisions of law
in a jurisdiction outside the State of California; or
      (5)   Has been found to be maintaining a nuisance in connection with the
same or similar type of business; or
      (6)   Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application
in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years
preceding the date of the revocation notice,
         (a)   Has engaged in the exposing of specified anatomical areas of
oneself or of another person to view, or in touching the specified anatomical
areas of oneself or of another person, while providing massage services or
while within view of a customer or patron of the massage establishment; or
         (b)   Has been the owner, manager, or other similar position, in an
establishment where the conduct described in division (6)(a) above has
occurred.
      (7)   DISQUALIFYING CONDUCT does not include the failure to obtain a
certificate of operation or operator permit without any prior oral or written
notification by the city that such was required, provided that the business
and/or person cease operations immediately upon notification.
   PROOF OF BONA FIDE EMPLOYMENT. Proof of an employer-employee relationship
between the operator of the massage establishment and any person working at the
massage establishment. Satisfactory PROOF OF BONA FIDE EMPLOYMENT must be shown
by written payroll documentation evidencing the employer’s compliance with
California Employment Development Department (EDD) requirements for the
withholding of California income tax, unemployment insurance contributions, and
disability contributions from the employee and written payroll documentation of
the employer’s compliance with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requirements for
the withholding of federal income taxes, Social Security (FICA) and Medicare
contributions from the employee. Such written documentation can include, but is
not limited to, W-2 wage and tax statements.
   RECEPTION AREA.  An area immediately inside the main entry door of the
massage establishment dedicated to the reception and waiting of patrons and
visitors of the massage establishment and which is not a massage room or
otherwise used for the provision of massage services.
   RESIDENCE ADDRESS. The actual physical home address and shall not include a
P.O. Box, mailbox service, or other similar location.
   SOLE PROVIDER. A massage business where the owner owns 100% of the business,
is the only person who provides massage services for compensation for that
business pursuant to a valid and active CAMTC certificate, and has no other
employees or independent contractors.
   SPA. Facilities such as mineral baths, salt rooms, mineral rooms, saunas,
steam rooms, whirlpools and other therapeutic baths.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following human anatomical areas:
genitals; pubic area; buttocks; anus; or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areolae, without a health care referral and
written consent of the patron.
   VISITOR. A nonemployee who has entered the massage establishment for
purposes other than receiving services.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Complete exception. The requirements of this chapter shall have no
application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to:
      (1)   Any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, osteopath, or
physical therapist licensed to practice such profession in the State of
California, within the scope of their license;
      (2)   Any registered nurse or licensed vocational nurse, licensed to
practice under the laws of the State of California, who is an employee of and
working under the on-site direction of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor,
osteopath, or physical therapist, duly licensed to practice their respective
professions in this state.
         (a)   Any other person providing massage services that is employed by
a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist, shall be
required to have a valid CAMTC certificate, as well as work under the adequate
supervision of such physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical
therapist as required by state law or regulation. If no specific law or
regulation applies, adequate supervision shall have the same meaning as set
forth in 16 California Code of Regulations § 312.
         (b)   If a duly licensed acupuncturist wishes to provide massage
therapy services to his or her clients by an individual(s) other than himself
or herself, said individual(s) must have a valid CAMTC certificate and the
office of the acupuncturist shall be subject to all the provisions of this
Chapter 122, as well as any other applicable provisions of the San Gabriel
Municipal Code.
      (3)   Any person licensed to practice any healing art under the
provisions of Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code Div. 2 (commencing with § 500) when
engaging in such practice within the scope of such license.
      (4)   State-licensed hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other
health care facilities duly licensed by the State of California, and the
employees of such facilities while working on the premises of such state-
licensed facilities.
      (5)   Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or
universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their
employment.
      (6)   Barbers, beauticians, or manicurists who are duly licensed by the
State of California pursuant to the Barbering and Cosmetology Act set forth in
Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 7300 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to
time, while engaging in practices within the scope of such license, except that
this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face, and/or scalp
of the customer or client of said barber or beautician or, in the case of a
licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearms, hands, calves, and/or feet
at a state licensed facility. However, if a state licensed establishment also
has a certificate of operation from the city to operate as a massage
establishment, the business must also comply with all provisions of this
Chapter 122.
      (7)   Schools of cosmetology or barbering which comply with the
requirements of Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 7362 et seq. when instructors are
acting within the scope of their employment or when students are working as
unpaid externs pursuant to the requirements of Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 7395.1.
      (8)   Any other business or professions exempt by state law.
   (B)   Partial exception.
      (1)   Businesses that offer massage services that are ancillary to the
primary business shall only be required to comply with the provisions set forth
in division (B)(2) of this section. For purposes of this division, ancillary
massage services shall be those services where less than 20% of the gross floor
area of the business is devoted to massage.
      (2)   Massage services provided under division (B)(1) of this section
shall be required to comply with the following:
         (a)   Massage services must be performed by the holder of a valid
CAMTC certificate.
         (b)   The business shall comply with the following provisions of this
chapter:
            1.   Section
122.50(A)(1) relating to hours;
            2.   Section
122.50(C) relating to instruments, equipment and personnel;
            3.   Section
122.50(D)(1) through (3) relating to personnel lists;
            4.   Section
122.50(E) relating to prohibited conduct;
            5.   Section
122.51(A) through (F) relating to building and facility requirements;
            6.   Section
122.52 relating to inspections.
   (C)   Evidence of entitlement to exception. Any person claiming exception
under this section shall furnish satisfactory evidence upon request that he or
she is entitled to such exception, including, proof of bona fide employment, or
if applicable, a citation to the particular provision of state law upon which
that person relies.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.04 BUSINESS LICENSE AND OTHER PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Nothing herein relieves an individual or business from obtaining a
city business license, conditional use permit in accordance with
Chapter 153 of this code, or other permit if otherwise required by law.
   (B)   Any individual applying for a business license as a massage technician
shall provide proof of a current CAMTC certificate before being issued a
business license.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.05 FLOOR PLANS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All massage establishments shall be required to submit a scaled floor
plan as part of their application for a certificate of operation, which floor
plan must be approved by the city as part of the conditional use permit
process.
   (B)   All businesses that claim a partial exemption from this chapter
pursuant to §
122.03(B) shall be required to submit scaled floor plans in order to verify the
applicability of the exemption.
   (C)   No changes may be made to the approved floor plan without written
approval from the Community Development Department, which may require
modification of the conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord. 633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord.
634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS
§ 122.15 CAMTC CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall provide massage services, including out-call massage
services, from any location in the city without having been issued a CAMTC
certificate, regardless of whether such person has an operator permit or the
business has a certificate of operation.
   (B)   Any person certified by the state who desires to own or manage a
massage establishment, must additionally obtain an operator permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   No operator of a massage establishment shall hire as an employee or
utilize as an independent contractor any person to perform massage unless such
person has been issued a CAMTC certificate.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
CERTIFICATES OF OPERATION AND OPERATOR PERMITS
§ 122.30 CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION AND OPERATOR PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   No person shall own or manage any massage establishment in any
location within the city without first having obtained an operator permit. An
operator permit must be obtained for each owner of a business or proposed
business, and any identified manager, in order for an application for a
conditional use permit for such business to be complete.
   (B)   No massage establishment shall be allowed to operate within the city
unless the business first obtains a certificate of operation. No certificate of
operation shall be approved until each operator identified in the application
has obtained an operator permit. A certificate of operation shall not be
granted until such time as a conditional use permit has been obtained for the
location.
   (C)   Any person desiring to obtain a certificate of operation and/or an
operator permit shall make application in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter, which application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee
in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   All applications shall be dated and shall contain the following
statements:
      (1)   A certification under penalty of perjury that the information
contained in the application is true and correct;
      (2)   An authorization for the city, its officers, agents and employees,
to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and to ensure continual compliance with
all applicable provisions of law; and
      (3)   An acknowledgment that by applying for an operator permit, the
applicant understands that he or she is responsible for having a working
knowledge of the city’s regulations relating to massage establishment
operations, be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the business and be
responsible for all violations of employees and independent contractors that
may take place in the massage establishment which such person owns or manages
and that such violations are grounds for revocation of the operator permit.
   (E)   The provisions of §§
122.05,
122.50,
122.51,
122.52 and
122.99 shall apply to any business that operates as a massage establishment,
even if such business fails to obtain operator permits or certificates of
operation. The city may immediately order a business that fails to have a
certificate of operation or a permitted operator on the premises to cease
operation until such failures have been resolved.
   (F)   Within 30 working days following receipt of a completed application,
the Finance Director shall either issue the certificate of operation and the
Chief of Police shall issue an operator permit or mail a written statement of
the reasons for denial thereof. Notwithstanding the above, failure of the city
to act upon a completed application within the time frame set forth above shall
not be deemed approval of the application pursuant to this chapter. Any
certificate of operation or permit issued pursuant to this division (F) shall
be deemed conditional pending the city’s receipt of the California Department
of Justice report on the applicant’s fingerprints. If the fingerprint report
demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record
required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the
permit shall be subject to denial or revocation pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.31 OPERATOR PERMIT.
   (A)    It shall be the responsibility of each and every operator to have a
working knowledge of the city’s regulations relating to massage establishment
operations and be responsible for the day-to-day operation of the business.
   (B)   Application; contents. Applicants for operator permits shall submit
the following information to the Police Department on a form supplied by the
Department:
      (1)   The full true name of the applicant;
      (2)   A complete statement listing and explaining any and all aliases and
fictitious names used by the applicant within the ten years immediately
preceding the application;
      (3)   The current residence address and business address and current
residence and business telephone number of the applicant;
      (4)   The name and address of the massage establishment for which the
operator permit is sought;
      (5)   A list of all previous residential and business addresses for a
minimum of eight years immediately preceding the present address of the
applicant and the dates of residence for each address;
      (6)   The applicant’s place of birth, and original documentation to
verify both the applicant’s identity and employment authorization (if
applicable), as listed under 8 U.S.C. 1324a(b)(l) and 8 C.F.R. part 274a.2(b)
(l). Documentation to satisfy this requirement may include, but is not limited
to, a California driver’s license, California identification card, social
security card, resident alien (“green”) card, United States passport (unexpired
or expired), unexpired foreign passport that contains a temporary I-551 stamp,
or an unexpired employment authorization document issued by the United States
government in compliance with 8 C.F.R. part 274a.2(b)(l)(v)(A);
      (7)   The history of the applicant as to any similar business or
occupation within ten years immediately preceding the filing of the
application. Such information shall include, but not be limited to, the names
and addresses of any other massage establishments or similar businesses the
applicant has owned, managed, provided massage services at, or worked at,
whether the applicant has had a permit or license to operate, manage, provide
massage services at, or work at a massage establishment denied, revoked, or
suspended in any jurisdiction; the reasons for any such denial, revocation, or
suspension; and the business, activity, or occupation the applicant engaged in
subsequent to such denial, revocation, or suspension;
      (8)   All criminal convictions within the last ten years, excluding minor
traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason
therefor;
      (9)   Such other reasonable identification and information as the Chief
of Police may require in order to discover the truth of the matter specified as
required to be set forth in the application;
   (C)   The applicant shall have his or her picture taken by the Police
Department or otherwise supply a photograph as directed by the Department; and
   (D)   Once the information required by division (A) of this section is
submitted, the applicant shall have his or her fingerprints taken for a
criminal history background (Livescan) check in the manner directed by the
Police Department.
   (E)   The Chief of Police shall issue the operator permit, unless after
investigation he or she makes any of the following findings:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide information, documentation, and
assurances required by this chapter or by the Chief of Police; has failed to
reveal any fact material to qualification; or has supplied information that is
untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification
criteria; or
      (2)   The applicant is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct;
or
      (3)   There is substantial evidence that the applicant has engaged in
disqualifying conduct, even if there is no conviction for such conduct; or
      (4)   The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or any
similar ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of any other public agency which
regulates the operation of massage establishments; or
      (5)   The applicant is not at least 18 years of age; or
      (6)   The applicant is delinquent in paying city fees or penalties owed
in relation to any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (F)   If the criminal history background check report demonstrates that the
applicant has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material
fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed
therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the permit shall be subject
to denial.
   (G)   For any person that has a valid CAMTC certificate, the applicant shall
only be required to provide the information specified in division (B)(1)
through (B)(4) and have his or her picture taken or provide a photograph as
specified in division (C) above. No independent background check shall be
conducted, but in determining whether to issue the operator permit, the Chief
of Police may rely on information supplied by CAMTC.
   (H)   Permits issued pursuant to this section shall remain in effect, unless
revoked, for a period of one year. Applications for the renewal of a permit
shall be filed on a form supplied by the city with the Chief of Police.
Temporary permits shall not be issued and expired permits are not valid unless
the permittee has a written receipt showing that the renewal application was
filed at least 30 days prior to expiration, without action having been taken by
the Chief of Police. Renewal applications shall be signed under penalty of
perjury and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by
resolution of the City Council. A permittee shall be required to update the
information contained in his or her original permit application and provide any
new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the Chief of
Police in order to determine whether the permit should be renewed, including
all information required by division (B) or (G) of this section. If requested,
a new photograph shall be supplied. Failure to provide this documentation shall
be grounds for nonrenewal of the permit in addition to those items set forth in
§
122.33 below. It is the operator’s obligation to keep track of when the renewal
is due and to renew in a timely fashion.
   (I)   Any decision to deny or not renew an operator permit shall be made in
writing and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. The notice shall
include a statement of appeal rights pursuant to §
122.34 below.
   (J)   Every person to whom an operator permit has been granted pursuant to
this chapter shall be issued an identification badge by the Police Department
which shall contain the person’s name, photograph, expiration date, and any
other information deemed necessary by the Chief of Police. The badge shall be
worn so as to be readily visible at all times while on the premises of the
massage establishment.
   (K)   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may not be assigned or
transferred.
   (L)   It is the duty of each operator to notify the Finance Department
whenever there is a change in information which was required to be submitted in
the application for the operator permit in the first instance. Such
notification shall be in writing and made within ten business days of the
change on a form provided by the city.
   (M)   Each operator of a massage establishment shall be responsible for the
conduct of all employees and independent contractors working on the premises of
the business. Failure of the employees or independent contractors of a massage
establishment to comply with this chapter may result in the revocation of the
operator’s permit.
   (N)   The operator of the massage establishment is responsible for verifying
that all persons hold the appropriate CAMTC certificate as required by this
chapter.
   (O)   Any requirement of this chapter applying to an operator shall apply to
each and every operator of a massage establishment.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 2-18-14; Am. Ord.
612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord. 633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S.,
passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.32 CERTIFICATE OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Applications for a certificate of operation shall be filed with the
Finance Department and shall include the information set forth below:
      (1)   The full name of the applicant;
      (2)   The name under which the business is to be conducted, which name
must match the name of the business under which the corresponding business tax
certificate is issued under
Chapter 110. No massage establishment business shall operate under any business
name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the certificate
of operation. If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as
shown on the articles of incorporation or on a valid DBA (“doing business as”);
      (3)   The address of the proposed massage establishment;
      (4)   A detailed description of the operation and type of services to be
provided by the massage establishment, including other therapies to be
provided, and other businesses to be operated on the same premises;
      (5)   The full legal name and residence address of each owner of the
massage establishment and of the manager(s) who will be in charge of the
operation of the massage establishment if other than the owner(s);
      (6)   A legal size copy of the floor plan approved as part of the
conditional use permit, drawn to scale with measurements in feet and inches and
labeled in English. The floor plan shall show: entrances; exits; windows;
interior doors; restrooms; all other separately enclosed rooms with dimensions,
including, but not limited to closets, storerooms, break rooms, and changing
rooms; and location of massage tables and chairs;
      (7)   The full name, address, and phone number of the legal owner of the
property, if other than the applicant on which the massage establishment is to
be located, along with a copy of the signed lease and a notarized
acknowledgment from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will
be located on his or her property; and
      (8)   The hours and days of operation.
   (B)   The Finance Director shall issue a certificate of operation upon
verification of the following:
      (1)   The massage establishment will comply with all applicable laws,
including, but not limited to building, fire, zoning, health, and safety
regulations, as well as any conditions which have been imposed to comply with
such laws;
      (2)   Each person identified as an operator, i.e., the owner(s) and
manager(s), has obtained an operator permit; and
      (3)   A conditional use permit, if required, has been obtained.
      (4)   Any decision to deny the certificate of operation shall be made in
writing and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. The notice shall
include a statement of appeal rights pursuant to §
122.34 below.
   (C)   Every massage establishment for which a certificate of operation has
been granted pursuant to this chapter shall display the certificate in a
conspicuous place so it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
   (D)   A certificate of operation is not transferable to a separate location
of the same business, to a different business at the same location, or to the
same business under different ownership at the same location, or the same
business under a different name.
   (E)   It is the duty of each operator to notify the Finance Department
whenever there is a change in information which was required to be submitted in
the application for the certificate of operation in the first instance. Any
sale or transfer of any reportable interest of an owner in a massage
establishment, which interest would be required to be reported under division
(A) of this section in the first instance, shall render the certificate of
operation temporarily suspended and subject to revocation in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter unless prior to the effective date of such sale
or transfer, the new owner applies for and obtains an operator permit.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary,
where a notice of suspension or revocation has been issued regarding a massage
establishment, or the business has otherwise been required to close because of
suspension or revocation proceedings against the operator, the Finance
Department shall not process or issue a new application for a certificate of
operation for said location unless or until the revocation or suspension
proceedings are dismissed or a final determination is made that the current
certificate of operation should not be suspended or revoked, or a two-year
period has passed since the occurrence of the activity which gave rise to the
suspension or revocation proceedings or other criminal actions.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, when
a massage establishment has been closed due to criminal activity and such
decision is final, no new massage establishment may open in such location and
no certificate of operation shall be issued for such location for a period of
two years from the date of such final determination. For purposes of this
section, closure due to criminal activity includes voluntary closure of the
business after there have been arrests at the location or other notices
relating to criminal activity or notices relating to suspension or revocation
proceedings. This provision is not meant to prohibit the issuance of a
certificate of operation to a business which initially failed to obtain a
certificate of operation without any prior oral or written notification by the
city that such was required.
   (H)   Where the applicant for the certificate of operation is not the record
owner, as shown on the latest county assessment roll, then upon issuance of the
certificate, the city shall send written notice to the property owner advising
of the issuance of the certificate and the regulations applicable to the
massage establishment and the property pursuant to this chapter; this may be
accomplished by including a copy of this chapter with the notice.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 2-18-14; Am. Ord.
612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord. 633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S.,
passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.33 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND NONRENEWAL OF OPERATOR PERMITS AND
CERTIFICATES OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Subject to the procedures set forth in this section, the Chief of
Police may suspend or revoke a permit, or determine not to renew an operator
permit, issued pursuant to this chapter whenever the Chief of Police determines
that any of the following has occurred:
      (1)   The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on
the premises, is conducting operations in a manner contrary to the provisions
of this code;
      (2)   The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on
the premises, is conducting operations in a manner which constitutes a public
nuisance;
      (3)   The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on
the premises, is conducting operations in a manner which is detrimental to the
health, safety, or welfare of the city or its inhabitants;
      (4)   There is substantial evidence of prostitution;
      (5)   The permittee, or any employee or independent contractor working on
the premises, has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or
      (6)   The Chief of Police makes any of the findings that would have
justified denying the application in the first instance.
   (B)   If, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, an alleged violation is
minor and capable of correction and there have not been previous violations by
the operator or the massage establishment, then prior to suspension or
revocation a written notice may be given to the permittee of the alleged
violation(s) involved to allow a period of time to correct the alleged
violation(s). Such period shall not exceed five business days, at the end of
which period, an inspection shall be conducted to determine whether the alleged
violation(s) has been corrected. For purposes of this section, written notice
shall include a notice of violation, an administrative citation, or a criminal
citation.
   (C)   If the Chief of Police determines that an alleged violation is not
minor or capable of correction, that an alleged violation(s) continues without
correction, or that there have been previous violations of this chapter, even
if for different reasons, then the Chief of Police may issue a notice of
suspension or revocation, along with an administrative or criminal citation.
Examples of a violation which will be determined by the Chief of Police to be
not capable of correction include but are not limited to substantial evidence
of prostitution activity on the massage establishment premises or an immediate
threat to public health, safety, or welfare.
   (D)   Notice of suspension, revocation or non-renewal. A notice of
suspension or revocation, or a notice of non-renewal of an operator permit,
shall contain a statement of the violation(s) which constitutes the basis for
the suspension or revocation, notice of the right to appeal to the City Manager
in accordance with §
122.34, and notice that a failure to appeal shall constitute a failure to
exhaust administrative remedies. If an alleged violation is capable of
correction, the notice shall also advise the permittee to correct the alleged
violation(s) within the time to respond.
   (E)   Unless the notice provides otherwise, the effective date of the
suspension or revocation shall be the deadline to file an appeal, or, if an
appeal is filed, the date that notice of a decision suspending or revoking a
permit is served.
   (F)   Where all massage activity is required to cease, notice shall also be
served on the owner of the property if different from the operator or
certificate holder.
   (G)   The notice shall include information about the right to appeal.
   (H)   Surrender of certificate of operation and permits. Any permittee shall
immediately surrender his or her permit to the Chief of Police upon the
effective date of its suspension or revocation. The operator shall immediately
surrender the certificate of operation upon revocation of an operator permit if
there is no other permitted operator for the massage establishment.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 2-18-14; Am. Ord.
612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord. 633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S.,
passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.34 APPEALS TO CITY MANAGER.
   (A)   Appeals.
      (1)   Appeals from any decision of the Chief of Police or Finance
Director under this chapter shall be in writing, shall clearly state the
applicable basis for the appeal and shall be filed with the City Clerk no later
than ten calendar days following the date of the notice.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall not accept an appeal, and no hearing shall be
held, unless the appellant has paid a filing fee, in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council, to defray the cost of such appeal. Any appeal
without the timely payment of fees shall be considered to be untimely.
      (3)   The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be
limited to those issues raised by the appellant in the written appeal, as
submitted pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section.
   (B)   City Manager action.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the City Clerk shall set the
matter for hearing before the City Manager. The hearing shall be held not fewer
than ten calendar days nor more than 45 calendar days from the date of the
appeal request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual
consent of the parties.
      (2)   The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place
of the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least
seven calendar days prior to the hearing.
      (3)   At the time of such hearing, the City Manager shall review the
records and files relating to the decision.
         (a)   The City Manager shall permit any interested person to present
any relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter.
         (b)   In conducting the hearing, technical rules relating to evidence
and witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is
material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons
in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law
or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over
objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the
sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of
serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they
are now, or are hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral,
and repetitious testimony shall be excluded.
         (c)   In determining whether a person should be disqualified for
meeting the definition of PERSON WHO HAS ENGAGED IN DISQUALIFYING CONDUCT as
set forth in §
122.02, the City Manager may consider: the nature and severity of the act(s) or
crime(s); whether there were any additional subsequent act(s) or crime(s); the
number of act(s) or crime(s); and how recent the act(s) or crime(s) were.
      (4)   The appellant shall have the burden of proving that he or she meets
the requirements for issuing the permit or certificate in the first instance;
the city shall have the burden in proving that grounds exist for suspending,
revoking or failing to renew a permit.
      (5)   Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the City Manager
shall determine whether the decision should be affirmed, modified, or reversed.
      (6)   The City Manager shall issue his decision within ten business days
after the close of the hearing. The City Manager’s decision shall include a
statement of the reasons therefor.
      (7)   The decision of the City Manager shall include notice that the
decision is final and conclusive, that judicial review may be sought therefrom
pursuant to Cal. Civil Proc. Code § 1094.5, and that any action filed in the
superior court shall be filed within 90 days following the City Manager’s
notice pursuant to Cal. Civil Proc. Code § 1094.6.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.35 NOTICES.
   (A)   All notices required to be given pursuant to this chapter shall be
served on the responsible party (i.e., permittee, applicant, appellant, or a
representative thereof) either by personal delivery or by deposit in the United
States mail in a sealed envelope postage prepaid addressed to such responsible
party as the name and address appear in the most recent application on file
with the city. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed on the
date deposited in the mail. Notices shall include information regarding appeal
rights and a statement that the failure to file an appeal shall constitute a
failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
   (B)   In all cases where the certificate holder is not the property owner,
notices shall also be sent to the property owner of record where the notice
relates to possible closure of the business due to suspension or revocation.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
OPERATION AND FACILITY REQUIREMENTS
§ 122.50 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Hours and conditions of operation.
      (1)   No massage establishment shall operate nor shall any massage be
administered in any massage establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. A massage begun any time before 10:00 p.m. must nevertheless
terminate at 10:00 p.m. The hours of operation must be displayed in a
conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in
any front window clearly visible from outside of the massage establishment.
These hours of operation may be modified pursuant to a conditional use permit.
      (2)   During hours of operation, no person other than a valid permit
holder under this chapter, a massage practitioner, a massage therapist, or a
patron shall be allowed beyond the reception area of the massage establishment.
      (3)   Patrons and visitors shall only be permitted in the massage
establishment during the hours of operation.
         (a)   Visitors shall only be permitted in the reception area of the
massage establishment.
         (b)   Patrons shall only be permitted in massage treatment areas if at
least one massage technician is on the premises.
      (4)   The massage establishment shall be supervised during all hours of
operation by an authorized operator for the massage establishment.
         (a)   An operator may not manage more than one massage establishment
at any given time.
         (b)   The name and photograph (minimum size of four inches by six
inches) of the on-duty operator shall be posted in a conspicuous public place
in the lobby of the massage establishment at all times that the business in
open. This provision shall not apply to sole providers. Regardless of the
number of operators that may be approved for the location, only one operator
may be identified as the on-duty operator at a time.
      (5)   No massage establishment shall be used for residential purposes.
There shall be no massage tables, cots, or beds in the establishment other than
as shown on the approved floor plan. Locker facilities shall be provided for
all employees and independent contractors and all personal items of the
employees and independent contractors shall be kept in the lockers while at the
massage establishment.
   (B)   Posting requirements. In addition to any other requirements for
posting set forth in this chapter, the following shall also apply:
      (1)   A recognizable and legible sign complying with the requirements of
this code shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as
a massage establishment.
      (2)   Each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of
time such service shall be performed shall be posted in English and such other
languages as may be convenient to communicate such service, in a conspicuous
public location in each massage establishment. No services shall be performed
and no sums shall be charged for such services other than those posted. Nothing
herein prohibits a voluntary tip from being paid by the patron.
      (3)   Any posted signs which are in a language other than English shall
also be posted in English.
   (C)   Instruments, equipment, and personnel.
      (1)   Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for
any instruments used in performing acts of massage and said instruments shall
be disinfected and sterilized after each use.
      (2)   Unless otherwise approved by a conditional use permit, massages
shall be administered only on standard or portable massage tables or chairs
which are covered with a durable, washable plastic or other acceptable
waterproof material. Beds, mattresses, water beds, futons, sofa beds, any type
of portable or convertible beds, and foam pads more than four inches thick or
with a width of more than four feet shall not be permitted in the
establishment.
      (3)   No massage technician shall massage the genitals or anal area of
any patron nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit
such a massage to the above-specified areas.
      (4)   No massage technician shall massage the breasts of a female patron
without the written consent of the person receiving the massage and a referral
from a licensed California health care provider, nor shall any operator of a
massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above-specified
area.
      (5)   A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the presence
of any massage establishment staff unless the patron's genitalia and, if a
female patron, the female patron's breasts, are fully covered by a fully
opaque, nontransparent covering.
      (6)   Persons providing services in the massage establishment shall not
be dressed in attire that is: transparent, see-through, substantially exposes
the massage technician's undergarments, or exposes the massage technician’s
breasts, buttocks, or genitals; in a manner which has been deemed by CAMTC to
constitute unprofessional attire based on the custom and practice of the
profession in California; or in swim attire unless such person is providing a
water-based massage modality which has been approved by CAMTC.
      (7)   All massage establishments shall be so equipped, maintained and
operated as to effectively control the entrance, harborage, and breeding of
vermin, including flies. When flies or other vermin are present effective
control measures shall be instituted for their control or elimination.
      (8)   Clean and sanitary towels, sheets, and linens shall be provided for
each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be
permitted. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided, that such
paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary
receptacle.
      (9)   All massage tables shall be at least two feet away from all walls
at all times.
   (D)   Personnel lists.
      (1)   Within seven calendar days of receiving a certificate of operation,
the operator shall provide the Police Department with a complete list of all
massage technicians who are working or will work, be employed, or provide
massage services in the massage establishment along with a copy of their CAMTC
certificate and identification card, as well as with the name and residence
address of the manager principally in charge of the operation of the massage
establishment and of any other manager.
      (2)   The operator shall have a continuing obligation to notify the Chief
of Police in writing of any changes in massage technicians and managers within
seven calendar days of such change.
      (3)   The operator shall maintain copies of each massage technician’s
CAMTC certificate and identification card on file on the premises of the
massage establishment which shall be available to any individual upon request,
including but not limited to employees of the city. Additionally, the operator
shall be required to file copies of each CAMTC certificate and identification
card with the Police Department within seven days of a massage technician
beginning to work at the massage establishment. Information required by this
section shall be maintained at the massage establishment for a minimum of two
years following the date that the person ceases providing services/employment
to the massage establishment.
      (4)   The operator shall maintain on the premises of the massage
establishment a register of all non-state certified persons employed, working
or providing other services at the massage establishment. The register shall be
maintained for a minimum of two years following the time that the person ceases
providing services/employment to the massage establishment. The operator shall
make the register immediately available for inspection upon demand of a
representative of the Police Department, any health officer, or any other
official charged with enforcement of this chapter. The register shall include
but is not limited to the following information:
         (a)   Name, nicknames, and/or aliases;
         (b)   Home address and relevant phone number, including but not
limited to home, cellular, and pager numbers;
         (c)   Age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and
eyes;
         (d)   The date such person began employment or providing services, and
the date such person ended employment or stopped providing services, if any;
         (e)   The duties of each person; and
         (f)   In a separate portion of the register, Social Security numbers,
which shall only be available for review by the Police Department or other law
enforcement personnel, but not health officers or other officials charged with
the enforcement of this chapter.
   (E)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or furnished on the
premises of any massage establishment without a valid alcoholic beverage
license from the state and conditional use permit from the city.
      (2)   No storage or sale of condoms or spermicides shall be permitted
within the massage establishment.
      (3)   No operator shall hire, employ, or allow a person to perform
massage services unless such person possesses a valid CAMTC certificate. Each
operator of a massage establishment shall verify that all persons hold the
appropriate CAMTC certificate required by this chapter. Nothing herein prevents
an operator from hiring, employing, or allowing a person to perform services
allowed by such person’s cosmetology or barber license, if the business has a
state establishment license in addition to a certificate of operation.
      (4)   No person shall use or possess, nor shall there be, any storage of,
any sexually-oriented implements or paraphernalia which are designed or
marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or
sadomasochistic activity.
      (5)   No electrical, mechanical, or artificial device shall be used by
any massage establishment staff for audio and/or video recording or for
monitoring the performance of a massage, of the conversation or other sounds in
the massage rooms, without the knowledge and written consent of the patron.
      (6)   No operator of a massage establishment shall place, publish, or
distribute or allow or cause to be placed, published or distributed any
advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would
reasonably suggest to prospective patrons or clients that any service is
available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the
premises as required in this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment
employ language in the text of any advertising that would reasonably suggest to
a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services
described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 2-18-14; Am. Ord.
612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord. 633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S.,
passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.51 BUILDING AND FACILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The building, or unit within the building where the massage
establishment is located, shall comply with all applicable building code
requirements.
   (B)   All massage rooms and dressing rooms shall be screened off by hinged
doors that can open inward. Swinging doors that can open inward, draw drapes,
curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures in lieu of doors are
acceptable on all inner dressing rooms and massage therapy rooms or cubicles.
Except for bathroom doors, interior doors may not have locks on them.
   (C)   In addition to the minimum lighting required by the provisions of
Chapter 150 of the San Gabriel Municipal Code, all rooms in which massages are
being provided shall be lit with a minimum of one light fixture emitting at
least 210 lumens for every 150 square feet of space during the administration
of such services, with the light fixtures being spread throughout the space. No
dimmer switches, strobe lights, flashing lights, colored light, or any
coverings or other apparatus, other than a lampshade, which changes or darkens
the color of the primary light source shall be used in any room in which
massage services are being provided.
   (D)   Any locker facilities provided for the use of patrons shall be fully
secured for the protection of the patron’s valuables and the patron shall be
given control of the key or other means of access.
   (E)   The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have
a washable mold-resistant surface.
   (F)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms,
and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair
and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam
or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use.
   (G)   One main entry that enters into the reception area shall be provided
for patron use. All patrons, and any persons other than those providing
services at the massage establishment, shall be required to enter and exit
through the front door of the establishment.
   (H)   All exterior doors (except rear exterior doors used only for employee
entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall remain unlocked
during business hours, and the establishment shall comply with the provisions
of the San Gabriel Municipal Code pertaining to the posting of signs stating
that doors shall remain unlocked during business hours. Exits for fire safety
purposes may be allowed where deemed necessary by the appropriate public safety
agency. Notwithstanding the above, the front door may be locked if there is no
staff available to assure security for the clients and massage staff who are
behind closed doors, provided that the massage establishment is owned by one
individual with one or no employees or independent contractors.
   (I)   There shall be no buzzer, alarm, or intercom system.
   (J)   No massage business located in a building or structure with exterior
windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall block
visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of
curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material that obstructs or darkens
the view into the premises or by signs that cover more than 25% of any
windowpane. The interior of the business shall be plainly visible from the
exterior of the business by passing vehicles and pedestrians.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.52 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Representatives of the city’s Police Department, Fire Department,
Community Development Department, and Finance Department, and agents for the
city from the County Health Department and representatives of any state or
local agencies with regulatory authority over massage establishments shall have
the right to enter massage establishments, from time to time, during regular
business hours, or at any time that the massage establishment is occupied or
open for business, to verify the massage establishment is in compliance with
all applicable laws without the need for an inspection or abatement warrant.
   (B)   Posting of notices.
      (1)   The operator shall cause to be conspicuously posted so that the
same may be readily visible to persons in the reception area of the massage
establishment, in letters that are a minimum of one inch in height, a notice in
English which provides substantially as follows:
         THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE
COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY CITY AND HEALTH OFFICIALS
WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE
      (2)   In addition, operators are encouraged to post this notice in
language(s) that are best understood by the customers of the massage
establishment.
   (C)   No person shall refuse to permit, cause delay of, or interfere with, a
lawful inspection or compliance check of the premises by the officials listed
in division (A) of this section at any time.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
§ 122.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in conduct that violates any
provision of this chapter, to engage in conduct which fails to meet the
standards set forth in this chapter, or to own, manage, or operate a massage
establishment that is not fully in compliance with the operational standards
set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor unless, in the
sole discretion of the City Prosecutor, it is charged as, or reduced to, an
infraction. Citations and warning notices may be utilized as determined
appropriate to the circumstances by the enforcing personnel.
   (C)   In addition to the above, any massage establishment operated,
conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be
and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city may, in
addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this chapter,
commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement,
removal, and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, including any
code enforcement procedures established pursuant to the laws of the State of
California or the City of San Gabriel; and may take such other steps and may
apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as
will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any
person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment
contrary to the provisions of this chapter. If an injunction is sought,
attorney’s fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court
against the party subject to said injunction.
   (D)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is
committed or continued.
(Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 612-C.S., passed 2-17-15; Am. Ord.
633-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 634-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
CHAPTER 123: SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS; WRECKING BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
123.01   Permit required
   
123.02   Permit application
   
123.03   Consideration of application; issuance
   
123.04   Term of permit
   
123.05   Permit nontransferability
   
123.06   Revocation
   
123.07   License fees
   
123.08   Premises; fencing
   
123.09   Placing and piling of merchandise
Wrecking Businesses
   
123.20   Records
   
123.21   Retention of merchandise
   
123.22   Days and hours of operation
   
123.23   Burning waste materials prohibited
   
123.24   Waste oil and grease
   
123.25   Fire extinguishers
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 123.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a junk
dealer or secondhand dealer or in the business of wrecking automobiles, motor
vehicles, or motorcycles in the city without first securing a permit from the
Council so to do and paying the license fees required by the provisions of this
chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-18.01) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 123.02 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to conduct or carry on any of the businesses mentioned
in §
123.01 of this chapter shall file with the Council an application in writing,
stating the name and address of the applicant, the proposed location, and the
kind of business to be carried on.
('65 Code, § 5-18.02) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
§ 123.03 CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   If the Council shall decide, after the receipt of and consideration of such
application, that the business to be carried on is proper or desirable in the
location proposed and the applicant is a proper person to conduct or carry on
such business, the Council shall authorize the City Clerk to issue a permit
therefor upon the payment of the license fees provided for in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-18.03) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
§ 123.04 TERM OF PERMIT.
   Such permit, when so issued, shall be valid so long as the license fees are
paid by the applicant and all of the provisions of this chapter and all other
laws are complied with by the applicant.
('65 Code, § 5-18.04) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
§ 123.05 PERMIT NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   Such permit shall not be transferable.
('65 Code, § 5-18.05) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 123.06 REVOCATION.
   Such permit may be revoked by the Council at any time after its issuance if
the applicant should fail or neglect to comply with each and all of the terms
and conditions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 5-18.06) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
§ 123.07 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Junk dealers. Every person carrying on the business of collecting,
purchasing, selling, or dealing in junk or rubbish shall pay a license fee as
set forth in §
110.68.
   (B)   Wrecking businesses. Every person carrying on the business of wrecking
automobiles, motorcycles, or any other motor vehicle shall pay a license fee as
set forth in §
110.68.
§ 123.08 PREMISES; FENCING.
   All premises used for secondhand, junk, or wrecking businesses shall have a
substantial continuous fence constructed of stucco or new armco metal, or
equal, seven feet in height across the entire front thereof and along both
sides thereof for a distance of not less than 50 feet along each of such sides.
There shall be but one gate in the front of the premises, which gate shall not
exceed or be over 12 feet in width for each lot so occupied. No goods, wares,
merchandise, or parts of motor vehicles shall be hung, placed, or put upon or
against the top or front of the fence. All signs shall be pursuant to §§
150.320 through 150.33. No automobile or motor vehicle not in running order and
capable of being operated by its own power without repairs, additions, or
alterations shall be kept, parked, or displayed between such fence and the
public highway. All premises so used shall at all times be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
('65 Code, § 5-18.08) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 123.09 PLACING AND PILING OF MERCHANDISE.
   No person engaged in a junk or wrecking business shall place, deposit, or
pile any article, goods, wares, or merchandise on the premises occupied by him
so that the same, or any part thereof, shall project or extend above the fence
required to be maintained on the premises; provided, however, tires and new
accessories may be displayed in front of such fence.
('65 Code, § 5-18.09) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
WRECKING BUSINESSES
§ 123.20 RECORDS.
   Every person engaged in the business of wrecking motor vehicles in the city
shall keep a record of the wrecking of such articles, which record shall at all
times be open to the inspection of any peace officer of the city.
('65 Code, § 5-18.10) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 123.21 RETENTION OF MERCHANDISE.
   Any vehicle received for the purpose of wrecking shall be held in its
original condition as received and shall not be wrecked or changed in any
respect for at least a period of five days from the time of notifying the
Police Chief, and beginning with midnight of the day of such report, unless
sooner released by the Police Department.
('65 Code, § 5-18.12) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 123.22 DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
   All wrecking or repairing shall be done on the rear of the premises and in
the daytime only. No wrecking shall be done on Sunday.
('65 Code, § 5-18.13) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 123.23 BURNING WASTE MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
   No burning of any materials shall be permitted on the premises.
§ 123.24 WASTE OIL AND GREASE.
   All oil and grease taken from motors shall be deposited in a substantial
container and so kept that the oil and grease shall not run onto the public
highway or adjoining property.
('65 Code, § 5-18.15) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 123.25 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   There shall at all times be kept on the premises at least one foamite fire
extinguisher and two soda and acid fire extinguishers, or their equal, which
shall be in good working order at all times.
('65 Code, § 5-18.16) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 124: SALES
Section
Aerosol Spray Cans and Writing Instruments
   
124.001   Sale and possession of aerosol spray paint cans by juveniles
   
124.002   Sale and storage requirements
Closing-Out Sales
   
124.015   Definitions
   
124.016   Permit required
   
124.017   License fee
   
124.018   Exception for established places of business
Garage Sales
   
124.030   Definition
   
124.031   Requirements for sales
Street or Sidewalk Sales
   
124.040   Permit required
   
124.041   Application for permit
   
124.042   Issuance of permits
   
124.043   Terms of permit
   
124.044   Notices of rejection
   
124.045   Alternative permits
   
124.046   Late applications
   
124.047   Officials to be notified
   
124.048   Interference with sales
   
124.049   Exceptions
Soliciting; Charitable Organizations
   
124.060   Door to door selling or soliciting
   
124.061   Charitable solicitation
   
124.062   Notice of intention
   
124.063   Hours of charitable solicitation
   
124.064   Charitable solicitation and canvassing for religious and political
purposes on posted property
Peddlers
   
124.090   Definition
   
124.091   Permit and license required
   
124.092   Permit application
   
124.093   Application investigation
   
124.094   Recommendation following investigation
   
124.095   Fingerprinting required
   
124.096   Issuance of permit
   
124.097   Permits and licenses nontransferable
   
124.098   Revocation of permits and licenses
   
124.099   Stationary locations restricted
   
124.100   Sound devices restricted
 
   
124.999   Penalty
AEROSOL SPRAY CANS AND WRITING INSTRUMENTS
§ 124.001 SALE AND POSSESSION OF AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT CANS BY JUVENILES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, give, or loan, or
cause or permit to be sold, exchanged, given, or loaned, any pressurized can or
other container commonly known as an aerosol spray paint can or container which
contains paint or dye, and or any writing instruments having a porous point,
tip or nib in excess of one-sixteenth of one inch in width at its widest point
(hereinafter referred to as “writing instrument”) and or glass etching tools to
anyone under the age of 18 years. It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age
of 18 years to purchase or otherwise obtain any aerosol spray paint can,
writing instrument or glass etching tools or for a juvenile to possess an
aerosol spray paint can, writing instrument or glass etching tools in a public
place unless:
   (A)   Such juvenile is in the presence of his or her parent or guardian; or
   (B)   The possession of such device or devices is part of an authorized
school activity or the juvenile's lawful employment duties.
('65 Code, § 4-11.01) (Ord. 401-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
§ 124.002 SALE AND STORAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any business or establishment offering for sale to the public any
paint or dye which is packaged for sale in a pressurized container commonly
known as an aerosol spray paint can or container, writing instruments as
described in §
124.001 of this subchapter and or glass etching tools shall provide, post and
maintain a sign which contains the following: “Any person who maliciously
defaces real or personal property with paint, marking pens or etching tools is
guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both.” The
letters shall be at least one-half inch in height. Such a sign shall be plainly
visible to customers who may seek to purchase aerosol spray paint cans, writing
instruments or glass etching tools.
   (B)   Any business or establishment offering for sale to the public any
paint or dye packaged in aerosol spray paint cans or containers, writing
instruments as described in §
124.001 of this subchapter, or glass etching tools, shall keep, store and
maintain such aerosol spray paint cans or containers, writing instruments or
glass etching tools in a place that is locked and secured, or otherwise
inaccessible to the public.
('65 Code, § 4-11.02) (Ord. 401-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
CLOSING-OUT SALES
§ 124.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLOSING-OUT SALE. Means and includes any sale of goods, wares, and
merchandise which is, or is advertised to be, a sale for the purpose of
disposing of the stock of merchandise on hand, or any major portion thereof, in
contemplation of discontinuing the operation or maintenance of the store or
place of business of the seller or the removal thereof to another location, or
any sale which is advertised or held out as being a sale under bankruptcy,
mortgage, insolvency, or an assignee's, trustee's, or creditor's sale.
   FIRE, BANKRUPT, or WRECK SALE. Means and includes the sale of goods, wares,
or merchandise salvaged from a fire, wreck, or other calamity, or a sale of
goods, wares, or merchandise advertised as a fire, bankrupt, or wreck sale.
('65 Code, § 5-7.01) (Ord. 657, passed - - )
§ 124.016 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a fire sale, bankrupt sale,
wreck sale, closing-out sale, or sale of a similar nature in the city without
first obtaining a permit from the Council.
('65 Code, § 5-7.02) (Ord. 657, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
§ 124.017 LICENSE FEE.
   A license fee for each and every of a closing-out sale shall be paid as set
forth in §
110.61.
§ 124.018 EXCEPTION FOR ESTABLISHED PLACES OF BUSINESS.
   Any person who has been conducting a business in the city for a period of
one year may conduct such a sale for a period of 30 days in his established
place of business without the payment of a license fee by securing a permit
from the Council and filing with the City Clerk an inventory of the merchandise
on hand and proposed to be sold. Such permit shall permit the sale of the
merchandise then on hand in the store or place of business, and no other
merchandise. Only one such sale is permitted per business.
('65 Code, § 5-7.04) (Ord. 657, passed - - )
GARAGE SALES
§ 124.030 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning, GARAGE SALE shall mean any lawn or yard sale,
attic sale, rummage sale, moving sale, patio sale, bazaar and/or flea market,
or other similar sale and shall mean any sale held for the purposes of selling,
trading, bargaining, exchanging, or otherwise disposing of unwanted or surplus
household furnishings, personal goods, or other tangible properties of the
person or organization holding such sale and conducted on premises in any
residential or commercial zone when the principal use of the property is
residential.
('65 Code, § 4-9.01) (Ord. 232-C.S., passed - - )
§ 124.031 REQUIREMENTS FOR SALES.
   Any person desiring to conduct any garage sale in the city shall comply with
the following requirements:
   (A)   That the occupant of a residence shall first obtain a city permit and
that a copy of such permit shall be displayed at the site of the sale at all
times during such sale;
   (B)   That no such sale shall be of a duration in excess of two days;
   (C)   That not more than one such sale shall be permitted during any six
month period;
   (D)   That such sale shall be conducted only on an improved lot;
   (E)   That no portion of any front or side yard area or any open, unenclosed
porch, platform, or landing shall be utilized for such purposes;
   (F)   That such sales shall be conducted only between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. of any day; and
   (G)   That no sign, placard, or other form of advertisement of such sale
shall be placed upon any public property within the city; nor shall any such
form of advertisement be placed upon the premises where the sale is to be
conducted more than two days prior to the day the sale is to commence, and such
advertisement shall be removed by 6:00 p.m. on the day the sale terminates. No
more than one double-faced sign, placard, or other form of advertisement shall
be placed upon the premises, and such sign shall not exceed six square feet in
size.
('65 Code, § 4-9.02) (Ord. 232-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
STREET OR SIDEWALK SALES
§ 124.040 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to hold, manage,
conduct, aid, participate in, start, or carry on any street or sidewalk sale,
moonlight sale, or any other similar display or sale or cause or permit the
same upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or any other public grounds
in the city unless there has first been obtained from the Community Development
Director a permit to do so, and such permit shall be carried by a person
heading such activity.
('65 Code, § 4-7.01) (Ord. 77-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
Cross-reference:
   
Streets, sidewalks, and public places, see Ch. 100
§ 124.041 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person or civic organization, such as a Chamber of Commerce, desiring to
conduct or manage a street or sidewalk sale, or moonlight sale, shall, not less
than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct such sale, file
with the Community Development Director a verified application, on a form
furnished by the city, setting forth the following information:
   (A)   The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct such sale;
   (B)   If the sale is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and the authorized and responsible head of such organization;
   (C)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the
sale chairperson and will be responsible for its conduct;
   (D)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person or organization
to whom the permit is desired to be issued;
   (E)   The date when such sale is to be conducted;
   (F)   The approximate number of merchants who will participate in such sale;
   (G)   The time when such sale will start and terminate;
   (H)   Whether such sale will occupy all or only a portion of the width of
the street or sidewalk proposed to be used;
   (I)   The approximate number of searchlights or floodlights proposed to be
used and their proposed location, the number of bands or other musical units to
be used, and other proposed entertainment; and
   (J)   Payment of a fee established by Council resolution.
('65 Code, § 4-7.02) (Ord. 77-C.S., passed - - )
§ 124.042 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   The Community Development Director shall issue a permit as provided for by
this subchapter when, after consideration of the application and after such
other information as may otherwise be obtained, it finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of such sale will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of traffic contiguous to its various locations;
   (B)   The conduct of such sale will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers, to properly police the sales and the areas
contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal police protection to the city;
   (C)   The concentration of persons and vehicles at sales locations will not
unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection or ambulance service to
such areas;
   (D)   The conduct of such sales will not unduly interfere with the movement
of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire or the movement of other
emergency equipment;
   (E)   The conduct of such sales is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property or to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
and
   (F)   Such sale is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising the
goods, wares, or merchandise of a particular business establishment or vendor.
('65 Code, § 4-7.03) (Ord. 77-C.S., passed - - )
§ 124.043 TERMS OF PERMIT.
   The permit to be issued by the Community Development Director shall
prescribe the following:
   (A)   The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct such sale;
   (B) If the sale is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and the authorized and responsible head of such organization;
   (C)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the
sale chairperson and will be responsible for its conduct;
   (D)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person or organization
to whom the permit is desired to be issued;
   (E)   The date when such sale is to be conducted;
   (F)   The approximate number of searchlights or floodlights to be used and
authorized locations and the number of bands or other musical units permitted;
   (G)   Whether such sale will occupy all or only a portion of the streets or
sidewalks to be occupied;
   (H)   The time at which the sale shall commence and close, and the time when
musical units may commence to play or sing, and the time when they shall cease
to play or sing; and
   (I)   The amount of bond or liability insurance to be furnished by the
applicant.
('65 Code, § 4-7.04) (Ord. 77-C.S., passed - - )
§ 124.044 NOTICES OF REJECTION.
   The Community Development Director shall act upon the application for a
sales permit within 15 days after the filing thereof or at its next regular
meeting. If the Community Development Director disapproves the application, it
shall cause to be mailed to the applicant, within five days after its decision,
a notice of its action, stating the reasons for denial of the permit. Such
notice shall be mailed to the applicant at his address as given in the
application.
('65 Code, § 4-7.05) (Ord. 77-C.S., passed - - )
§ 124.045 ALTERNATIVE PERMITS.
   The Community Development Director, in denying an application, may authorize
the conduct of such sale on a date and at a time different from that named by
the applicant, and, if the applicant desires to accept the proposed date and
time, he shall, within two days after notice of the action of the Community
Development Director, file a notice of acceptance. Such permit shall conform to
the requirements of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 4-7.06) (Ord. 77-C.S., passed - - )
§ 124.046 LATE APPLICATIONS.
   The Community Development Director shall have the authority, in his or her
discretion, to consider any application for a permit to conduct such sale which
is filed less than 30 days before the date such sale is proposed to be
conducted.
('65 Code, § 4-7.07) (Ord. 77-C.S., passed - - )
§ 124.047 OFFICIALS TO BE NOTIFIED.
   Immediately upon the granting of a sale permit, the Community Development
Director shall send a copy thereof to the following:
   (A)   The Police Chief;
   (B)   The Fire Chief; and
   (C)   Other public officials responsible for functions deemed likely to be
affected by the sale.
('65 Code, § 4-7.08) (Ord. 77-C.S., passed - - )
§ 124.048 INTERFERENCE WITH SALES.
   No person shall, without the consent of the permittee, join or participate
in such sale nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct.
('65 Code, § 4-7.09) (Ord. 77-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
§ 124.049 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared to be exceptions
to various other sections of this code regulating sales within buildings for
the purpose of regulating and permitting sales on streets or sidewalks only for
the periods designated in the permit as to the dates and hours of such sales.
   (B)   The Council is hereby setting a policy of allowing such applications
for permits for street or sidewalk sales not more often than semiannually, and
only when the Community Development Director finds that such sales are in the
public interest and not contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare.
('65 Code, § 4-7.10) (Ord. 77-C.S., passed - - )
SOLICITING; CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS
§ 124.060 DOOR TO DOOR SELLING OR SOLICITING.
   No person shall solicit, sell, or offer to sell, demonstrate, or take orders
for the sale of goods, wares, or any form of merchandise, by entering upon the
premises of another for such purpose except in compliance with the provisions
of this section.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SOLICITATION. To sell or offer to sell or take orders for the sale of
goods, wares, or any form of merchandise or services.
   (B)   No person shall enter upon the premises of another for the purpose of
solicitation between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the following day.
   (C)   Any person over the age of 16 who engages in door-to-door
solicitations shall carry a form of photo identification and must present such
photo identification upon request of any person being solicited, any peace
officer or other person charged with enforcement of the laws pertaining to such
solicitations. The photo identification must include the person’s date of birth
and be issued by a governmental agency or educational institution. Acceptable
identification includes a state driver’s license, state identification card,
school identification card, or any government issued identification card.
   (D)   Any person engaged in door-to-door solicitations shall present the
original or a copy of proof of payment of City Business License Tax (pursuant
to San Gabriel Municipal Code §
110.61) upon request of any person being solicited, any peace officer, or other
person charged with enforcement of the laws pertaining to such solicitations.
   (E)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to vendors or
solicitors who have previously been invited or requested to appear at such
premises by the owner or lawful occupant thereof, or to persons making
charitable solicitations as defined in §
124.061 below.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15)
§ 124.061 CHARITABLE SOLICITATION.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARITABLE SOLICITATION.  
      (1)   Means and includes the following:
         (a)   Any oral or written request for a charitable contribution made,
transmitted, or distributed by any means; and
         (b)   Any offer to sell any service, item, or right to attend any
function or participate in any activity, which offer includes reference to any
actual or purported charitable purpose or charitable organization as an
inducement to purchase the service, item, or right to attend.
      (2)   CHARITABLE SOLICITATION as used herein shall not mean door to door
canvassing for the purpose of disseminating information on, promoting,
advocating, or proselytizing any religious or political message or cause. As
set forth in §
124.060 above CHARITABLE SOLICITATION as defined herein shall not require a
city permit but shall require a “notice of intention” as set forth in §
124.062 below.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15)
§ 124.062 NOTICE OF INTENTION.
   No person shall conduct any charitable solicitation as defined in §
124.061 above or solicit or authorize any other person to conduct any
charitable solicitation unless a written notice of intention to conduct
charitable solicitations is filed with the city’s Finance Director or designee
at least 15 days prior to the beginning of the solicitation on a form furnished
by the city. A notice of intention shall be filed for each separate special
event. At the option of the person filing the notice, a notice related to an
ongoing general appeal for charitable contributions may be filed on an annual
basis. The Finance Director or designee shall distinguish between special
events and activities related to an ongoing general appeal so as to best inform
the public of the various types of charitable solicitation activities
undertaken by the person filing the notice. If an annual notice is filed, it
shall include a description of the activities planned for the year. The person
filing the notice shall file a separate notice of intention for any charitable
solicitation activity that is not included in the annual notice. The notice of
intention shall include the following information:
   (A)   The name of the person registering and desiring to conduct
solicitations for charitable purposes;
   (B)   Whether the person registering is a natural person, partnership,
corporation, or association; and,
      (1)   If a natural person, the principal business or residence address
and telephone number;
      (2)   If a partnership, the address and telephone number, if any, of the
partnership, and the name and principal business or residence address and
telephone number of each partner;
      (3)   If a corporation, the state of incorporation, the address and
telephone number of the corporate headquarters, the mailing address, location,
telephone number, and name of the person in charge of the local office, if any,
and the name and title of each officer and director or trustee;
      (4)   If an association, the principal business address and telephone
number of the association, if any, the name and principal business or residence
address and telephone number of each member, unless there are more than ten
members, in which case the association shall provide the name, title, and
principal business or residence address and telephone number of each officer
and director or trustee, and if the association is part of a multi-state
organization, the business address and location of local office;
   (C)   The purpose of the solicitation and use of the contributions to be
solicited;
   (D)   The commencement and termination dates of the solicitation;
   (E)   The type of solicitation activity and how it will be conducted;
   (F)   The names of any officer, director, trustee, partner, or any current
agent or employee engaging in solicitation of funds who has been convicted of a
felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven years,
and the nature of the offense, the state where the conviction occurred, and the
year of the conviction, such a conviction may be a basis for denial of the
right to solicit;
   (G)   A statement signed under penalty of perjury by persons authorized by
the person filing the notice that the signers of the notice of intention have
read and are familiar with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15)
§ 124.063 HOURS OF CHARITABLE SOLICITATION.
   (A)   No person shall conduct any charitable solicitation door-to-door
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
   (B)   No child under the age of ten years shall conduct any charitable
solicitation unless accompanied by a responsible person who is 18 years of age
or older and who shall at all times keep such child within the range of his or
her sight and hearing.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15)
§ 124.064 CHARITABLE SOLICITATION AND CANVASSING FOR RELIGIOUS AND POLITICAL
PURPOSES ON POSTED PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether permitted under this chapter or
not, to conduct charitable solicitation or door-to-door canvassing for the
purpose of disseminating information on,- promoting, advocating or
proselytizing any religious or political message or cause in or upon any
premises which has posted a sign in a place providing reasonable notice by
bearing the words “no solicitors,” or words of similar import.
(Ord. 616-C.S., passed 3-17-15)
PEDDLERS
§ 124.090 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, PEDDLER shall mean and include every
person who travels from place to place, or house to house, and solicits or
takes orders for books or subscriptions of magazines, periodicals, or
newspapers or who canvasses for or makes demonstrations of any goods, wares,
merchandise, or things or articles of value; provided, however, PEDDLER shall
not include route salespersons of an established business in the city.
('65 Code, § 5-21.201) (Ord. 572, passed - - )
§ 124.091 PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler
in the city without first securing a permit and license therefor.
('65 Code, § 5-21.202) (Ord. 572, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
§ 124.092 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a permit to engage in the business of a peddler shall
file an application in writing with the Finance Director on a form to be
furnished by him.
('65 Code, § 5-21.203) (Ord. 572, passed - - )
§ 124.093 APPLICATION INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt of such application, the Finance Director shall refer it to the
City Manager who shall cause such investigation to be made of the applicant's
business or moral character as he deems necessary for the protection of the
public.
('65 Code, § 5-21.204) (Ord. 572, passed - - )
§ 124.094 RECOMMENDATION FOLLOWING INVESTIGATION.
   The City Manager shall, at the conclusion of his investigation, endorse on
the application his recommendation. In the event it is recommended that no
permit be issued to the applicant, the application shall be denied.
('65 Code, § 5-21.205) (Ord. 572, passed - - )
§ 124.095 FINGERPRINTING REQUIRED.
   In the event the application for such permit is recommended by the City
Manager, the applicant for such permit shall, before securing the permit from
the Finance Director, report to the Police Chief and have his fingerprints
taken and file a specimen of his written signature.
('65 Code, § 5-21.206) (Ord. 408, passed - - )
§ 124.096 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   In the event the application for such permit is recommended by the City
Manager, the Finance Director shall issue a permit to the applicant to engage
in the business of a peddler under the following terms and conditions:
   (A)   Such permit shall be issued on the form provided by the Finance
Director on which form shall be placed a photograph of the applicant, one inch
by one inch in size, taken within six months of the issuing of the permit.
   (B)   A deposit in the amount of $25 shall be made as a guarantee for the
return of the permit to the Finance Director within three days after the
expiration of the permit.
   (C)   A license fee in the amount established by Council resolution shall be
paid to the city before the permit shall be issued.
   (D)   The permit shall be worn upon the permittee in full view at all times
while he is engaged in the business of a peddler.
   (E)   The fees required by the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this
section shall not apply to agents who are personally employed by the
manufacturer of the articles they sell and shall not apply to agents who are
personally employed by the duly franchised, exclusive dealer or distributor of
such manufacturer. In lieu thereof, such agents shall pay a license fee in the
amount established by Council resolution.
('65 Code, § 5-21.207) (Ord. 572, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 4-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
§ 124.097 PERMITS AND LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE.
   No license or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter
shall be used by, or assigned to any other person.
('65 Code, § 5-21.208) (Ord. 572, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
§ 124.098 REVOCATION OF PERMITS AND LICENSES.
   Any permit or license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter
may be revoked by the Council in the event the holder thereof is guilty of
fraud, misrepresentation, or the violation of any provision of this subchapter
or the general welfare of the public.
('65 Code, § 5-21.209) (Ord. 572, passed - - )
§ 124.099 STATIONARY LOCATIONS RESTRICTED.
   No peddler shall be permitted a stationary location upon a public street in
the city.
('65 Code, § 5-21.210) (Ord. 572, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
§ 124.100 SOUND DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   No peddler shall use any sound device which will constitute an annoyance or
disturbance in connection with his business.
('65 Code, § 5-21.211) (Ord. 572, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 124.999
§ 124.999 PENALTY.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
10.99, establishing the penalty for violation of the Municipal Code as a
misdemeanor, the prosecutor, in his or her sound discretion, may prosecute a
violation of this chapter as an infraction, rather than as a misdemeanor. The
prosecutor may also reduce or agree to the reduction of a previously filed
misdemeanor to an infraction. Every person, firm, partnership, association, or
corporation convicted of an infraction for violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation, a
fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same section within a
year and a fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same
section within one year. A fourth violation within one year shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues may be regarded as a new and
separate offense.
CHAPTER 125: TOBACCO
Section
Tobacco Retailers
   
125.01   Short title
   
125.02   Findings and purpose
   
125.03   Definitions
   
125.04   Requirements for tobacco retail licensure
   
125.05   Application process
   
125.06   Issuance and renewal of license
   
125.07   Display of license
   
125.08   License and reinspection fees
   
125.09   Licenses non-transferable
   
125.10   Suspension or revocation of license
   
125.11   Initial compliance period
Tobacco Use and Sales Restrictions
   
125.25   Authority
   
125.26   Definitions
   
125.27   Prohibition of smoking, use of and disposal of tobacco products in
public parks, trails, playgrounds, picnic areas, swimming pools and recreation
centers
   
125.28   Prohibition of mobile vending of tobacco products
   
125.29   Purchaser identification
 
   
125.98   Enforcement
   
125.99   Penalty
TOBACCO RETAILERS
§ 125.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “tobacco retailer license chapter.”
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10)
§ 125.02 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that despite existing federal, state and local laws
intended to regulate tobacco sales and use, local laws need to be enhanced to
ensure compliance and maximize their effectiveness in protecting the public’s
health, especially that of the more vulnerable youth. The purpose of this
subchapter is to discourage violations of laws which prohibit or discourage
sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors in the city. It is not the
purpose of this subchapter to expand or reduce the degree to which the acts
regulated by federal or state law are criminally proscribed, or to alter the
penalty provided therefor.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10)
§ 125.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PROPRIETOR. A person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business.
An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a 10% or
greater interest in the stock, assets or income of a business other than the
sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to
exist when a person can or does have, or can or does share, ultimate control
over the day-to- day operations of a business.
   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA. Includes cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders
of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and other items
designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco or products prepared from
tobacco.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any manufactured substance made from the tobacco plant,
including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco and smokeless tobacco, or products prepared from tobacco and designed
for smoking or ingestion.
   TOBACCO RETAILER. Any person or business that operates a store, stand,
booth, concession or other place at which the sales of tobacco products are
made to purchasers for person consumption or use.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10)
§ 125.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR TOBACCO RETAIL LICENSURE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer
without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer’s license
pursuant to this subchapter, for each location at which that activity is to
occur.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of a tobacco retailer’s license for a licensee
or his or her agent or employee to violate any local, state, or federal
tobacco-related law.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
125.99
§ 125.05 APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Application for a tobacco retailer’s license shall be submitted in the
name of each proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be
signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof.
   (B)   It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed of the laws
affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer’s license.
   (C)   A license that is issued in error or on the basis of false or
misleading information supplied by a proprietor may be revoked pursuant to §
125.10. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city and
shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor;
      (2)   The business name, address, and telephone number of the fixed
location for which a tobacco retailer’s license is sought;
      (3)   The name and mailing address authorized by each applicant to
receive all license-related communications and notices (the “authorized
address”). Failure to supply an authorized address shall be understood to
consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in
division (C)(2) of this section;
      (4)   Whether any applicant has previously been issued a license pursuant
to this chapter that is or was at any time suspended or revoked and, if so, the
dates of the suspension period or the date of the revocation;
      (5)   Such other information as the city deems necessary for the
administration or enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
125.99
§ 125.06 ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a tobacco retailer’s license and
the license fee, the city shall issue a license unless:
      (1)   The application is incomplete or inaccurate; or
      (2)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing by a
proprietor for which or whom a suspension is in effect or by a proprietor which
or who has had a license revoked; or
      (3)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is
unlawful pursuant to this code, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other
local, state or federal law; or
      (4)   The city has information that the proprietor or his or her agent or
employee has violated any local, state or federal tobacco control law, other
than selling tobacco products without the license required by this subchapter,
within the preceding 30-day period;
      (5)   The city has information that the proprietor or his or her agent or
employee has sold tobacco products without the required tobacco retailer’s
license, within the previous 90-day period.
   (B)   A license shall be valid for one year and must be renewed no later
than 30 days prior to the expiration of the payment term.
   (C)   If the information required in the license application pursuant to
section §
125.05(C)(1), (2) or (3) changes, a new tobacco retailer’s license is required
before the business may continue to act as a tobacco retailer. For example, if
a proprietor to whom a license has been issued changes business location, that
proprietor must apply for new license prior to acting as a tobacco retailer at
the new location. If the business is sold, the new owner must apply for a
license for that location before acting as a tobacco retailer.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
125.99
§ 125.07 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location
at the licensed premises.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
125.99
§ 125.08 LICENSE AND REINSPECTION FEES.
   The City Council shall, by resolution, establish fees for the
administration, enforcement and implementation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10)
§ 125.09 LICENSES NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   A tobacco retailer’s license is non-transferable and is valid only for the
person and location of license issued for the period indicated, unless it is
suspended or revoked for cause.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10)
§ 125.10 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco
retailer’s license may be suspended or revoked if the city finds, after notice
to the licensee and an opportunity to be heard, that the licensee or his or her
agent or employee has violated the conditions of the license imposed pursuant
to §
125.04 of this subchapter.
      (1)   Upon a finding by the city of a first license violation, the
license shall be suspended for 30 days;
      (2)   Upon a finding by the city of a second license violation within a
five-year period of the first violation, the license shall be suspended for 90
days;
      (3)   Upon a finding by the city of a third violation within a five-year
period of the first violation, the license shall be revoked.
   (B)   A tobacco retailer’s license may be revoked if the city finds, after
notice and an opportunity to be heard, that the information contained in the
application, including supplemental information, if any, is found to be false
in any material respect.
   (C)   A decision of the city to revoke or suspend a license is appealable to
the City Manager, who may assign a designee to serve as hearing officer. An
appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the appealed action. The
decision of the City Manager shall be the final decision of the city.
   (D)   During a period of license suspension or revocation, the tobacco
retailer must remove from public view all tobacco products and tobacco-related
advertising.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
125.99
§ 125.11 INITIAL COMPLIANCE PERIOD.
   Any tobacco retailer who is selling tobacco products as of the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this subchapter, shall obtain a tobacco
retailer’s license by no later than July 1, 2010.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
125.99
TOBACCO USE AND SALES RESTRICTIONS
§ 125.25 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 118910 for the purpose of prohibiting smoking in specified places
in order to eliminate the hazards and nuisance which smoking causes to those
who are involuntarily exposed.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10)
§ 125.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any manufactured substance made from the tobacco plan,
including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco and smokeless tobacco, or products prepared from tobacco and designed
for smoking or ingestion.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10)
§ 125.27 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING, USE OF AND DISPOSAL OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS IN
PUBLIC PARKS, TRAILS, PLAYGROUNDS, PICNIC AREAS, SWIMMING POOLS AND RECREATION
CENTERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to possess a burning tobacco product,
including but not limited to cigars and cigarettes, to chew tobacco, to dispose
of lighted or unlighted cigars or cigarettes or cigarette butts, or any other
tobacco product waste, in or upon any city park, trail or walking path, picnic
area, sports field, playground, swimming pool or recreation center. This
prohibition includes all parking lots for, and sidewalks adjacent to, such
facilities.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
125.99
§ 125.28 PROHIBITION OF MOBILE VENDING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   It is unlawful for a person to engage in retail tobacco sales at other than
a fixed location. Itinerant tobacco retailing and tobacco retailing from
vehicles are both expressly prohibited.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
125.99
§ 125.29 PURCHASER IDENTIFICATION.
   The seller of any tobacco products shall require government-issued
photographic identification if a purchaser reasonably appears to be under 27
years of age. In compliance with federal and state law, tobacco products shall
not be sold to anyone under 18 years of age.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10) Penalty, see §
125.99
§ 125.98 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement of this chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10)
§ 125.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor or an
infraction in the discretion of the City Prosecutor. Citations and warning
notices may be utilized as determined appropriate to the circumstances by the
enforcing personnel.
   (B)   In addition to the above remedy, a violation of this chapter may be
remedied by civil action initiated by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 3-2-10)
CHAPTER 126: SHOPPING CARTS
Section
   
126.01   Legislative purpose
   
126.02   Definitions
   
126.03   Enforcement
   
126.04   Cart containment requirements
   
126.05   Cart retrieval required
 
   
126.99   Penalty
§ 126.01 LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.
   Many retail establishments provide shopping carts for the convenience of
customers while shopping on the business premises. However, shopping carts
removed from the premises of such businesses and left abandoned on public or
private property throughout the city constitute a public nuisance and a
potential hazard to the health and safety of the public. The abundance of lost,
stolen, or abandoned shopping carts on public and private property causes
blighting conditions in the community, results in the obstruction of free
access to public and private sidewalks, streets, parking lots, and interferes
with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on public and private streets, and
impedes emergency services. The purpose of this chapter is to establish
regulations to ensure that measures are taken by the owners and operators of
businesses which provide ten or more shopping carts to prevent the removal of
shopping carts from the business premises and provide prompt retrieval of lost,
stolen, or abandoned shopping carts, to complement state law, and adopt local
regulations to the extent not otherwise preempted by state statute.
(Ord. 584-C.S., passed 6-1-10)
§ 126.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SHOPPING CART. A shopping cart removed from the business premises
by any person without the written consent of the owner of the shopping cart or
the retailer entitled to possession of the cart, or a cart left unattended,
discarded, or abandoned outside the business premises or parking lot or
facility of the business establishment which furnishes the shopping cart for
patrons.
   BUSINESS PREMISES. The entirety of a commercial or industrial site upon
which a cart provider conducts a commercial establishment, including, but not
limited to, the interior of the cart provider’s commercial establishment,
adjacent walkways, any associated loading and parking areas provided on that
site or provided on private property in conjunction with the commercial or
industrial establishment.
   CART PROVIDER. The owner or operator of a business who provides ten or more
carts for use by its customers for the purpose of transporting goods of any
kind.
   PHYSICAL CONTAINMENT SYSTEM. Devices on all shopping carts, which prevent
them from being removed from the business premises by locking the wheels or
otherwise preventing the movement of the shopping carts off the business
premises or from the businesses entrance/exit.
   SHOPPING CART. Any basket of any size, mounted on wheels or other similar
device provided by the store operator for the purpose of transporting goods of
any kind within a business establishment or designated parking or loading area
of that business establishment.
(Ord. 584-C.S., passed 6-1-10)
§ 126.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Community Development Director or his or her designee shall oversee the
implementation, administration, and enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 584-C.S., passed 6-1-10)
§ 126.04 CART CONTAINMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for owners or
operators of any establishment that provides ten or more carts to provide or
offer, or permit to be offered, any shopping carts to customers of the retail
establishment without an approved mandatory cart containment system meeting one
or all of the following criteria:
      (1)   Installation of disabling devices on all carts, which are activated
when they cross a barrier at the entrance/exit to the business structure or the
perimeter of the premises. If the cart provider’s containment system is found
to be ineffective by city staff the cart provider will be required to modify
the existing system or implement a new containment system within 30 days of
said finding. Cart providers may not lose more than three carts a day to be
considered effective.
      (2)   Installation of the physical containment system required shall be
completed prior to the issuance of a business license to any cart provider for
any business opened after the effective date of this chapter.
      (3)   For each cart provider whose business is legally in operation
before the effective date of this chapter, a six-month implementation period
will be provided to allow the cart provider time to evaluate its own rates of
cart loss and to secure and install an effective containment system. Any such
cart provider who has not installed a physical containment system at the
conclusion of the six-month period from the effective date of this chapter
shall be in violation of the San Gabriel Municipal Code. An extension may be
given at the discretion of the city’s Development Services Director or his or
her designee.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any retail establishment to
provide or offer, or permit to be provided or offered, to customers of the
retail establishment any shopping cart which does not have a sign permanently
affixed thereto containing all of the information required by Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code § 22435.1.
(Ord. 584-C.S., passed 6-1-10) Penalty, see §
126.99
§ 126.05 CART RETRIEVAL REQUIRED.
   In addition to installing physical measures to prevent the removal of carts
from the premises, each cart provider that provides ten or more shopping carts
shall also retrieve any abandoned shopping cart related to the business and
collect all shopping carts located on the premises and confine them in a cart
containment area at the end of each business day (other than an establishment
open for business 24 hours per day).
(Ord. 584-C.S., passed 6-1-10) Penalty, see §
126.99
§ 126.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of the mandatory requirements of this chapter may be subject to
misdemeanor, infraction and or administrative citation penalties as provided
for in the San Gabriel Municipal Code.
(Ord. 584-C.S., passed 6-1-10)
CHAPTER 127: SIDEWALK VENDING
Section
   
127.01   Definitions
   
127.02   Sidewalk vending permits
   
127.03   General regulations
   
127.04   Location-specific regulations
   
127.05   Ability-to-pay determination
 
   
127.99   Penalty
§ 127.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter the following meanings shall apply.
   ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDOR. A sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and
stops only to complete a transaction.
   SIDEWALK. The area of the public right-of-way which is designated or
ordinarily used for pedestrian travel, and including also any paved or unpaved
land within the right-of-way adjacent to any public street or highway. Sidewalk
also includes other pedestrian paths located on public property.
   SIDEWALK VENDING RECEPTACLE. A pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart,
wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance.
   SIDEWALK VENDOR. A person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart,
stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-
motorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other
pedestrian path.
   STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDOR. A sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed
location.
(Ord. 718, passed 3-4-25)
§ 127.02 SIDEWALK VENDING PERMITS.
   (A)   Only sidewalk vendors with a valid sidewalk vending permit issued by
the Community Development Director or designee, may vend upon the city's public
rights-of-way, sidewalks or public parks.
   (B)   A sidewalk vending permit shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issuance, unless sooner rescinded as set forth in §
127.99(B)(4).
   (C)   To apply for a sidewalk vending permit, the applicant must provide:
      (1)   A completed application form containing:
         (a)   Their name and mailing address;
         (b)   Description of the merchandise offered for sale or exchange;
         (c)   If the sidewalk vendor is an agent of an individual, company,
partnership, or corporation, the name and business address of the principal and
any owners of the company, partnership, or corporation; and
         (d)   Certification that the information is true to his or her
knowledge and belief.
      (2)   A copy of a California's driver's license or identification number,
an individual taxpayer identification number, or a Social Security number. Such
information is not a public record and will remain confidential as required by
Cal. Gov’t Code § 51038(c)(4).
      (3)   A copy of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration seller's permit, as required.
      (4)   A copy of a valid business license issued pursuant to Chapter 110
of this code.
      (5)   If vending includes food, a copy of a valid mobile food permit
issued by the County of Los Angeles Department of Public Health.
      (6)   Certificate of insurance and endorsements for general liability
insurance, naming the City of San Gabriel as additional insured and in the
amount required by the city's Risk Manager.
      (7)   A statement indicating whether the sidewalk vendor intends to
operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor and, if
the latter, the intended method and path of travel.
      (8)   A description of the dimensions of the sidewalk vending unit,
including the square footage of any display area, and a picture of each
sidewalk vending unit operating under the permit.
      (9)   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together
with license number or other means of identification.
   (D)   The sidewalk vending permit application shall require the applicant to
agree, in writing, to comply with all the provisions of this chapter and all
applicable provisions of this code.
   (E)   Certificate. The city shall issue to each permittee at the time of
delivery of their permit a certificate which shall contain the words “Licensed
Sidewalk Vendor,” the period for which the permit is issued, and the number of
the permit, in letters and fonts easily discernible from a distance of ten
feet. Such certificate shall, during the time such permittee is engaged in
sidewalk vending, be worn constantly by the permittee on the front of their
outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous.
(Ord. 718, passed 3-4-25)
§ 127.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   To maintain accessibility standards for the city's disabled residents,
every sidewalk vendor operating on any sidewalk shall ensure that no
obstruction is placed:
      (1)   In, on, over or near the sidewalk that would reduce the width of
the sidewalk to less than 48 inches, exclusive of the top of the curb;
      (2)   That would interfere with traffic signage by being located within
100 feet of a traffic signal, stop sign, directional sign or commercial
driveway; or
      (3)   That would obstruct vehicular traffic.
   (B)   To prevent food-borne illness and protect the health and safety of the
city's residents, every sidewalk vendor selling any food or beverage which is
not in a prepackaged container is required to wear a hairnet and food service
gloves.
   (C)   A sidewalk vending permit does not provide an exclusive right to
operate within any specific portion of the public right-of-way.
   (D)   No equipment or objects used for sidewalk vending purposes may be left
or maintained unattended in public spaces or in any portion of the public
right-of-way. Any equipment or objects left unattended in public spaces or in
any portion of the public right-of-way will be considered discarded and may be
seized or disposed of by the city.
   (E)   To facilitate the enforcement of this chapter, every sidewalk vendor
must display their city-issued sidewalk vending permit on the street-side
portion of their pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase,
rack, or other non-motorized conveyance when operating in the public right-of-
way.
   (F)   To preserve accessibility to private and public facilities, a sidewalk
vendor operating on any sidewalk or public right-of-way must ensure that no
obstruction is placed impeding entry to and exit from a business or residence
or access to a public facility.
   (G)   A sidewalk vendor must not engage in the selling of alcohol,
marijuana, tobacco products, products that contain nicotine or any product used
to smoke/vape nicotine or marijuana.
   (H)   A sidewalk vendor is responsible for maintaining clean vending sites.
A sidewalk vendor must be equipped with trash receptables large enough to
ensure proper disposal of trash generated by vending operations. A sidewalk
vendor may not dispose of any trash in private, or city- owned trash cans
intended for use by the general public.
   (I)   A sidewalk vendor must not use an open flame on or within any sidewalk
vending receptacle.
   (J)   Sidewalk vending receptacles and units must not touch, lean against,
or be affixed at any time to any sidewalk, building or structure including, but
not limited to, pavement or pavers, lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes,
traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans or
traffic barriers.
   (K)   A sidewalk vendor may not use any horns, music, flashing lights,
digital signs, digital advertising, any other visual media, or any other
amplifying device unless approved in the sidewalk vending permit.
(Ord. 718, passed 3-4-25)
§ 127.04 LOCATION-SPECIFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Sidewalk vending hours in areas zoned for non-residential use shall be
limited to the operating hours of other businesses or uses on the same street,
excluding those permitted to operate 24 hours. If other uses on the same street
do not have uniform hours of operation, the hours of operation shall be the
same as the majority of other businesses or uses on the same street.
   (B)   Roaming sidewalk vending is limited to the operating hours of 9:00
a.m. through 6:00 p.m. in areas that are exclusively residential.
   (C)   Stationary sidewalk vending is prohibited from operating in areas that
are exclusively residential.
   (D)   A stationary sidewalk vendor is prohibited from operating in a city
park if the city has entered into exclusive agreements for the sale of food or
merchandise by one or more concessionaires for that city park. A sidewalk
vendor shall be prohibited from locating within 100 feet of a creek, river,
drainage way, lake, reservoir or other body of water, any recreational
equipment or other structure or building located within a city park.
   (E)   A sidewalk vendor is prohibited from operating within 500 feet of a
permitted certified farmers' market, or any area subject to an encroachment
permit, temporary use permit, or special event permit, for special uses,
including, but not limited to filming, parades, outdoor concerts, holiday
events, community events, swap meets, art or cultural events, etc.
   (F)   To limit traffic congestion and protect the safety of children
traveling to and from and in and around schools from potential adverse safety
impacts due, in part, to sidewalk congestion, no sidewalk vendor is permitted
to operate within 250 feet of a public or private school during the period
extending of one hour before the start of classes and one hour after the end of
classes.
   (G)   Sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating within five feet of
streetlights, parking meters, edges of street wells, above ground utility
structures, newsstands, bike racks.
   (H)   Sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating within 15 feet of fire
hydrants, bus bench, transit shelter, crosswalk, driveway.
   (I)   Sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating within 20 feet from
another vendor, or entrance or exit of any building.
   (J)   Sidewalk vendors are prohibited from operating within 45 feet of an
intersection.
   (K)   Sidewalk vendors shall not operate on any sidewalk that is less than
nine feet wide and shall maintain at least four feet wide clear path of travel.
(Ord. 718, passed 3-4-25)
§ 127.05 ABILITY-TO-PAY DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Any fine issued under §
127.99 will be accompanied by a notice of and instruction regarding the right
to request an ability-to-pay determination.
   (B)   If the requester is receiving public benefits under Cal. Gov’t Code §
68632(a), or has a monthly income which is 125% or less than the current
poverty guidelines updated periodically in the Federal Register by the United
States Department of Health and Human Services, the city shall limit the total
amount of the requestor’s administrative fine to 20% of the total and may:
      (1)   Allow the person to complete community service in lieu of paying
the total administrative fine;
      (2)   Waive the administrative fine; or
      (3)   Offer an alternative disposition.
(Ord. 718, passed 3-4-25)
§ 127.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Every person engaged as a sidewalk vendor operating without a sidewalk
vending permit is guilty of an administrative violation punishable by an
administrative fine not to exceed:
      (1)   Two hundred fifty dollars for a first violation;
      (2)   Five hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the
first violation; and
      (3)   One thousand dollars for each additional violation within one year
of the first violation.
   (B)   Every person violating any other provision of this chapter is guilty
of an administrative violation punishable by an administrative fine not to
exceed:
      (1)   One hundred dollars for a first violation;
      (2)   Two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the
first violation;
      (3)   Five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year
of the first violation; and
      (4)   The city may revoke a sidewalk vending permit for the remaining
term of the permit upon a fourth or subsequent violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Failure to pay an administrative fine is not punishable as an
infraction or misdemeanor. Additional fines, fees, assessments, or any other
financial conditions beyond those authorized will not be assessed.
   (D)   An administrative violation constitutes a separate and distinct
violation for each day that it exists, and each such violation may be subject
to the maximum fine permitted under this chapter.
(Ord. 718, passed 3-4-25)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Disorderly conduct
   
130.02   Intoxication on private premises
   
130.03   Intoxication in public places
   
130.04   Drinking intoxicants in public places
   
130.05   Sale of identified devices from ice cream or mobile vending carts
   
130.06   Gambling unlawful
   
130.07   Gambling; bingo
   
130.08   Gambling houses; lotteries
   
130.09   Noise caused by machinery
   
130.10   Obstructing aisles and stairways of public buildings
   
130.11   Public buildings; exits to be open
   
130.12   Discharge of firearms
   
130.13   Discharge of air guns, slingshots, and the like
   
130.14   Weapons of archery
   
130.15   False reports to Police Department
   
130.16   Radio and television interference
   
130.17   Public urination and defecation
   
130.18   Aggressive panhandling
   
130.19   Trespassing and loitering
   
130.20   Unlawful camping
   
130.21   Amplified sound
   
130.22   Vandalism
Damage to Public Property
   
130.30   Report required
   
130.31   Report; contents
   
130.32   Failure to make report
Minors; Loitering and Curfew
   
130.50   Curfew restrictions on minors
   
130.51   Lack of lawful purpose
   
130.52   Construction
   
130.53   Daytime loitering by minors
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of any noisy, drunken,
disorderly, or offensive conduct in the city, or to be drunk and asleep or
lying upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the city, or
to be drunk and while so drunk to expose himself upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public place in the city.
('65 Code, § 5-14.01) (Ord. 118, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.02 INTOXICATION ON PRIVATE PREMISES.
   No person shall be on any private premises or in any private house in a
state of drunkenness or intoxication to the annoyance of any other person.
('65 Code, § 5-14.02) (Ord. 118, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 634, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.03 INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be or appear in a
state of drunkenness or intoxication upon any public street, sidewalk, highway,
or alley, or in any public park, or in any railroad depot or bus station, or in
any public place open to the patronage of the public, or in any place open to
public view, or in or upon any building or premises, or portion thereof, which
is owned or occupied by any municipality or by any department office thereof,
or by any other government or governmental agency or instrumentality and
devoted to any public or governmental use or to the performance of any official
business or function, including any premises occupied by the federal government
but not under the exclusive jurisdiction thereof.
('65 Code, § 5-14.03) (Ord. 118, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 634, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.04 DRINKING INTOXICANTS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall drink any malt, spirituous, or vinous liquor containing more
than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, parkway, park, or playground, or in any railroad depot or bus
station, or in any public place, or in any place open to the patronage of the
public in the city, which premises are not licensed for the consumption of such
liquor on the premises.
('65 Code, § 5-14.04) (Ord. 118, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 634, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 675, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.05 SALE OF IDENTIFIED DEVICES FROM ICE CREAM OR MOBILE VENDING CARTS.
   No person utilizing an ice cream truck or a mobile vending cart shall sell,
barter, trade for or give away any item or items listed in Cal. Penal Code §
626.10. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
('65 Code, § 5-21.212) (Ord. 462-C.S., passed 11-7-95)
§ 130.06 GAMBLING UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to play, engage in, or
bet upon any gambling game not mentioned in the California Penal Code, or to
play, manipulate, or operate, or permit or allow any person to play,
manipulate, or operate, any machine, card, contrivance, device, or any other
thing upon which money is hazarded or upon the result of the operation or
action of which any goods, wares, or merchandise, money, or any article or
thing of value, check, or token redeemable in, or exchangeable for, money or
any other thing of value is staked, won, lost, given away, or taken upon
chance, or to keep, control, have charge or custody of, or permit, or allow any
person to play, use, or operate any wheel of fortune, ring or ball tossing,
throwing, or pitching, or any other contrivance, device, or thing upon the
result of the action of which money or any goods, wares, merchandise, or any
article or thing of value is staked, hazarded, won, lost, or given away. Any
such machine, contrivance, or device so used or operated is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance, and the same shall be abated by the Police Chief.
('65 Code, § 5-14.06) (Ord. 118, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross-reference:
   
Operation of card rooms unlawful, see § 116.001
§ 130.07 GAMBLING; BINGO.
   Any organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax
by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701, subsections (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), and
(l) or any mobile home park association or senior citizens organization may
conduct bingo games within the city, provided the proceeds of such games are
used only for charitable purposes, subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to receive or pay a profit,
wage, or salary from any bingo game authorized by the Constitution of the State
of California, Art. IV, § 19.
   (B)   The City may bring an action to enjoin a violation of this section.
   (C)   No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.
   (D)   An organization authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this
section shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it and
which property is used by such organization for an office or for the
performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in
this division shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased
by the organization to be used or leased exclusively by such organization.
   (E)   All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members
of the authorized organization.
   (F)   A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the
authorized organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a
profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized
to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the
promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game.
   (G)   No individual corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except
the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game, shall hold a financial
interest in the conduct of such bingo game.
   (H)   With respect to organizations exempt from the payment of the bank and
corporation tax by Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 23701(d), all profits derived from a
bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be
commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for
charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct
bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game
shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any
other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable
purposes, except as follows:
      (1)   Such proceeds may be used for prizes.
      (2)   A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed 10% of the proceeds after
the deduction for prizes, or $500 per month, whichever is less, may be used for
the rental of property, overhead, and administrative expenses.
   (I)   Any organization conducting a bingo game pursuant to the provisions of
this section shall obtain from the city a license permitting the licensee to
conduct a bingo game. The fee for such license shall be established by Council
resolution. The applicant shall furnish the city with such information as is
reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this section and as more
specifically set forth in an application which shall be promulgated by the
Department of Finance, which shall be responsible for the issuance of such
license. Any violation of any provision of this section shall constitute
grounds for the revocation of a license to conduct a bingo game and may further
constitute grounds for the denial to the applicant or licensee of any future
license to conduct additional bingo games within the city.
   (J)   No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the
person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is
being conducted.
   (K)   The total value of the prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo
game shall not exceed $250 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game
which is held.
   (L)   As used in this section, BINGO shall mean a game of chance in which
prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card
which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. It is the intention of
the legislature that bingo, as defined in this division, shall apply
exclusively to this section and shall not be applied in the construction or
enforcement of any other provision of law.
('65 Code, § 5-14.06.1(a), (c)—(m)) (Ord. 187-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-
C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.08 GAMBLING HOUSES; LOTTERIES.
   Except for the operations of the California State Lottery, it shall be
unlawful for any person within the city to keep or have charge of, be present
at, or visit any gambling house, room, or place where gambling or lottery is
conducted, carried on, or engaged in, or where any gambling implements, tools,
or devices are accepted or exposed to view, or to have the possession or
control of any lottery ticket or gambling instrument or device used or any
paper, instrument, or device used in connection with a lottery or lottery
drawing or in any manner appertaining thereto. Any such implement, tool,
device, ticket, paper, instrument, or anything used as prohibited by the
provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
('65 Code, § 5-14.07) (Ord. 118, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.09 NOISE CAUSED BY MACHINERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to run or operate, or permit to be run
or operated, any mechanical, electrical, electronic, hydraulic, or wind-driven
equipment, fan, pump, compressor, blower, motor, engine, machine, or other
similar apparatus, whether as owner, agent, employee, lessee, or other person
having the charge thereof, which causes, or is likely to cause, any loud,
excessive, unnecessary, or unusual continued or intermittent noise, or any
noise which annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace, or safety of others within the city unless such noise is muffled
effectually and the apparatus is either equipped with a muffler device in
constant operation and properly maintained to deaden such noise, or the
apparatus is enclosed in a room, building, or other enclosure sufficiently
insulated to deaden such noise.
('65 Code, § 5-14.08) (Ord. 118, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 802, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.10 OBSTRUCTING AISLES AND STAIRWAYS OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause any obstruction to
any aisle, passageway, corridor, or stairway of any church, assembly hall,
theater, building, or other public building in the city, used for the purpose
of worship, instruction, entertainment, or public assemblages, by standing in
or occupying such aisles, passageways, corridors, or stairways during or
preparatory to any service, performance, exhibition, lecture, concert, ball, or
other public gathering, or by placing therein any chair, settee, stool, or
other obstruction.
('65 Code, § 5-14.11) (Ord. 328, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.11 PUBLIC BUILDINGS; EXITS TO BE OPEN.
   It shall be unlawful for the lessee, manager, owner, or person in charge of
any church, assembly hall, theater, building, or other public building in the
city to permit any exit door to be locked or fastened immediately preceding,
during, or immediately after any service, performance, lecture, exhibition,
concert, ball, or other public gathering.
('65 Code, § 5-14.12) (Ord. 328, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.12 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to explode or to discharge any shotgun,
rifle, cannon, pistol, revolver, or any firearm or other instrument used for a
like purpose within the city, not in necessary defense of life or property or
in the performance of an official duty, unless such person shall have first
secured from the Council permission so to do.
('65 Code, § 5-14.15) (Ord. 35-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.13 DISCHARGE OF AIR GUNS, SLINGSHOTS, AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or to discharge any air gun,
spring gun, BB gun, gas operated gun, pellet gun, blow gun, slingshot, or other
like instrument capable of projecting or propelling shot, bullets, or stones
within the city.
('65 Code, § 5-14.16) (Ord. 35-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.14 WEAPONS OF ARCHERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or to discharge any weapon of
archery, such as a bow or crossbow, for the purpose of shooting an arrow, bolt,
or dart within the city, except at an archery range on either public or private
property approved by the Police Chief or the Council.
('65 Code, § 5-14.17) (Ord. 35-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.15 FALSE REPORTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make to, or file with, the Police
Department, or any officer thereof, any false, misleading, or unfounded
statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any
crime occurring in the city.
('65 Code, § 5-10.01) (Ord. 555, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.16 RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in the city any device or
apparatus, the operation of which can cause interference with the reception of
radio, television, or wireless communication.
('65 Code, § 5-17.01) (Ord. 565, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.17 PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person within the city to urinate or defecate
upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other
public grounds, public places, public buildings, or vacant lots, in any place
open to the public or obviously open to public view, except in a rest room or
other enclosed facility designed for the sanitary disposal of human waste.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person within the city to enter into or remain
on private property for the purpose of urinating or defecating, except with the
permission of the lawful occupant in a rest room or other enclosed facility
designed for the sanitary disposal of human waste.
   (C)   A violation of this section shall be an infraction.
(Ord. 507-C.S., passed 9-19-00)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.18 AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING.
   (A)   Aggressive or intimidating acts by panhandlers soliciting money or
other things of value from persons upon public property, or upon private
property open to the public, imperils the safety of residents, visitors and
tourists within the city. Such acts further constitute coercion to obtain
contributions from persons who do not desire to make, and would not otherwise
freely make, such contributions in the absence of such aggressive or
intimidating conduct. Such conduct further jeopardizes the city's economy by
discouraging visitors, tourists and prospective customers from coming to San
Gabriel for business, recreation and shopping. Such conduct also threatens to
drive city residents to places outside of San Gabriel for their recreation and
shopping activities. Such conduct further undermines the public's basic right
to be in and enjoy public places without fear that they will be pursued or
intimidated by persons seeking handouts. Further, it is necessary to place
reasonable restrictions upon the time, place and manner in which panhandling
occurs in order to protect the public health and safety.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      AGGRESSIVE MANNER.  
         (a)   Approaching, speaking to, or following a person in a manner as
would cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or the commission of a
criminal act upon the person, or upon property in the person's immediate
possession; or
         (b)   Touching another person without such person's consent in the
course of asking, begging or soliciting alms; or
         (c)   Continuing to ask, beg, or solicit alms from a person after such
person has made a negative response or otherwise indicated a desire not to
contribute; or
         (d)   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free
passage of the person solicited by any means, including causing such person to
take evasive action to avoid physical contact or preventing such person from
departing the location of the solicitation; or
         (e)   Intentionally following the person solicited, without such
person's consent, for the purpose of continuing to ask, beg or solicit alms
after such person has made a negative response or indicated a desire not to
contribute; or
         (f)   Making any statement, gesture, or other communication which a
reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be
a threat of bodily harm; or
         (g)   Rendering any service to a motor vehicle, including but not
limited to any cleaning, washing, protecting, guarding or repairing of said
vehicle or any portion thereof, without the prior consent of the owner,
operator or occupant of such vehicle, and thereafter asking, begging or
soliciting alms or payment for the performance of such service, regardless of
whether such vehicle is stopped, standing or parked on a public street or upon
other public or private property; or
         (h)   Intentionally blocking, preventing, impeding or interfering with
the free and unobstructed ability of the person solicited to enter into or
emerge from any vehicle during the course of asking, begging or soliciting alms
or following a negative response by the person solicited to any such
solicitation; or
         (i)   Intentionally blocking, preventing, impeding or interfering with
the operation or movement of any vehicle operated or occupied by the person
solicited, during the course of asking, begging or soliciting alms or following
a negative response by the person solicited to any such solicitation.
      ASK, BEG, OR SOLICIT ALMS. Includes the spoken, written, or printed word
or such other act conducted for the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation
of money or thing of value, whether for personal use, or as a charitable
contribution to any individual or organization, or for any other purpose.
   (C)   Prohibited acts. No person shall ask, beg, or solicit alms in an
aggressive manner in any place open to the general public, whether publicly or
privately owned, including but not limited to any sidewalks, streets, alleys,
driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, buildings, doorways and entrances to
buildings, gasoline service stations, and the grounds around or enclosed by
buildings.
   (D)   Exemptions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to
prohibit any act which is otherwise expressly permitted or prohibited by law.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to permit any act which is
otherwise prohibited by law.
   (E)   Violations. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 36900, or any
successor provision thereto.
   (F)   Penalty. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. A violation of any
of the provisions of failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements
of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor; except that notwithstanding any
other provision of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor
under this section may, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the citing
officer on the scene, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.
(Ord. 688, passed 5-2-23)
§ 130.19 TRESPASSING AND LOITERING.
   (A)   Obstructions by crowds; dispersal. Whenever the free passage of any
street or sidewalk shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such
crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by any police officer.
   (B)   Loitering and obstruction of public property. No person shall loiter
or stand in, sit upon or lie or sleep in or upon any public highway, alley,
sidewalk, crosswalk or any other public way, or otherwise occupy any portion
thereof in such a manner as to unreasonably annoy or molest any pedestrian
thereon, or as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with the free passage of
pedestrians or motor vehicles, or unreasonably interfere with the use in the
customary manner of such public highway, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk or other
public way open to the public.
   (C)   Violation; penalty. It is unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. A
violation of any of the provisions of failing to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor; except
that notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any such violation
constituting a misdemeanor under this section may, at the discretion of the
City Attorney or the citing officer on the scene, be charged and prosecuted as
an infraction.
   (D)   Trespass.
      (1)   No person who, having entered private property open to the public,
shall refuse or fail to leave the premises immediately upon being requested to
do so by the owner thereof, his lawful agent, or a person in lawful possession
thereof.
      (2)   No person who, having been requested to leave private property in
the manner set forth in subsection (1) shall reenter the premises within 12
hours thereof without obtaining express permission from the party who requested
him to leave, or the lawful agent thereof.
   (E)   Exceptions. Section
130.19 shall not apply in the following instances:
      (1)   Where its application results with or is coupled with an act
prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act or any other provision of law relating
to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of sex, race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, disability, medical condition, genetic
information, marital status, or sexual orientation;
      (2)   Where its application results in or is coupled with an act
prohibited by Cal. Penal Code § 365 or any other provision of law relating to
duties of innkeepers and common carriers;
      (3)   Where its application would result in an interference with or
inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities;
      (4)   Where its application would result in an interference with or any
other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech such
as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of political or religious
opinions, not involving offensive personal conduct.
   (F)   Claim of right. Section
130.19 shall not be construed to require any peace officer to arrest, issue a
criminal citation, or remove any person from any premises when such officer
determines that the presence of such person is based upon a substantial claim
or color of legal right and that there is a dispute as to such matter as to
which there are practical and effective civil remedies.
(Ord. 688, passed 5-2-23)
§ 130.20 UNLAWFUL CAMPING.
   (A)   Personal use of private residential property for camping may only be
by the property owner or by others with the owner's written consent and without
any form of compensation.
   (B)   Such use shall not exceed seven consecutive days in duration, except
during the period between Memorial Day and Labor Day when such use shall not
exceed 14 consecutive days in duration.
   (C)   Camping may not occur more than four times per calendar year.
   (D)   A minimum of 14 days is required between each camping period.
   (E)   The prohibition set forth in this section does not apply to:
      (1)   Mobile home parks and special occupancy parks operating in
accordance with the San Gabriel Municipal Code;
      (2)   Camping on public or private property pursuant to a permit issued
by the city; and
      (3)   Day use for lawful activities on public property pursuant to a
permit issued by the city.
   (F)   In addition to any other applicable requirements of the San Gabriel
Municipal Code, camping pursuant to this section shall comply with all of the
following operational requirements pertaining to camping:
      (1)   Portable restrooms with toilet facilities must be provided and
accessible to campers on the private property and must comply with the
California Plumbing Code. Restrooms at city-owned parks do not qualify for use
by campers on private property.
      (2)   Trash receptacles sufficient for the number of campers must be
provided.
      (3)   The private property where camping occurs must be kept in a clean
and sanitary manner.
      (4)   Trash and debris must be removed when camping ceases and must be
disposed of in trash receptacles.
      (5)   Any outdoor storage of camping paraphernalia shall not be permitted
when not in use by campers.
      (6)   Within the jurisdiction of the city, no permanent structures shall
be permitted in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, fencing.
      (7)   Any use or placement of electrical cords shall be above the
floodplain, if applicable.
      (8)   All parking shall be on paved surfaces only and above the
floodplain.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, camping shall not
be permitted where such use violates any provision of this Code, adopted codes
or state law.
   (H)   No person or persons shall stand, sit, linger, idle, or loiter on any
public property, or in or about the entrance or exit of any business
establishment, either on foot or in an automobile or other vehicle, in such a
manner as to obstruct or hinder the free passage of persons through such public
property, or obstruct or hinder persons entering and exiting from any business
establishment, or in such a manner as to create a health or safety hazard for
the community or for the patrons of such public place. No person in violation
of this prohibition shall refuse or fail to disperse or move on when directed
to do so by a police officer or other city employee.
   (I)   No person shall walk, stand, sit, or lie upon any monument, vase,
decorative fountain, drinking fountain, bike rack, trash receptacle, fire
hydrant, street-tree planter, utility cabinet, railing, fence, planter, or upon
any other public property not designed or customarily used for such purposes.
   (J)   Public urination and defecation prohibited. No person shall urinate or
defecate on private property in any area exposed to the public view, or on any
public property owned, controlled and/or operated by the city, county or any
public agency, except when using a urinal, toilet, or commode located in a
bathroom, restroom, or other structure specifically designated for the purpose
of urination and defecation.
   (K)   Enforcement. Law enforcement officers shall not enforce this camping
section when the individual is on public property and there is no available
overnight shelter.
      (1)   The term "available overnight shelter" is a public or private
shelter, with an available overnight space, for an individual experiencing
homelessness, at no charge.
      (2)   Police or their designee shall initiate contact with the shelters
to determine whether the shelters have available space and, if so, the number
of available sleeping spaces. Prior to issuing any citation, a police officer
shall also confirm that a shelter has available space that can be utilized by
that particular individual. No police officer shall issue a citation to a
homeless person sleeping, lying, sitting, or camping outdoors unless the
officer first confirms the shelter has available space that can be utilized by
the individual.
   (L)   Penalty. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. A violation of any
of the provisions of failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements
of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor; except that notwithstanding any
other provision of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor
under this section may, at the discretion of the City Attorney or the citing
officer on the scene, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.
(Ord. 688, passed 5-2-23)
§ 130.21 AMPLIFIED SOUND.
   (A)   Purpose. This City Council enacts this legislation for the sole
purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety, and
welfare of its citizenry. While recognizing that certain uses of sound-
amplifying equipment are protected by the constitutional rights of freedom of
speech and assembly, the City Council nevertheless feels obligated to
reasonably regulate the use of sound-amplifying equipment in order to protect
the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of this community to
privacy and freedom from public nuisance of loud and raucous noise.
   (B)   Regulation of amplified sound. It shall be unlawful for any person to
use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, within the city any sound-
amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position, or mounted upon any
vehicle, except when used or operated in compliance with the following
provisions:
      (1)   In all residential zones and within 200 feet of any boundary
thereof, no sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated or used for commercial
purposes, except sound-amplifying equipment may be used for commercial purposes
upon a moving vehicle between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to announce
the presence of such vehicle in an area or location for commercial purposes;
provided that such sound-amplifying equipment shall not be used during periods
that the vehicle is stopped, parked or otherwise in a stationary position.
      (2)   In all residential zones and within 200 feet of any boundary
thereof, no sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated or used for
noncommercial purposes between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the
following day.
      (3)   In all non-residential zones, except such portions thereof as may
be included within 200 feet of the boundary of any residential zone, the
operation or use of sound-amplifying equipment for commercial purposes is
prohibited between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day.
      (4)   In all non-residential zones, except such portions thereof as may
be included within 200 feet of the boundary of any residential zone, the
operation or use of sound-amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes is
prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
      (5)   Sound emanating from sound-amplifying equipment shall not be
audible to a person of normal hearing acuity within an enclosed building (other
than a building within which the sound emanates) at a distance in excess of 200
feet from the sound- amplifying equipment.
      (6)   In no event shall the sound-amplifying equipment be unreasonably
loud, raucous, jarring or disturbing to a person of normal sensitiveness within
the area of audibility, or disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use any sound-
amplifying equipment within, upon or adjacent to the premises of any hospital,
school, or publicly owned or operated arena, stadium, convention center or
auditorium, while in use, in a manner which disturbs, disrupts or interferes
with the conduct of any event, business or activity of any nature then
occurring within such building or premises. Nothing contained in this
subsection shall be deemed to prohibit any conduct which is otherwise
prohibited by Cal. Penal Code § 302 or 403, or any other provision of state
law.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   The word PERSON, as used herein, shall include the singular and the
plural, and shall also mean and include any person, firm, corporation,
association, club, partnership, society or any other form of association or
organization.
      (2)   The words SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT, as used herein, shall mean
any device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound.
      (3)   The word ZONE, as used herein, shall mean the zoning designation
given to any public or private property pursuant to the provisions of Title XV
of this Code. Any public or private street, alley or other right-of-way shall
be deemed to have the same zoning designation as the public or private property
immediately contiguous to such street, alley or right-of-way. Where the
property on each side of a street, alley or right-of-way bears a different
zoning designation, each such zoning designation shall be deemed to extend to
the centerline of such street, alley or right-of-way.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to permit or
authorize any activity or sound level which is otherwise prohibited by any
provision of state law.
   (E)   Exemptions. The following uses of sound-amplifying equipment and
activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   Vehicle sound systems, radios and similar devices located within or
upon any vehicle, to the extent the sound from such devices is regulated by
provisions of the Cal. Vehicle Code.
      (2)   Sound-amplifying equipment when used and heard only by occupants of
the premises in which the devices are located.
      (3)   Warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other
warning devices on other vehicles when used for traffic safety purposes, or any
other device when used by a public safety officer for official purposes.
      (4)   Equipment used by any duly authorized facility operator, tenant or
lessee as an integral part of any event at Anaheim Stadium, Arrowhead Pond,
Anaheim Convention Center, or as an integral part of any event or program at
any other publicly owned or operated facility.
      (5)   Equipment and devices used as an integral part of any public or
private institutional use lawfully permitted, including but not limited to,
public and private educational institutions, and places of religious worship.
   (F)   Penalty for violations. The first violation of this chapter by any
person occurring within any 12-month period shall be punishable as an
infraction in accordance with applicable provisions of the Cal. Penal Code and
the Cal. Gov’t Code. The second and all subsequent violations of this chapter
by such person occurring within any 12- month period shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 688, passed 5-2-23)
§ 130.22 VANDALISM.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the City Council
of the city, through the adoption of this section, to provide additional
abatement and enforcement tools to protect public and private property from
acts of vandalism and defacement; especially, but not limited to, graffiti on
privately and publicly owned property, which is inimical and destructive of the
rights and values of private property owners as well as the total community.
The majority of those individuals who paint graffiti seek notoriety and
recognition as they attach status to having their work seen. Prolonged
visibility due to the sheer volume, scale and complexity of the graffiti, and
placement of the graffiti in hard-to-reach places, enhance the perpetrator's
satisfaction. Therefore, the swift removal or painting over of graffiti in
combination with criminal prosecution of the persons who create it is the most
effective way of combating this very serious problem. It is further the intent
of the City Council, through the adoption of this section, to provide notice to
all of those who callously disregard the property rights of others, that the
law enforcement agencies of the city, both the Police Department and the
prosecutor's office, will strictly enforce the law and severely prosecute those
persons engaging in the defacement of public and private properties.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER. Any aerosol container, regardless of the
material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of
spraying paint or other substances capable of defacing property.
      FELT TIP MARKER. Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip
which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth inch, containing an
ink that is not water-soluble.
      GLASS ETCHING PRODUCTS. Any product which can be used to permanently
alter a glass surface, including but not limited to such products that contain
hydrofluoric acid, ammonium bifluoride and sulfuric acid, or sodium bifluoride.
      GRAFFITI. Any inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched
, scratched , drawn, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to or on any surface,
regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component, to the
extent that same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof.
      GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. An aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, a
graffiti stick or glass etching products.
      GRAFFITI STICK. A device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax,
epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by
pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch
in width, visible from a distance of 20 feet, and not water-soluble.
   (C)   Anti-vandalism provisions.
      (1)   Unlawful to apply graffiti. It shall be unlawful for any person to
apply graffiti on any public or privately owned structures located on public or
privately owned real property within the city, other than property that they
own or rent.
      (2)   Property-defacing or injuring private buildings or fixtures. It is
unlawful for any person to deface, mar, break or in any way destroy or injure
any portion of any private real or personal property within the city not his or
her own.
      (3)   Property-defacing or injuring public buildings or fixtures. It is
unlawful for any person to deface, mar, break or in any way destroy or injure
any portion of any public building, or the fixtures or contents thereof, which
building is owned by the city.
   (D)   Penalties for violation. Any and all violations of this section shall
be punishable either as an infraction or a misdemeanor, at the discretion of
the City Attorney.
(Ord. 688, passed 5-2-23)
DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 130.30 REPORT REQUIRED.
   Any person, or the agent of any person, who negligently, carelessly,
accidently, or in any manner causes any damage to any property of the city
shall report such damage within 24 hours to the Police Chief.
('65 Code, § 5-8.01) (Ord. 105, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.31 REPORT; CONTENTS.
   Such report shall set forth the date, time, and place where the damage was
sustained and the names of any persons who witnessed the damage, together with
the nature and extent of such damage.
('65 Code, § 5-8.02) (Ord. 105, passed - - )
§ 130.32 FAILURE TO MAKE REPORT.
   Any person who shall fail or neglect to make such report within the time set
forth shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('65 Code, § 5-8.03) (Ord. 105, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
MINORS; LOITERING AND CURFEW
§ 130.50 CURFEW RESTRICTIONS ON MINORS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CURFEW HOURS. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and sunrise of
the immediately following day.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. EMERGENCY includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, an earthquake or other natural disaster, an automobile accident, or
any situation which requires immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury
or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
court order.
      MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
      OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment.
      PARENT. A person who is a natural, adoptive, or step-parent of another
person; or at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
alleys, parks, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses,
office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
      REMAIN. To linger or stay; or fail to leave the premises when requested
to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control
of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death, serious disfigurement, or serious permanent injury.
   (B)   Offenses.
      (1)   It is unlawful for a minor to remain in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
      (2)   It is unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly
permit, or by insufficient control, allow, a minor for whom they are
responsible, to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the city during curfew hours.
      (3)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (B) above, if the
minor was:
         (a)   Accompanied by his or her parent or guardian;
         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         (c)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning
directly home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         (d)   Involved in an emergency;
         (e)   In a vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
         (g)   Returning directly home from a public meeting, or a place of
public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school
activity;
         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, including freedom of speech, the free exercise of religion, and
the right of assembly; or
         (i)   An emancipated minor in accordance with the provisions of the
California Family Code.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (B)(3) above that
the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no exception
listed in subsection (C) above is present.
('65 Code, § 5-13.01) (Ord. 314-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 453-C.S., passed 8-
1-95; Am. Ord. 483-C.S., passed 9-16-97)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.51 LACK OF LAWFUL PURPOSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without lawful purpose, to loiter upon
or about the public streets, avenues, parks, or other public places of the city
after having been directed by a police officer to move on.
('65 Code, § 5-13.02) (Ord. 314-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.52 CONSTRUCTION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as in any way limiting the
power or right of law enforcement officers to make such investigations,
detentions, or arrests as such law enforcement officers would be permitted to
make had this subchapter not been enacted.
('65 Code, § 5-13.04) (Ord. 314-C.S., passed - -; Am. Ord. 483-C.S., passed 9-
16-97)
§ 130.53 DAYTIME LOITERING BY MINORS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years, who is
subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education to be
in or upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, or other
public ground, public place, public building, place of amusement, eating
establishment or vacant lot during the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. on days
when said minor's school is in session.
   (B)   The following do not apply:
      (1)   When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or
other adult person having the care or custody of the minor; or
      (2)   When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her
parent or guardian or other adult person having care or custody of the minor;
or
      (3)   When the minor is going or coming directly from or to their place
of gainful employment or to or from a medical appointment; or
      (4)   To students who have permission to leave school campus for lunch or
school related activity and have in their possession a valid, school issued,
off-campus permit.
      (5)   When the minor is exempt by law from compulsory education or
compulsory continuation education; or
      (6)   When the minor is authorized to be absent from his or her school
pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code § 48205; or
      (7)   When the minor is an emancipated minor as that term is described in
Family Code § 7002.
('65 Code, § 5-13.05) (Ord. 453-C.S., passed 8-1-95; Am. Ord. 483-C.S., passed
9-16-97; Am. Ord. 499-C.S., passed 4-6-99)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty otherwise provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine of not to exceed $1000 or by imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months.
   (B)   Any person who shall in any manner engage, encourage, aid, abet, or
assist in the violation of any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
is otherwise provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as
provided in division (A) of this section, and any clerk, servant, or agent of a
person committing any act in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty as principal. ('65 Code, § 5-14.14) (Ord. 118, passed - - )
   (C)   Any person who violates §
130.07(A) shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $10,000, which fine shall
be deposited in the general fund of the city. Any person who violates any
provision of §
130.07, other than division (A), shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to the penalty provided in division (A) of this section. ('65 Code, §
5-14.06.1(b))
(Ord. 187-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - )
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   HOUSE TRAILERS
      
152.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
153.   ZONING CODE
      
154.   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Code
   
150.001   Adoption of the California Building Standards Code incorporating the
California Administration Code, California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2,
including Appendix Chapters A, C, H, I, and J, California Historical Building
Code, including Appendix Chapter A, California Existing Building Code,
including Appendix Chapter A1, California Residential Code, including Appendix
Chapters AA-AE, AG, AH, AJ, AK, AO, and AP, California Energy Code, including
Appendix Chapter 1-A, California Green Building Standards Code, California
Referenced Standards Code, and the State of California Title 24, Parts 1, 2,
2.5, 6, 8, 10, 11, and 12, California Building Code Amendments of 2022,
including erratas and supplements hereafter
   
150.002   Omissions, amendments and additions to the California Building,
Historical Building, and Residential Code
   
150.002.1 Site security and screening standards
   
150.003   Construction; hours of operation
   
150.004   Penalty
 
Electrical Code
   
150.010   Adoption of California Building Standards Code incorporating the
California Electrical Code
   
150.011   Omissions, amendments and additions to the California Electrical Code
   
150.012   Utility service connection
   
150.013   Penalty
Mechanical Code
   
150.020   Adoption of the California Building Standards Code incorporating the
California Mechanical Code
   
150.021   Omissions, amendments and additions to the California Mechanical Code
   
150.022   Penalty
Plumbing Code
   
150.030   Adoption of the California Building Standards Code incorporating the
California Plumbing Code
   
150.031   Omissions, amendments and additions to the California Plumbing Code
   
150.032   Penalty
Building Lines
   
150.040   Broadway
   
150.041   East Live Oak Street
   
150.042   El Monte Street
   
150.043   Hermosa Drive
   
150.044   Las Tunas Drive
   
150.045   New Avenue
   
150.046   San Gabriel Boulevard
   
150.047   Santa Anita Street
   
150.048   Santa Anita Street; San Gabriel Orange Grove Tract
   
150.049   Valley Boulevard
   
150.050   West Live Oak Street
Building Moving
   
150.060   Permits from Building Department required; applications
   
150.061   Inspections by Building Department
   
150.062   Inspection fees
   
150.063   Approval by Council
   
150.064   Permits from Community Development Director required
   
150.065   Permits from Community Development Director; applications
   
150.066   Protection of streets and alleys; bonds
   
150.067   Permit fees
   
150.068   Permits for removal of wires required
   
150.069   Sewer disconnections and sealing
   
150.070   Notices to Police and Fire Departments
   
150.071   Warning lights
   
150.072   Obstructing access to fire equipment
Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing Buildings
   
150.080   Purpose
   
150.081   Scope
   
150.082   Definitions
   
150.083   Rating classifications
   
150.084   General requirements
   
150.085   Administration
   
150.086   Historical buildings
   
150.087   Analysis and design
   
150.088   Materials of construction
   
150.089   Information required on plans
   
150.090   Inspections
   
150.091   Schedule of fees
   
150.092   Rule of general application for unreinforced masonry bearing wall
buildings
   
150.093   Tables of earthquake hazard reduction standards
Gasoline Stations
   
150.110   Buildings; height
   
150.111   Buildings; type of construction and area
   
150.112   Walls
   
150.113   Detached accessory buildings
   
150.114   Self-service stations; rules and regulations
   
150.115   Violations
Sandblasting
   
150.140   Permit required
   
150.141   Application for permit
   
150.142   Permit fee
   
150.143   Insurance
   
150.144   Notice
   
150.145   Restrictions
   
150.146   Obstructions in streets
   
150.147   Cause for revocation of permit
   
150.148   Application of other requirements
Solar Energy Collectors
   
150.160   Purpose
   
150.161   Definitions
   
150.162   Standards for ground-mounted solar energy collectors
   
150.163   Standards for roof-mounted solar energy collectors
   
150.164   Exceptions
Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System Permits
   
150.165   Applicability
   
150.166   Solar energy systems requirements
   
150.167   Duties of the Building Division and Building Official
   
150.168   Permit review and inspection requirements
Swimming Pool Fencing
   
150.180   Safety requirements; fencing
   
150.181   Compliance with provisions; final approval
Water-Efficient Landscape Requirements
   
150.200   Intent of requirements
   
150.201   Definitions
   
150.202   [Reserved]
   
150.203   Existing landscapes
   
150.204   Minor deviations
Building Code Security Regulations
   
150.210   Scope
   
150.211   Purpose
   
150.212   Definitions
   
150.213   Keying requirements
   
150.214   Frames, jambs, strikes, and hinges
   
150.215   Window and sliding glass doors
   
150.216   Garage-type doors-rolling overhead, solid overhead, swing, sliding,
or accordion
   
150.217   Addition to the California Building Code-security bars, grills, or
screens
   
150.218   Special residential building provisions
   
150.219   Special commercial provisions
   
150.220   Alternate materials and methods of construction
   
150.221   Appeals
   
150.222   Enforcement authority
   
150.223   Violations and penalty
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
   
150.300   Expedited electric vehicle charging station permitting
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.001 ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE INCORPORATING THE
CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION CODE, CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE, VOLUMES 1 AND 2,
INCLUDING APPENDIX CHAPTERS A, C, H, I, AND J, CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING
CODE, INCLUDING APPENDIX CHAPTER A, CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE,
INCLUDING APPENDIX CHAPTER A1, CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE, INCLUDING APPENDIX
CHAPTERS AA-AE, AG, AH, AJ, AK, AO, AND AP, CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE, INCLUDING
APPENDIX CHAPTER 1-A, CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE, CALIFORNIA
REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE, AND THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA TITLE 24, PARTS 1, 2,
2.5, 6, 8, 10, 11, AND 12, CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS OF 2022,
INCLUDING ERRATAS AND SUPPLEMENTS HEREAFTER.
   (A)   The California Building Standards Code incorporating the California
Administration Code, 2022 Edition, California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2,
including Appendix Chapters A, C, H, I, & J, 2022 Edition, California
Historical Building Code, including Appendix Chapter A, 2022 Edition,
California Existing Building Code, including Appendix Chapter A1, 2022 Edition,
California Residential Code, including Appendix Chapters AA-AE, AG, AH, AJ, AK,
AD, & AP, 2022 Edition, California Energy Code, including Appendix Chapter 1-A,
2022 Edition, California Green Building Standards Code, 2022 Edition,
California Referenced Standards Code, 2022 Edition, and the State of California
Title 24, Parts 1, 2, 2.5, 6, 8, 10, 11, & 12, California Building Code
Amendments of 2022, including Errata's and Supplements hereafter. 2022
additions, together with their appendices adopted by the State, which regulate
the erection, construction, enlargements, alteration, repair, moving, removal,
conversion, demolition, occupancy, use, equipment, height, area, security,
abatement, and maintenance of buildings or structures within the city, provide
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and provide for
penalties for violation thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, and
conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed.
   (B)   All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said
codes, together with their appendices adopted by the state, one copy of which
will be on file and accessible to the public for review at the Community
Development Department at City Hall, are hereby referred to, adopted and made
part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions,
deletions, additions, and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter.
(‘65 Code, § 8-1.01) (Ord. 457-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 500-C.S., passed
6-3-99; Am. Ord. 532- C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-
07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed 11-19-13; Am.
Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16; Am. Ord. 655, passed 11-19-19; Am. Ord. 686,
passed 11-15-22)
§ 150.002 OMISSIONS, AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS TO THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING,
HISTORICAL BUILDING, AND RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   Omissions, amendments, and additions to the California Building, Historical
Building and Residential Code incorporating the California Building Code,
California Historical Building Code, and California Residential Code are as set
forth in this section:
   (A)   Building Code Chapter 1 Section 105.5.1 is amended to read as follows:
      105.5.1 Expiration. On or after January 1, 2019, every permit issued
shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is
commenced within 12 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the
site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 12 months after
the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant,
in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days
each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. (See Health and Safety Code Section 18938.5 and 18938.6). At the
discretion of the Building Official work shall be considered abandoned whenever
substantial progress has not been made within 12 months from the date of permit
issuance or extension, if given. Every permit issued or extended as part of
code enforcement actions shall become invalid if substantial progress has not
been made within the time period determined by the Building Official and/or
Code Official.
   (B)   Building Code, Chapter 1, Section 105.2 and Residential Code, Chapter
1, Section R105.2: Exempted Work. Items numbered 2 and 4 contained in Section
105.2 of the California Building Code and items numbered 2 and 3 contained in
Section R105.2 of the California Residential Code are hereby deleted from said
list of exempted work. (‘65 Code, § 8-1.09)
   (C)   Building Code, Section 109.1 - 109.6 and Residential Code, Section
108.1 - 108.6. A new Section 109.1 - 109.6 and 108.1 - 108.6 are hereby added
to read as follows:
      (c)   Plan Review Fees. When a plan or other data is required to be
submitted by Section 109.1 - 109.6 and/or 108.1 - 108.6, a plan review fee
shall be paid at the time of submitting said plans and specifications for
review. Said plan review fee shall be established by the City Council, from
time to time, by resolution.
      The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from
the permit fees, and are in addition to the permit fees.
      Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan
review, an additional plan review fee shall be established by City Council,
from time to time, by resolution.
(‘65 Code, § 8-1.12)
   (D)   Building Code, Section 3306.5. Section 3306.5 is hereby added to the
Building Code to read as follows:
      Section 3306.5. Construction fencing. All property shall be totally
enclosed around the perimeter by a fence during construction or demolition. The
fence shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height measured from adjacent
grade, adequately constructed from chain link, lumber, masonry or other
approved materials and erected prior to the initiation of any work.
      The fence shall be entirely self-supporting and shall not incorporate
structures or fencing on any adjacent property without prior written approval
of the adjacent property owner. The location, type and installation of the
fencing shall be subject to the approval of the Building Official.
(‘65 Code, § 8-1.15)
   (E)    Building Code, Section 109.1 - 109.6 and Residential Code, Section
108.1 - 108.6. Section 109.1 - 109.6 and 108.1 - 108.6 are hereby added to read
as follows: Building Permit Fees. Building Permit and Plan Review Fees shall be
established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution.
   (F)   Building Code, Section 3109, Swimming Pool Enclosures and Safety
Devices.
      (1)   Sec. 3109.02. The swimming pool definition is amended to read as
follows: SWIMMING POOL is any structure normally intended for swimming or
recreational bathing that is capable of containing water over 18 inches deep.
This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs
and spas.
      (2)   Section 3109.4.1. This section is amended to read as follows:
         Whereas, this section refers to the top of the barriers at 48 inches
high, hereafter shall be 60 inches high.
   (G)   Technical Amendments to the 2022 California Building Code, 2022
California Residential Code, and 2022 California Green Building Standards Code
entitled “Los Angeles Regional Uniform Code Program” dated July 1, 2022 on file
in the office of the Building Official.
   (H)   Add the 2021 International Property Maintenance Code on file in the
office of the Building Division Manager.
   (I)   Building Code, Section 113.1 and Residential Code, Section 112.1 are
hereby added as follows: In the case where the established appeals board is not
at full function at the time of an appeal filed, the governing body is hereby
to give authorization to the City Manager to establish the hearing procedure in
a timely manner. Such procedure shall conform to sections 113.2, 113.3 and
113.4 of the California Building Code and R112.2, R112.3 and R112.4 of the
California Residential Code.
(Ord. 262-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 281-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 379-C.S.,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 384-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 444-C.S., passed 1-3-95;
Am Ord. 457-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 500-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord.
532-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587
C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed 11-19-13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S.,
passed 12-6-16; Am. Ord. 655, passed 11-19-19; Am. Ord. 686, passed 11-15-22)
§ 150.002.1 SITE SECURITY AND SCREENING STANDARDS.
   Prior to application for building, grading or demolition permits each and
every applicant subject to these standards shall be required to provide a site
security and screening plan. The contents of the plan shall include at a
minimum the following:
   (A)   Provisions for securing the site with fencing and green shield
pursuant to standards on file with the Community Development Department;
   (B)   Provisions for securing gates and control points with locking
mechanisms;
   (C)   Provisions for maintenance and protection of significant trees and
vegetation as may be protected by the Code or development permits during the
construction phase;
   (D)   Provisions for the monitoring and prompt removal of graffiti;
   (E)   Provisions for the temporary installation, maintenance and upkeep of
landscape components in front of any fencing and shield, within the front
setback areas, where such setbacks apply; or where landscaping is existing,
maintenance of existing landscape components; and
   (F)   Provisions for the protection and recovery of archaeological,
paleontological or historical artifacts as may be determined by a historic
structures report or inventory, walkover, environmental impact report,
conditions of project approval or similar document.
   No permit shall be issued for construction unless and until the Building
Division has determined satisfactory compliance with these requirements.
(Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
§ 150.003 CONSTRUCTION; HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   No construction shall take place within the city except between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Saturday. Construction shall be prohibited on Sundays and
on such holidays as may be designated by Council resolution. The Community
Development Director may extend the hours of operation for special
circumstances by providing written notice to surrounding residents in advance.
The restriction on construction hours shall not apply to emergency repairs
required to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, whether performed
by a public agency, utility, company, or private owner. Said restrictions also
shall not apply to a residential property owner and or members of his immediate
family, performing work on his personal property.
150.004 PENALTY.
   Every person violating any provision of the California Building Standards
Code incorporating the California Building Code and related codes and
appendices, adopted by reference by §
150.001, or of any permit or license granted thereunder, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon
conviction thereof he or she shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000
or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The imposition of such penalty for any violation shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 500-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 532-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord.
575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 150.010 ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE INCORPORATING THE
CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   The California Building Standards Code incorporating the California
Electrical Code, including Annexes A-1, 2022 edition; and the State of
California Title 24, Part 3, California Electrical Code Amendments of 2022,
including Errata’s and Supplements hereafter; which provide minimum
requirements and standards for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare by regulating the installation or alteration of electrical wiring,
equipment, materials, and workmanship in the city, provides for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor and provides penalties for the
violations thereof, with all changes and amendments thereto, is hereby adopted
by reference, and conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed.
   (B)   All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said
codes, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and
accessible to the public for review at the Community Development Department at
City Hall, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if
fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and
amendments thereto as set forth in this subchaper.
 (‘65 Code, § 8-5.01) (Ord. 458-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 500-C.S.,
passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 532- C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed
11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed 11-19-
13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16; Am. Ord. 655, passed 11-19-19; Am. Ord.
686, passed 11-15-22)
§ 150.011 OMISSIONS, AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS TO THE CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL
CODE.
   Omissions, amendments and additions to the California Electrical Code are as
set forth in this section:
   (A)   Electrical Code, Article 89.108.4.2, Plan Review Fees. Article
89.108.4.2 of the Electrical Code Provisions is hereby repealed in its entirety
and replaced as follows:
      When a plan review is required by the Building Official, per Article
89.108.4 a plan review fee shall be paid. The fee shall be part of the Schedule
of Fees, as established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution.
(‘65 Code, § 8-5.03)
   (B)   Electrical Code, Article 89.108.4.2, Electrical Permit Fees. The
schedule of fees shall be established by the City Council, from time to time,
by resolution. (‘65 Code, § 8-5.04)
(Ord. 355-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 458-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 500-
C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 532-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-C.S.,
passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed
12-6-16; Am. Ord. 655, passed 11-19-19)
§ 150.012 UTILITY SERVICE CONNECTION.
   (A)   Electrical lines serving all new or replaced metered electrical
service panels shall be installed underground in an approved manner in
accordance with the utility company requirements in the following situations:
      (1)   In the case of any new construction in a residential zone;
      (2)   In the case of any new construction in a non-residential zone;
      (3)   Any time there is an addition in square footage to a residential
dwelling of at least 25% of the original square footage of the dwelling.
Multiple additions within a twelve-month period shall be considered
cumulatively in determining the total square footage addition;
      (4)   Any time there is an alteration to a residential dwelling which is
valued at more than 50% of the total assessed value of the property. Multiple
alterations within a twelve-month period shall be considered cumulatively in
determining the total amount of the increased value;
      (5)   Any time there is any alteration or addition to a non-residential
building; or
      (6)   Any time property is developed in an underground utility assessment
district.
   (B)   Appeals/In Lieu Fees - Residential Development.
      (1)   In cases of residential development, if the undergrounding
requirement creates a hardship due to the location of an existing building or
other extenuating conditions, an appeal may be made to the City Planner or the
City Planner's designee for an overhead connection. Factors which the City
Planner may consider in determining whether to grant a waiver of the
undergrounding requirement include, but are not limited to those set forth
below. Economic hardship is not a factor which will be taken into
consideration.
         (a)   Physical constraints due to the location of existing buildings;
         (b)   That the power pole is located on an adjacent property and the
appellant is unable to obtain the needed permission to perform the work on such
property.
      (2)   In cases where an appeal is granted, the applicant shall be
required to pay an in-lieu fee to the City in an amount established by
resolution of the City Council which fee shall be used for future
undergrounding in the area.
      (3)   All appeals shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for
requesting an appeal. Applications shall be accompanied by an appeal fee in an
amount established by resolution of the City Council. All determinations
subject to this section shall be issued in writing within 30 days of
application to the City Planner.
('65 Code, § 8-5.05) (Ord. 355-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 458-C.S., passed 11-
21-95; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Underground utilities, see
§§ 52.50 through
52.60
§ 150.013 PENALTY.
   Every person violating any provision of the California Building Standards
Code incorporating the California Electrical Code and related codes and
appendices, adopted by reference by §
150.010, or of any permit or license granted thereunder, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon
conviction thereof he or she shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000
or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The imposition of such penalty for any violation shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Am. Ord. 532-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
MECHANICAL CODE
§ 150.020 ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE INCORPORATING THE
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE.
   (A)   The California Building Standards Code incorporating the California
Mechanical Code, including Appendix Chapter’s B-D, & G, 2022 edition; and the
State of California Title 24, Part 4, California Mechanical Code Amendments of
2022, including Errata’s and Supplements hereafter; which regulate and control
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of heating, venting, cooling, refrigeration systems, or other
miscellaneous heat producing appliances in the city, provide for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor, and provide for penalties for the
violation thereof, with certain changes and amendments thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference, and conflicting ordinances are hereby repealed.
   (B)   All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said
codes, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and
accessible to the public for inspection at the City Clerk’s office, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as if fully set forth in
this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions, and amendments thereto
as set forth in this subchapter.
(‘65 Code, § 8-14.01) (Ord. 319-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 381-C.S., passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 386-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 459-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am.
Ord. 500-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 532-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-
C.S., passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S.,
passed 11-19-13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16; Am. Ord. 655, passed 11-19-
19; Am. Ord. 686, passed 11-15-22)
§ 150.021 OMISSIONS, AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS TO THE CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL
CODE.
   Omissions, amendments and additions to the California Building Standards
Code incorporating the California Mechanical Code are as set forth in this
section:
   (A)   Mechanical Code, Section 104, Permits. Plan Review and Permit Fees,
Section 104.3.2 and 104.5 are hereby amended to read as follows:
      Plan review as required accordance with Section 104.3.1 and permit fees
shall be established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution.
   (B)   Mechanical Code, Sections 114, Plan Review and Permit Fees.
      Plan Review and Permit Fees, Sections 114.2 and 114.3, shall be
established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution.
      Section 114.3: When a plan or other data is required to be submitted in
accordance with Section 112.2, a Plan Review Fee shall be paid at the time of
application for permit. The Plan Review Fees for mechanical work shall be as
established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution.
      The Plan Review Fees specified in this subsection are separate from the
permit fees specified in Section 114.2 and are in addition to the permit fees.
      When plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan
review, an additional Plan Review Fee shall be charged as established by the
City Council, from time to time, by resolution. (‘65 Code, § 8-14.03)
(Ord. 319-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 381-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 386-C.S.,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 459- C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 500-C.S., passed 6-
3-99; Am. Ord. 532-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07;
Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed 11-19-13; Am. Ord.
630-C.S., passed 12-6-16; Am. Ord. 655, passed 11-19-19)
§ 150.022 PENALTY.
   Every person violating any provision of the California Building Standards
Code incorporating the California Mechanical Code and related codes and
appendices, adopted by reference by §
150.020 or of any permit or license granted thereunder, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto is guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon
conviction thereof he or she shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000
or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The imposition of such penalty for any violation shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 500-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 532-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord.
575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.030 ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE INCORPORATING THE
CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   The California Building Standards Code incorporating the California
Plumbing Code, including Appendix Chapters A-D & G-K, 2022 edition, and the
State of California Title 24, Part 5, California Plumbing Code Amendments of
2022, including Errata’s and Supplements hereafter; which provide minimum
requirements and standards for the protection of the public health, safety, and
welfare by regulating the installation or alteration of plumbing and drainage,
materials, venting, wastes, traps, interceptors, water systems, sewers, gas
piping, water heaters and other related products. and workmanship in the city,
provides for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor and
provides for penalties for the violation thereof, with certain changes and
amendments thereto, is hereby adopted by reference, and all conflicting
ordinances are hereby repealed.
   (B)   All of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of said
codes, together with their appendices, one copy of which will be on file and
accessible to the public for inspection at the Community Development Department
at City Hall, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of this chapter as
if fully set forth in this chapter with the exceptions, deletions, additions,
and amendments thereto as set forth in this subchapter.
(‘65 Code, § 8-8.01) (Ord. 266-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 318-C.S., passed - -
; Am. Ord. 380-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 385-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 460-
C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 500-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 532-C.S.,
passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed
12-7-10; Am. Ord. 607-C.S., passed 11-19-13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16;
Am. Ord. 655, passed 11-19-19; Am. Ord. 686, passed 11-15-22)
§ 150.031 OMISSIONS, AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS TO THE CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE.
   Omissions, amendments and additions to the California Building Standards
Code incorporating the California Plumbing Code are as set forth in this
section:
   (A)   Plumbing Code Section 104.0 Permits. Plan Review and Permit Fees,
Section 104.3.2 and 104.5 are hereby amended to read as follows:
      Plan review as required accordance with Section 104.3.1 and permit fees
shall be established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution.
   (B)   Plumbing Code, Section 103.4; Permit Fees. Permit fees shall be
established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution. (‘65 Code, §
8-8.03)
(Ord. 266-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 318-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 380-C.S.,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 385-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 460-C.S., passed 11-21-
95; Am. Ord. 500-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 532-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am.
Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587 C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord.
607-C.S., passed 11-19-13; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 12-6-16; Am. Ord. 655,
passed 11-19-19)
§ 150.032 PENALTY.
   Every person violating any provision of the California Building Standards
Code incorporating the California Plumbing Code and related codes and
appendices, adopted by reference by §
150.030, or of any permit or license granted thereunder, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon
conviction thereof he or she shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000
or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The imposition of such penalty for any violation shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue. Each day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 500-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 532-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord.
575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
BUILDING LINES
§ 150.040 BROADWAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or construct,
or cause or permit to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any
building or structure, or any portion thereof, within a strip of land 80 feet
wide lying 50 feet on the northerly side and 30 feet on the southerly side of
the center line of Broadway in the city.
('65 Code, § 8-2.01) (Ord. 287, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.041 EAST LIVE OAK STREET.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or
construct, or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any
building or structure, or any portion thereof, on those portions of East Live
Oak Street in the city within a strip of land 50 feet wide lying 50 feet on the
north side of the center line of East Live Oak Street, as said center line is
shown in the City Engineer's Field Book No. 47 at Page 183, and extending from
the easterly line of St. Francis Street to the intersection of said center line
of Cameron Way, as shown on the tract maps recorded in the office of the County
Recorder as follows: Tract No. 17422, Map Book 446, Pages 32 and 33.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or
construct, or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any
building or structure, or any portion thereof, on that portion of East Live Oak
Street in the city within a strip of land 50 feet wide lying 50 feet on the
south side of the center line of East Live Oak Street, as said center line is
shown in the City Engineer's Field Book No. 47 at Page 183, and extending from
the easterly line of St. Francis Street to the intersection of said center line
with the center line of Cameron Way, as shown on the tract maps recorded in the
office of the County Recorder as follows: Tract No. 17422, Map Book 446, Pages
32 and 33.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or
construct, or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any
building or structure, or any portion thereof, on property abutting East Live
Oak Street in the city within a strip of land 50 feet wide lying 50 feet on the
north side of the center line of East Live Oak Street, as said center line is
shown in the City Engineer's Field Book No. 47 at Page 183, and extending from
the easterly line of Del Mar Avenue to the intersection of said center line, as
shown on the tract maps recorded in the office of the County Recorder as
follows: Tract No. 17422, Map Book 446, Pages 32 and 33.
('65 Code, § 8-2.02) (Ord. 813, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 831, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.042 EL MONTE STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or construct,
or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any building or
structure, or any portion thereof, within a strip of land 45 feet wide lying
northerly of the center line of El Monte Street, as shown in the City
Engineer's Field Book No. 49 at Pages 32 and 33, and extending from Gladys
Avenue to Charlotte Avenue in the city.
('65 Code, § 8-2.03) (Ord. 684, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.043 HERMOSA DRIVE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or construct,
or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any building or
structure, or any portion thereof, on that portion of Hermosa Drive in the city
within a strip of land 60 feet wide measured 30 feet distant from either side
of the center line of Hermosa Drive, and extending from Del Mar Avenue on the
west to California Street on the east, as such center line is shown, fixed, and
established by a map of Hermosa Drive filed in the office of the City Clerk.
('65 Code, § 8-2.04) (Ord. 247, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.044 LAS TUNAS DRIVE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or construct,
or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any building or
structure, or any portion thereof, on that portion of Las Tunas Drive in the
city within a strip of land 50 feet wide measured at right angles from the
center of Las Tunas Drive, and extending from the westerly limits of the city
to San Gabriel Boulevard.
('65 Code, § 8-2.05) (Ord. 215, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.045 NEW AVENUE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or construct,
or cause or permit to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any
building or structure, or any portion thereof, within a strip of land 30 feet
wide lying easterly of the center line of New Avenue, as shown on Map of
Bencamp Tract, as recorded in Book 57, Page 71, in the office of the County
Recorder, and extending from Valley Boulevard to the southerly line of said
Bencamp Tract.
('65 Code, § 8-2.06) (Ord. 536, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 667, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.046 SAN GABRIEL BOULEVARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or construct,
or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any building or
structure, or any portion thereof, on San Gabriel Boulevard from Wells Street
to Valley Boulevard in the city within a strip of land 100 feet wide lying 50
feet on either side of the center line of San Gabriel Boulevard, which center
line is shown on sheet No. 4 of County Surveyor's Map No. B-144, and is marked
thereon “proposed center line,” and from Valley Boulevard to Marshall Avenue
within a strip of land 100 feet wide lying 50 feet on either side of the center
line of San Gabriel Boulevard, which center line is shown on sheet No. 4 of
County Surveyor's Map No. B-144, and is marked thereon “present center line.”
('65 Code, § 8-2.07) (Ord. 551, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.047 SANTA ANITA STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or construct,
or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any building or
structure, or any portion thereof, on that portion of Santa Anita Street in the
city within a strip of land 60 feet wide measured 30 feet distant from either
side of the center line of Santa Anita Street, and extending from Mission Drive
on the south to Las Tunas Drive on the north, as such center line is shown,
fixed, and established by a map of Santa Anita Street filed in the office of
the City Clerk.
('65 Code, § 8-2.08) (Ord. 247, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.048 SANTA ANITA STREET; SAN GABRIEL ORANGE GROVE TRACT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or construct,
or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any building or
structure, or any portion thereof, within a strip of land 60 feet wide lying 30
feet on either side of the center line of Santa Anita Street in the city, said
center line being shown on the tract maps recorded in the office of the County
Recorder as follows: San Gabriel Orange Grove Tract Map Book 6, Page 29; Tract
No. 2470, Map Book 27, Page 25; Tract No. 5017, Map Book 57, Page 79.
('65 Code, § 8-2.09) (Ord. 514, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.049 VALLEY BOULEVARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or construct,
or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any building or
structure, or any portion thereof, excepting marquees, canopies, awnings, and
signs, within a strip of land 100 feet wide lying 50 feet on the southerly side
and 50 feet on the northerly side of the center line of Valley Boulevard in the
city, as said center line is shown on Plan and Profile Nos. 96 and 132 on file
in the office of the City Engineer.
('65 Code, § 8-2.10) (Ord. 614, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.050 WEST LIVE OAK STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, maintain, or construct,
or cause to be built, erected, maintained, or constructed, any building or
structure, or any portion thereof, on that portion of West Live Oak Street in
the city within a strip of land 50 feet wide lying 50 feet on either side of
the center line of West Live Oak Street, as said center line is shown on the
City Engineer's Wall Map, and extending from the westerly line of Del Mar
Avenue to the easterly line of San Marino Avenue.
('65 Code, § 8-2.11) (Ord. 909, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
BUILDING MOVING
§ 150.060 PERMITS FROM BUILDING DEPARTMENT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal or agent, to move,
or cause to be moved, any building or structure into the city or from one
location to another within the city without first making an application in
writing, stating the location of the building or structure to be moved and the
location to which it is to be moved, and obtaining a permit therefor from the
Community Development Department.
('65 Code, § 8-3.01) (Ord. 524, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.061 INSPECTIONS BY BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   Before issuing the permit required by the provisions of §
150.060 of this subchapter, the Community Development Department shall make an
inspection of the building or structure to be moved to determine that it shall
conform to all city building regulations and shall be of the same general
character as other buildings in the neighborhood.
('65 Code, § 8-3.02) (Ord. 524, passed - - )
§ 150.062 INSPECTION FEES.
   An inspection fee shall be charged by the Community Development Department
for inspecting a building or structure. Such inspection fee shall be in the
amount established by Council resolution.
('65 Code, § 8-3.03) (Ord. 524, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - )
§ 150.063 APPROVAL BY COUNCIL.
   All applications to move any building or structure, together with the
Community Development Department's inspection reports, shall be submitted to
the Community Development Director for final approval.
('65 Code, § 8-3.04) (Ord. 524, passed - - )
§ 150.064 PERMITS FROM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, as principal, agent, officer, clerk, or
employee, for himself or for another person, to move any building or structure
upon or along any street or alley in the city without permission first being
obtained from the Community Development Director.
('65 Code, § 8-3.05) (Ord. 620, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.065 PERMITS FROM COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR; APPLICATIONS.
   No permit required by the provisions of §
150.064 of this subchapter shall be granted by the Community Development
Director, except upon the written application of the person desiring to move
the building or structure.
('65 Code, § 8-3.06) (Ord. 620, passed - - )
§ 150.066 PROTECTION OF STREETS AND ALLEYS; BONDS.
   As a condition to granting an application to move a building or structure,
the Community Development Director may require such manner or mode of moving
such building or structure as shall protect and conserve, in their then
condition, the streets or alleys over which such building shall be moved, and
he shall require a deposit of a bond in the minimum amount of $1,000 to be made
to the city for the purpose of defraying the costs of repairing any such
streets, alleys, or other public property which may be damaged by the moving of
the building or structure for which the application is made.
('65 Code, § 8-3.07) (Ord. 620, passed - - )
§ 150.067 PERMIT FEES.
   No permit granted by the Community Development Director to move any building
or structure shall be effective until the applicant to whom such permit is
granted shall have paid to the Community Development Director the amount
established by Council resolution.
('65 Code, § 8-3.08) (Ord. 620, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - )
§ 150.068 PERMITS FOR REMOVAL OF WIRES REQUIRED.
   Whenever it shall become necessary or convenient, in order to move any
building or structure, to remove any wire, no permit shall be granted by the
Community Development Director to move any building or structure until permits
have been obtained for such removal from the person having the control or
management of such wires.
('65 Code, § 8-3.09) (Ord. 620, passed - - )
§ 150.069 SEWER DISCONNECTIONS AND SEALING.
   No permit shall be issued for moving any building or structure unless the
sewer in such building or structure shall have been disconnected, closed, and
sealed in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code.
('65 Code, § 8-3.10) (Ord. 620, passed - - )
§ 150.070 NOTICES TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.
   No building or structure shall be moved upon any public street without
notice having been given to the Police and Fire Departments. One such notice
shall be given at least eight hours prior to the time of such moving and the
second such notice shall be given 30 minutes prior to the estimated time of
entry into the city of the building or structure being moved.
('65 Code, § 8-3.11) (Ord. 620, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.071 WARNING LIGHTS.
   No building or structure shall be moved or allowed to remain stationary upon
any public street during the period between 30 minutes before sunset and 30
minutes after sunrise unless flashing lights are kept lighted during such
period at each corner of the building or structure.
('65 Code, § 8-3.12) (Ord. 620, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.072 OBSTRUCTING ACCESS TO FIRE EQUIPMENT.
   No building or structure shall be permitted to remain stationary on any
street intersection or upon any street in such a manner as to obstruct the
access to any fireplug, standpipe, or other firefighting appliance located upon
or adjacent to such street.
('65 Code, § 8-3.13) (Ord. 620, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING BUILDINGS
§ 150.080 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote public safety and welfare
by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of
earthquakes on unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings constructed before
1934. Such buildings have been widely recognized for their sustaining of life
hazardous damage as a result of partial or complete collapse during past
moderate to strong earthquakes.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter are minimum standards for structural
seismic resistance, established primarily to reduce the risk of life loss or
injury, and will not necessarily prevent loss of life or injury or prevent
earthquake damage to an existing building which complies with these standards.
This subchapter shall not require existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or
fire safety systems to be altered unless they constitute a hazard to life or
property.
   (C)   This subchapter provides systematic procedures and standards for
identification and classification of unreinforced masonry bearing wall
buildings based on their present use. Priorities, time periods and standards
are also established under which these buildings are required to be
structurally analyzed and anchored. Where the analysis determines deficiencies,
this subchapter requires the building to be strengthened or demolished.
   (D)   Qualified historical buildings shall comply with the requirements of
the State Historical Building Code (SHBC) established under Cal. Administrative
Code, Part 8, Title 24.
('65 Code, § 8-15.01) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
§ 150.081 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all buildings
constructed or under construction prior to October 6, 1933, or for which a
building permit was issued prior to October 6, 1933, which on the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this subchapter have unreinforced masonry
bearing walls as defined herein.
   (B)   Exception. This subchapter shall not apply to detached one- or two-
family dwellings and detached apartment houses containing fewer than five
dwelling units and used solely for residential purposes.
('65 Code, § 8-15.02) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
§ 150.082 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Community Development Department of the city.
   ESSENTIAL BUILDING. Any building housing a hospital or other medical
facility having surgery or emergency treatment areas, fire or police stations,
municipal government disaster operations and communication centers.
   HIGH-RISK BUILDING. Any building not classified as an essential building
having an occupant load of more than 100 occupants.
   HISTORICAL BUILDING. Any building designated as a historical building by an
appropriate federal, state or city jurisdiction.
   LOW-RISK BUILDING. Any building not classified as a high- or medium-risk
building or an essential building having an occupant load of less than 20
occupants.
   MEDIUM-RISK BUILDING. Any building not classified as a high-risk building or
an essential building having an occupant load of 20 to 99 occupants.
   UNREINFORCED MASONRY BEARING WALL. A masonry wall having all or part of the
following characteristics:
      (1)   Provides the vertical support for a floor or roof;
      (2)   The total superimposed load is over 100 pounds per linear foot; or
      (3)   The area of reinforcing steel is less than 50% of that required in
Chapter 24 of the Uniform Building Code.
('65 Code, § 8-15.03) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
§ 150.083 RATING CLASSIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Determination of rating. The rating classifications as exhibited in §
1 of the appendix to this chapter are hereby established and each building
within the scope of this subchapter shall be placed in one such rating
classification by the Department. The total occupant load of the entire
building as determined by § 3302(a) of the Uniform Building Code shall be used
to determine the rating classification.
   (B)   Exception. For the purpose of this subchapter, portions of buildings
constructed to act independently when resisting seismic forces may be placed in
separate rating classifications.
('65 Code, § 8-15.04) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
§ 150.084 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The owner of each building within the scope of this subchapter shall
cause a structural analysis to be made of the building by a civil or structural
engineer or architect licensed by the State of California, and if the building
does not meet the minimum earthquake standards specified in this subchapter,
the owner shall cause it to be structurally altered to conform to such
standards or cause the building to be demolished.
   (B)   The owner of a building within the scope of this subchapter shall
comply with the requirements set forth above by submitting to the Department
for review within the stated time limits:
      (1)   Within 270 days after the service of the order, a structural
analysis. Such analysis, which is subject to approval by the Department, shall
demonstrate that the building meets the minimum requirements of this
subchapter;
      (2)   Within 270 days after the service of the order, the structural
analysis and plans for the proposed structural alterations of the building
necessary to comply to the minimum requirements of this subchapter;
      (3)   Within 120 days after service of the order, plans for the
installation of wall anchors in accordance with the requirements specified in §
150.087(C); or
      (4)   Within 270 days after service of the order, plans for the
demolition of the building.
   (C)   After plans are submitted and approved by the Department, the owner
shall obtain a building permit, commence and complete the required construction
or demolition within the time limits set forth in § 2 of the appendix following
this chapter. These time limits shall begin to run from the date the order is
served in accordance with §
150.085(A) and (B).
   (D)   Owners electing to comply with division (B)(3) of this section are
also required to comply with divisions (B)(2) or (4) of this section; provided,
however, that the 270 day period provided for in such divisions (B)(2) and (4)
and the time limits for obtaining a building permit, commencing construction
and completing construction for complete structural alterations or building
demolition set forth in § 2 of the appendix following this chapter shall be
extended in accordance with § 3 of the appendix following this chapter. Each
such extended time limit, except the time limit for commencing construction,
shall begin to run from the date the order is served in accordance with §
150.085(B). The time limit for commencing construction shall commence to run
from the date the building permit is issued.
('65 Code, § 8-15.05) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.085 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Service of order. When the Department determines that a building is
within the scope of this subchapter, the owner shall comply with §
150.084. If the owner does not comply, the Department shall issue an order as
provided in division (B) of this section to the owner of each building within
the scope of this subchapter in accordance with the minimum time periods for
service of such orders set forth in § 3 of the appendix following this chapter.
The minimum time period for the service of such orders shall be measured from
the effective date of this subchapter. The Department shall, upon receipt of a
written request from the owner, order a building to comply with this subchapter
prior to the normal service date for such building set forth in this section.
   (B)   Contents of order. The order shall be in writing and shall be served
either personally or by certified or registered mail upon the owner as shown on
the last equalized assessment, and upon the person, if any, in apparent charge
or control of the building. The order shall specify that the building has been
determined by the Department to be within the scope of this subchapter and,
therefore, is required to meet the minimum seismic standards of this
subchapter. The order shall specify the rating classification of the building
and shall be accompanied by a copy of §
150.084 of this subchapter which sets forth the owner's alternatives and time
limits for compliance.
   (C)   Appeal from order.
      (1)   The owner or person in charge or control of the building may appeal
the Department's initial determination that the building is within the scope of
this subchapter to the City Manager.
      (2)   Such appeal shall be filed with the City Manager's office within 60
days from the service date of the order described in division (B) of this
section. Any such appeal shall be decided by the City Manager no later than 60
days after the date that the appeal is filed. Such appeal shall be made in
writing, and the grounds thereof shall be stated clearly and concisely. Each
appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by Council
resolution.
   (D)   Recordation.
      (1)   At the time that the Department serves the aforementioned order,
the Department shall file with the office of the County Recorder a certificate
stating that the subject building is within the scope of this subchapter. The
certificate shall also state that the owner thereof has been ordered to
structurally analyze the building and to structurally alter or demolish it when
the Department determines the building is not in compliance with this
subchapter.
      (2)   If the building is either demolished, found not to be within the
scope of this subchapter, or is structurally capable of resisting minimum
seismic forces required by this subchapter as a result of structural
alterations or an analysis, the Department shall file with the office of the
County Recorder a certificate terminating the status of the subject building as
being classified within the scope of this subchapter.
   (E)   Enforcement. If the owner or other person in charge or control of the
subject building fails to comply with any order issued by the Department
pursuant to this subchapter within any of the time limits set forth in §
150.084 of this subchapter, the Department shall order that the entire building
be vacated and that the building remain vacated until such order has been
complied with. If compliance with such order has not been accomplished within
90 days after the date the building has been ordered vacated or such additional
time as may have been granted by the City Manager, the City Manager may order
its demolition in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 98 of this code of
ordinances.
('65 Code, § 8-15.06) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   
Nuisances, see Ch. 98
§ 150.086 HISTORICAL BUILDINGS.
   For provisions concerning historical buildings, see the State Historical
Building Code, Cal. Administrative Code, Title 24, Part 8.
('65 Code, § 8-15.07) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
§ 150.087 ANALYSIS AND DESIGN.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Every structure within the scope of this subchapter shall be
analyzed and constructed to resist minimum total lateral seismic forces assumed
to act nonconcurrently in the direction of each of the main axes of the
structure in accordance with the following equation:
   V = IKCSW. . . . . . . . .(15-1)
      (2)   The value of IKCS need not exceed the values set forth in § 4 of
the appendix following this chapter based on the applicable rating
classification of the building.
   (B)   Lateral forces on elements of structures.
      (1)   Parts or portions of structures shall be analyzed and designed for
lateral loads in accordance with division (A) of this section and the Uniform
Building Code, Chapter 23, § 212, but not less than the value from the
following equation:
   Fp = ICpSWp. . . . . . . . .(15-2)
      (2)   For the provisions of this division, the product of IS need not
exceed the values as set forth in § 5 of the appendix following this chapter.
      (3)   Exception. Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not having a
rating classification of I may be analyzed in accordance with § 150.088 of this
subchapter.
      (4)   The value of Cp need not exceed the values set forth in § 6 of the
appendix following this chapter.
   (C)   Anchorage and interconnection. Anchorage and interconnection of all
parts, portions and elements of the structure shall be analyzed and designed
for lateral forces in accordance with § 6 of the appendix following this
chapter and the equation Fp = ICpSWp as modified by § 6 of the appendix
following this chapter Minimum anchorage of masonry walls to each floor or roof
shall resist a minimum force of 200 pounds per linear foot acting normal to the
wall at the level of the floor or roof.
   (D)   Level of required repair. Alterations and repairs required to meet the
provisions of this subchapter shall comply with all other applicable
requirements of this code unless specifically provided for in this subchapter.
   (E)   Required analysis.
      (1)   General. Except as modified herein, the analysis and design
relating to the structural alteration of existing structures within the scope
of this subchapter shall be in accordance with the analysis specified in the
Uniform Building Code, Chapter 23.
      (2)   Continuous stress path. A complete, continuous stress path from
every part or portion of the structure to the ground shall be provided for the
required horizontal forces.
      (3)   Positive connections. All parts, portions or elements of the
structure shall be interconnected by positive means.
   (F)   Analysis procedure.
      (1)   General. Stresses in materials and existing construction utilized
to transfer seismic forces from the ground to parts or portions of the
structures shall conform to those permitted by the code and those materials and
types of construction specified in §
150.088 of this subchapter.
      (2)   Connections. Materials and connectors used for interconnection of
parts and portions of the structure shall conform to the code. Nails may be
used as part of an approved connector.
      (3)   Unreinforced masonry walls.
         (a)   Except as modified herein, unreinforced masonry walls shall be
analyzed as specified in the Uniform Building Code, Chapter 24, §§ 2808 and
2809, to withstand all vertical loads, as specified in Chapter 23 of the
Uniform Building Code, in addition to the seismic forces required by this
subchapter. The 50% increase in the seismic force factor for shear walls as
specified in § 8 of the appendix following this chapter may be omitted in the
computation of seismic loads to existing shear walls.
         (b)   No allowable tension stress will be permitted in unreinforced
masonry walls. Walls not capable of resisting the required design forces
specified in this subchapter shall be strengthened or removed and replaced.
         (c)   Exceptions.
            1.   Unreinforced masonry walls in buildings not classified as a
rating classification I pursuant to § 1 of the appendix following this chapter
may be analyzed in accordance with §
150.088 following this chapter.
            2.   Unreinforced masonry walls which carry no design loads other
than their own weight may be considered as veneer if they are adequately
anchored to new supporting elements.
   (G)   Combination of vertical and seismic forces.
      (1)   New materials. All new materials introduced into the structure to
meet the requirements of this section which are subjected to combined vertical
and horizontal forces shall comply with the Uniform Building Code, Chapter 23,
§ 2312.
      (2)   Existing materials. When stresses in existing lateral force-
resisting elements are due to a combination of dead loads plus seismic loads,
the allowable working stress specified in the code may be increased 100%.
However, no increase will be permitted in the stresses allowed in §
150.088 of this subchapter, and the stresses in members due only to seismic and
dead loads shall not exceed the values permitted by the Uniform Building Code,
Chapter 23.
      (3)   Allowable reduction of bending stress by vertical load. In
calculating tensile fiber stress due to seismic forces required by this
subchapter, the maximum tensile fiber stress may be reduced by the full direct
stress due to vertical dead loads.
('65 Code, § 8-15.08) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.088 MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   General. All materials permitted by this code, including their
appropriate allowable stresses and those existing configurations of materials
specified herein, may be utilized to meet the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Existing materials.
      (1)   Unreinforced masonry walls.
         (a)   Unreinforced masonry walls analyzed in accordance with this
section may provide vertical support for roof and floor construction and
resistance to lateral loads. The bonding of such walls shall be as specified in
Chapter 24 of the Uniform Building Code.
         (b)   Tension stresses due to seismic forces normal to the wall may be
neglected if the wall does not exceed the height- or length-to-thickness ratio
and the in-plane shear stresses due to seismic loads as set forth in § 7 of the
appendix following this chapter.
         (c)   If the wall height-thickness ratio exceeds the specified limits,
the wall may be supported by vertical bracing members designed in accordance
with the Uniform Building Code, Chapter 23. The deflection of such bracing
member at design loads shall not exceed one-tenth of the wall thickness.
         (d)   Exception. The wall may be supported by flexible vertical
bracing members designed in accordance with §
150.087(B) if the deflection at design loads is not less than one-quarter nor
more than one-third of the wall thickness.
      (2)   Vertical bracing members. All vertical bracing members shall be
attached to floor and roof construction for their design loads independently of
required wall anchors. Horizontal spacing of vertical bracing members shall not
exceed one-half the unsupported height of the wall nor ten feet. Bracing
elements shall be detailed to minimize the horizontal displacement of the wall
by components of vertical displacements of the floor or roof.
      (3)   Existing roof, floors, walls, footings and wood framing. Existing
materials, including wood shear walls utilized in the described configuration,
may be used as part of the lateral load-resisting system, provided that the
stresses in these materials do not exceed the values shown in § 8 of the
appendix following this chapter.
   (C)   Strengthening of existing materials. New materials, including wood
shear walls, may be utilized to strengthen portions of the existing seismic
resisting system in the described configurations, provided that the stresses do
not exceed the values shown in § 9 of the appendix following this chapter.
   (D)   Alternate materials. Alternate materials, designs and methods of
construction may be approved by the Department in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Building Code, Chapter 1, § 105.
   (E)   Minimum acceptable quality of existing unreinforced masonry walls.
      (1)   General provisions. All unreinforced masonry walls utilized to
carry vertical loads and seismic forces parallel and perpendicular to the wall
plane shall be tested as specified in this division. All masonry quality shall
equal or exceed the minimum standards established herein or shall be removed
and replaced by new materials. Alternate methods of testing may be approved by
the Department. The quality of mortar in all masonry walls shall be determined
by performing in-place shear tests or by testing eight-inch diameter cores.
Alternative methods of testing may be approved by the Department. Nothing shall
prevent pointing with mortar of all the masonry wall joints before the tests
are first made. Prior to any pointing, the mortar joints must be raked and
cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. Mortar for pointing shall be
Type S or N except masonry cements shall not be used. All preparation and
mortar pointing shall be done under the continuous inspection of a registered
deputy building inspector. At the conclusion of the inspection, the inspector
shall submit a written report to the licensed engineer or architect responsible
for the seismic analysis of the building setting forth the result of the work
inspected. Such report shall be submitted to the Department for approval as
part of the structural analysis. All testing shall be performed in accordance
with the requirements specified in this division by a testing agency approved
by the Department. An accurate record of all such tests and their location in
the building shall be recorded and these results shall be submitted to the
Department for approval as part of the structural analysis.
      (2)   Number and location of tests. The minimum number of tests shall be
two per wall or line of wall elements resisting a common force, or one per 1500
square feet of wall surface, with a minimum of eight tests in any case. The
exact test or core location shall be determined at the building site by the
licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the
subject building.
      (3)   In-place shear tests. The bed joints of the outer wythe of the
masonry shall be tested in shear by laterally displacing a single brick
relative to the adjacent bricks in that wythe. The opposite head joint of the
brick to be tested shall be removed and cleaned prior to testing. The minimum
quality mortar in 80% of the shear tests shall not be less than the total of 30
psi plus the axial stress in the wall at the point of the test. The shear
stress shall be based on the gross area of both bed joints and shall be that at
which movement of the brick is first observed.
      (4)   Core tests. A minimum number of mortar test specimens equal to the
number of required cores shall be prepared from the cores and tested as
specified herein. The mortar joint of the outer wythe of the masonry core shall
be tested in shear by placing the circular core section in a compression
testing machine with the mortar bed joint rotated 15 degrees from the axis of
the applied load. The mortar joint tested in shear shall have an average
ultimate stress of 20 psi based on the gross area. The average shall be
obtained from the total number of cores made. If test specimens cannot be made
from cores taken, then the shear value shall be reported as zero.
   (F)   Testing of shear bolts.
      (1)   One-fourth of all new shear bolts and dowels embedded in
unreinforced masonry walls shall be tested by a registered deputy building
inspector using a torque calibrated wrench to the following minimum torques:
   1/2-inch-diameter bolts or dowels — 40 foot-lbs.
   5/8-inch-diameter bolts or dowels — 50 foot-lbs.
   3/4-inch-diameter bolts or dowels — 60 foot-lbs.
      (2)   No bolts exceeding three-fourths inch shall be used. All nuts shall
be installed over malleable iron or plate washers when bearing on wood and
heavy cut washers when bearing on steel.
   (G)   Determination of allowable stresses for design methods based on test
results.
      (1)   Design shear values. Design seismic in-plane shear stresses shall
be substantiated by tests performed as specified in divisions (E)(3) and (4) of
this section. Design stresses shall be related to test results obtained in
accordance with § 10 of the appendix following this chapter. Intermediate
values between three and ten psi may be interpolated.
      (2)   Design compression and tension values. Compression stresses for
unreinforced masonry having a minimum design shear value of three psi shall not
exceed 100 psi. Design tension values for unreinforced masonry shall not be
permitted.
   (H)   Five percent of the existing rod anchors utilized as all or part of
the required wall anchors shall be tested in pullout by an approved testing
laboratory. The minimum number tested shall be four per floor, with two tests
at walls with joists framing into the wall and two tests at walls with joists
parallel to the wall. The test apparatus shall be supported on the masonry wall
at a minimum distance of the wall thickness from the anchor tested. The rod
anchor shall be given a preload of 300 pounds prior to establishing a datum for
recording elongation. The tension test load reported shall be recorded at one-
eighth inch relative movement of the anchor and the adjacent masonry surface.
Results of all tests shall be reported. The report shall include the test
results as related to the wall thickness and joist orientation. The allowable
resistance value of the existing anchors shall be 40% of the average of those
tested anchors having the same wall thickness and joist orientation.
   (I)   Qualification tests for devices used for wall anchorage shall be
tested with the entire tension load carried on the enlarged head at the
exterior face of the wall. Bond on the part of the device between the enlarged
head and the interior wall face shall be eliminated for the qualification
tests. The resistance value assigned the device shall be 20% of the average of
the ultimate loads.
('65 Code, § 8-15.09) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.089 INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PLANS.
   (A)   General. In addition to the seismic analysis required elsewhere in
this subchapter, the licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic
analysis of the building shall determine and record the information required by
this section on the approved plans.
   (B)   Construction details. The following requirements with appropriate
construction details shall be made part of the approved plans:
      (1)   (a)   All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at the roof
level by tension bolts through the wall as specified in § 9 of the appendix
following this chapter or by approved equivalent at a maximum anchor spacing of
six feet.
         (b)   All unreinforced masonry walls shall be anchored at all floors
with tension bolts through the wall or by existing rod anchors at a maximum
anchor spacing of six feet. All existing rod anchors shall be secured to the
joists to develop the required forces. The Department may require testing to
verify the adequacy of the embedded ends of existing rod anchors. Tests when
required shall conform to §
150.088(H) of this subchapter.
         (c)   When access to the exterior face of the masonry wall is
prevented by proximity of an existing building, wall anchors conforming to Item
5 in § 9 of the appendix following this chapter may be used. Alternative
devices to be used in lieu of tension bolts for masonry wall anchorage shall be
tested as specified in §
150.088(I) of this subchapter.
      (2)   Diaphragm chord stresses of horizontal diaphragms shall be
developed in existing materials or by addition of new materials.
      (3)   Where trusses and beams other than rafters or joists are supported
on masonry, ledges or columns shall be installed to support vertical loads of
the roof or floor members.
      (4)   (a)   Parapets and exterior wall appendages not capable of
resisting the forces specified in this subchapter shall be removed, stabilized
or braced to ensure that the parapets and appendages remain in their original
position.
         (b)   The maximum height of an unbraced, unreinforced masonry parapet
above the lower of either the level of tension anchors or roof sheathing, shall
not exceed one and one-half times the thickness of the parapet wall. If the
required parapet height exceeds this maximum height, a bracing system designed
for the force factors specified in § 5 of the appendix following this chapter
and Table No. 23-P of the Uniform Building Code for walls shall support the top
of the parapet. Parapet corrective work must be performed in conjunction with
the installation of tension roof anchors.
         (c)   1.   The minimum height of a parapet above the wall anchor shall
be 12 inches.
            2.   Exception. If a reinforced concrete beam is provided at the
top of the wall, the minimum height above the wall-anchor may be six inches.
      (5)   All deteriorated mortar joints in unreinforced masonry walls shall
be pointed with Type S or N mortar. Prior to any pointing, the wall surface
must be raked and cleaned to remove loose and deteriorated mortar. All
preparation and pointing shall be done under the continuous inspection of a
registered deputy building inspector certified to inspect masonry or concrete.
At the conclusion of the project, the inspector shall submit a written report
to the Department setting forth the portion of work inspected.
      (6)   Repair details of any cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry wall
required to resist forces specified in this subchapter.
   (C)   Existing construction. The following existing construction information
shall be made part of the approved plans:
      (1)   The type and dimensions of existing walls and the size and spacing
of floor and roof members;
      (2)   The extent and type of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof;
      (3)   The extent and type of parapet corrections which were performed;
      (4)   Accurately dimensioned floor plans and masonry wall elevations
showing dimensioned openings, piers, wall thickness and heights;
      (5)   The location of cracks or damaged portions of unreinforced masonry
walls requiring repairs;
      (6)   The type of interior wall surfaces and if reinstalling or anchoring
of ceiling plaster is necessary;
      (7)   The general condition of the mortar joints and if the joints need
pointing.
('65 Code, § 8-15.10) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.090 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   General. The owner, or the engineer or architect of record acting as
the owner's agent, shall employ one or more special or deputy inspectors.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities.
      (1)   The special or deputy inspector shall observe the work for
conformance with the approved design drawing and specifications.
      (2)   The special or deputy inspector shall furnish inspection reports to
the Building Official, the engineer or architect of record, and other
designated persons. All discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate
attention of the contractor for correction, then, if uncorrected, to the proper
design authority and to the Building Official.
      (3)   The special or deputy inspector shall submit a final signed report
stating whether the work completed was, to the best of his or her knowledge, in
conformance with the approved plans and specifications and the applicable
workmanship.
('65 Code, § 8-15.11) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
§ 150.091 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   The schedule of fees shall be established by the City Council, from time to
time, by resolution.
('65 Code, § 8-15.12) (Ord. 321-C.S., passed - - )
§ 150.092 RULE OF GENERAL APPLICATION FOR UNREINFORCED MASONRY BEARING WALL
BUILDINGS.
   That certain Rule of General Application, dated December 10, 1986 and
incorporated herein by this reference, is hereby adopted as an acceptable
alternate method of design for buildings which fall within the scope of
Division 88 of the Los Angeles City Building Code, as adopted by the city.
(Ord. 428-C.S., passed 5-17-94)
§ 150.093 TABLES OF EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Rating classifications.
 
Type of Building     Classification
Essential building   I
High-risk building   II
Medium-risk building III
Low-risk building    IV
 
('65 Code, Table 15-A)
   (B)   Time limits for compliance.
 
Required Action by  Obtain Building Commence Construction Complete Construction
Owner               Permit Within   Within                Within
Complete structural
alterations or      One year        180 days *            Three years
building demolition
Wall anchor         180 days        270 days              One year
installation
* Measured from date of building permit issuance.
 
('65 Code, Table 15-B)
   (C)   Service priorities and extended time provisions.
                                    Extension of Time if Minimum Time Periods
Rating Classification Occupant Load Wall Anchors are     for Service of Order
                                    Installed
Rating                               Extension of Time if Minimum Time Periods
Classification     Occupant Load     Wall Anchors are     for Service of Order
                                     Installed
I                  Any               One year             0
(highest priority)
II                 100 or more       One year             90 days
                   100 or more       One year             One year
                  More than 50, but One year             Two years
                  less than 100
III                More than 19, but One year             Four years
                   less than 51
IV                 Less than 20      One year             Four years
(lowest priority)
Buildings which have obtained a building permit for wall anchors and meet the
time schedule in division (B) of this section for wall anchor installation may
utilize the time extensions which were permitted in this table prior to the
adoption of this chapter.
 
('65 Code, Table 15-C)
   (D)   Horizontal force factors based on rating classification.
 
Rating Classification IKCS
I                     0.186
II                    0.133
III and IV            0.100
 
('65 Code, Table 15-D)
   (E)   Horizontal force factors “IS” for parts or portions of structures.
 
Rating Classification IS
I                     1.50
II                    1.00
III and IV            0.75
 
('65 Code, Table 15-E)
   (F)   Horizontal force factor “Cp” or portions of buildings or other
structures.
 
Part or Portion of Buildings                 Direction of Force     Value of Cp
Exterior bearing and non-bearing walls;
interior bearing walls and partitions;
interior non-bearing walls and partitions    Normal-to-flat surface 0.20
over ten feet in height; masonry fences over
six feet in height
Cantilever parapet and other cantilever      Normal-to-flat surface 1.00
walls, except retaining walls
Exterior and interior ornamentations and     Any direction          1.00
appendages
When connected to or a part of a building:
Towers, tanks, towers and tanks plus
contents, racks over eight feet three inches Any direction          0.20
in height plus contents, chimneys,
smokestacks and penthouses
 
When connected to or a part of a building:
Rigid and rigidly mounted equipment and      Any horizontal direction      0.20
machinery not required for continued
operation of essential occupancies
Tanks plus effective contents resting on the Any direction                 0.12
ground
Floors and roofs acting as diaphragms        In the plane of the diaphragm 0.12
Prefabricated structural elements, other
than walls, with force applied at center of  Any horizontal direction      0.30
gravity of assembly
Connections for exterior panels or elements  Any direction                 2.00
Notes:
(1) See §150.087(B) for use of Cp.
(2) When located in the upper portion of any building with a ratio of five to
one or greater, the value shall be increased by 50%.
(3) For flexible and flexibly mounted equipment and machinery, the appropriate
values for Cp shall be determined with consideration given to both the dynamic
properties of the equipment and machinery and to the building/structure where
placed.
(4) The Wp for storage racks shall be the weight of the racks plus contents.
The value of Cp for racks over two storage support levels in height shall be
0.16 for the levels below the top two levels.
(5) The design of the equipment and machinery and their anchorage is an
integral part of the design and specification of such equipment and machinery.
The structure to which the equipment or machinery is mounted shall be capable
of resisting the anchorage forces (see also §2312 of the Uniform Building
Code).
(6) Floor and roofs acting as diaphragms shall be designed for a minimum force
resulting from a Cp of 0.12 applied to Wp unless a greater force results from
the distribution of lateral forces in accordance with §2312 of the Uniform
Building Code.
 
('65 Code, Table 15-F)
   (G)   Allowable value of height-thickness ratio of unreinforced masonry
walls with minimum quality mortar.1,2
 
                             Buildings with Crosswalls as All Other Buildings
                             Defined by §150.082
Walls of one-story buildings 16                           13
First-story wall of multi-   16                           15
story buildings
Walls in top story of multi- 14                           9
story buildings
All other walls              16                           13
1 Minimum quality mortar shall be determined by laboratory testing in
accordance with §150.088(E).
2 This table is not applicable to buildings of Rating Classification I. Walls
of buildings within Rating Classification I shall be analyzed in accordance
with §150.087(F).
 
('65 Code, Table 15-G)
   (H)   Values for existing materials.
 
New Materials or Configuration of           Allowable Values
Materials1
Horizontal Diaphragms
Roofs with straight sheathing and roofing   100 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
applied directly to the sheathing.
Roofs with diagonal sheathing and roofing   400 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
applied directly to the sheathing.
Floors with straight tongue-and-groove      150 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
sheathing.
Floors with straight sheathing and finished 300 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
wood flooring.
Floors with diagonal sheathing and finished 450 lbs. per foot for seismic shear
wood flooring.
Floors or roofs with straight sheathing Add 50 lbs. per foot to the allowable
and plaster applied to the joist or     values for items (1) and (2)
rafters.2
Shear Walls
Wood stud walls with lath and plaster.  100 lbs. per foot each side for seismic
                                        shear
Plain Concrete Footings                 f'c = 150/psi unless otherwise shown by
                                        tests
Douglas Fir Wood                        Allowable stress same as No. 1 D.F.3
Reinforcing Steel                       ft = 18,000 lbs. per square inch
                                        maximum3
Structural Steel                        ft = 20,000 lbs. per square inch
                                        maximum3
1 Material must be sound and in good condition.
2 The wood lath and plaster must be reattached to existing joists or rafters in
a manner approved by the Department.
3 Stresses given may be increased for combinations of loads as specified in
§150.087(G)(2).
 
('65 Code, Table 15-H)
   (I)   Allowable values of new materials used in conjunction with existing
construction.
 
New Materials or Configuration of       Allowable Values
Materials
Horizontal Diaphragms
Plywood sheathing applied directly over
existing straight sheathing with ends   Same as specified in Table No. 25-J-
of plywood sheets bearing on joists or  1 of the Uniform Building Code (For
rafters and edges of plywood located on blocked diaphragms).
center of individual sheathing boards.
Shear Walls
(1) Plywood sheathing applied directly
over existing wood studs. No value      Same as values specified in Table No.
shall be given to plywood applied over  25-K-1 (For shear walls).
existing plaster or wood sheathing.
(2) Drywall or plaster applied directly 75% of the values specified in Table
over existing wood studs.               No. 47-1 of the Uniform Building Code.
(3) Drywall or plaster applied to plywood sheathing over existing wood studs.  33% of the values specified in Table No. 47-1 of the Uniform Building
                                                                               Code.
Shear Bolts
Shear bolts and shear dowels embedded a minimum of eight inches into           100% of the values for plain masonry specified in Table No. 24-I of the
unreinforced masonry walls. Bolt centered in a two and one-half inch diameter  Uniform Building Code. No values larger than those given for ¼-inch bolts
hole with dry-pack or non-shrink grout around circumference of bolt or         shall be used.
dowel.1,3
Tension Bolts
Tension bolts and tension dowels extending entirely through unreinforced
masonry walls secured with bearing plates on far side of wall with at least 30 1200 lbs. per bolt or dowel.
square inches of area.2,3
Wall Anchors [§150.089(B)(1)]
(1) Bolts extending to the exterior face of the wall with a two and one-half
inch round plate under the head. Install as specified for shear bolts. Spaced  600 lbs. per bolt.
not closer than 12-inches on centers.1,2,3
(2) Bolts or dowels extending to the exterior face of the wall with a two and
one-half-inch round place under the head and drill at an angle of 22½ degrees 1200 lbs. per bolt or dowel.
to the horizontal. Installed as specified for shear bolts.1,2,3
Infilled Walls
Reinforced masonry infilled openings in existing unreinforced masonry walls    Same as values specified for unreinforced masonry walls.
with keys or dowels to match reinforcing.
Reinforced Masonry
                                                                      Same as
                                                                      values
                                                                      specified
Masonry piers and walls reinforced per §2409 of the Uniform Building in Chapter
Code.                                                                 24 of the
                                                                      Uniform
                                                                      Building
                                                                      Code.
Reinforced Concrete
                                                                      Same as
                                                                      values
                                                                      specified
Concrete footings, walls and piers reinforced as specified in Chapter in Chapter
26 and designed for tributary loads.                                  26 of the
                                                                      Uniform
                                                                      Building
                                                                      Code.
Existing Foundation Loads
                                                                      Calculated-
                                                                      existing
                                                                      foundation
                                                                      loads due
                                                                      to maximum
                                                                      dead load
                                                                      plus live
                                                                      load may be
                                                                      increased
                                                                      25% for
Foundation loads for structures exhibiting no evidence of settlement. dead load,
                                                                      and may be
                                                                      increased
                                                                      50% for
                                                                      dead load
                                                                      plus
                                                                      seismic
                                                                      load
                                                                      required by
                                                                      the
                                                                      chapter.
1 Bolts and dowels to be tested as specified in §150.088(F).
2 Bolts and dowels to be ½-inch minimum in diameter.
3 Drilling for bolts and dowels shall be done with an electric rotary drill.
Impact tools shall not be used for drilling holes or tightening anchor and shear
bolt nuts.
 
('65 Code, Table 15-I)
   (J)   Allowable shear stress for tested unreinforced masonry walls.
 
90% of Test Results in psi Average Test Results of Seismic In-Plane Shear Based
Not Less Than              Cores in psi            on Gross Area
30 plus axial stress       20                      3 psi*
40 plus axial stress       27                      4 psi*
50 plus axial stress       33                      5 psi*
100 plus axial stress or   67 or more              10 psi max.*
more
* Allowable shear stress may be increased by addition of 10% of the axial
stress due to the weight of the wall directly above.
('65 Code, Table 15-J)
('65 Code, Table 15-J)
GASOLINE STATIONS
§ 150.110 BUILDINGS; HEIGHT.
   Gasoline filling stations or automobile service stations shall be limited to
one story in height.
('65 Code, § 8-7.02) (Ord. 475, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.111 BUILDINGS; TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION AND AREA.
   (A)   Such stations shall not be of Type V construction. When such stations
are of Type IV construction, as defined by the California Building Code, such
buildings shall not be over 1,500 square feet in the area enclosed within the
walls.
   (B)   Buildings of Group B Occupancy, as defined by the California Building
Code, when a Type III construction, as defined by the California Building Code,
shall have all partitions and intermediate or mezzanine floors of one-hour
fire-resistive construction.
('65 Code, § 8-7.03) (Ord. 475, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 665, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.112 WALLS.
   No wall of any structure on any gasoline filling station or service station
site or development shall be closer than ten feet to any property line or
building setback line, except that structures, or portions of structures,
having walls of two-hour rated fire-resistive construction may extend into such
restricted area, subject to the provisions of the California Building Code as
to openings in such two-hour rated walls.
('65 Code, § 8-7.07) (Ord. 475, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 844, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.113 DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No detached accessory building shall be on the front half of the lot upon
which it is erected or maintained, and it shall not be closer than five feet to
any property line or building setback line when such accessory building is on
the rear half of such lot.
('65 Code, § 8-7.08) (Ord. 475, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.114 SELF-SERVICE STATIONS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The owner, operator, or person in charge of any self-service gasoline
filling station in the city shall comply with and conform to the following
rules, regulations, and requirements:
   (A)   Automatic safety nozzles. All gasoline lines shall be equipped with
automatic safety nozzles; provided, however, no latching or other device shall
be attached or used which will permit fully automatic filling without manual
control.
   (B)   “No Smoking” signs. A sign containing the words “Stop Your Motor — No
Smoking” shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at each pump island so that
it can be seen from either side of the island. Each sign shall have a white
background and red letters three inches in height. Service shall be refused and
the pump shut off when persons do not follow instructions.
   (C)   Shutoff switches and levers. Each pump island shall be equipped with a
manually operated shutoff switch or lever.
   (D)   Fire extinguishers. One CO2 extinguisher of at least the five pound
size shall be placed on each island. One CO2 extinguisher of at least the 15
pound size shall be located as required by the Fire Prevention Bureau. Du-Gas
extinguishers may be substituted for all CO2 extinguishers.
   (E)   First aid fire equipment. At least two water lines of at least one
inch size, properly equipped with adequate fixed fog nozzles, shall be provided
and so located that complete coverage of the entire premises can be had. Such
hose lines and nozzles shall be used for first aid fire equipment only.
   (F)   Electrical fixtures. All electrical fixtures within ten feet of any
pump or vent pipe shall be vapor or explosion proof and/or approved by the
National Board of Fire Underwriters or other testing laboratory approved by the
Fire Prevention Bureau.
   (G)   Telephone facilities. Telephone facilities shall be provided on the
premises. At least one telephone shall be provided at the control room or in
some other place readily accessible to the public and designated by a sign with
a white background and red letters three inches in height containing the words
“Emergency Telephone.” At no time during business hours shall any lock be
engaged on the telephone dialing system so that it shall be made inoperable.
Such emergency telephone shall not be a coin-operated instrument.
   (H)   Buildings; location near pumps. No building shall be located within 25
feet of any pump, unless such building is of noncombustible material.
   (I)   Control rooms; location; defined. Control rooms shall be centrally
located and elevated sufficiently to enable the operator to have a clear and
unobstructed view of all islands. CONTROL ROOM shall mean a room where electric
switches controlling the operation of the station and pumps are located.
   (J)   Attendants; number and duties. There shall be not less than one
attendant on duty whenever nine pumps or less are open to the public and not
less than two attendants on duty when more than nine pumps are available and
open to the public. All attendants shall be thoroughly instructed in the use of
extinguishers and water in case of fire and shall be instructed in prohibiting
and preventing patrons from smoking around the pumps. Service shall be refused
and the pumps shut off when any person does not follow instructions.
   (K)   Persons to be on duty. There shall be at least one person of the age
of 18 years or more on duty at all times during which the station is open to
the public.
   (L)   Open-flame devices and heaters. No open-flame device shall be located
or permitted within 25 feet of any pump, except that electric heaters may be
installed if the location is approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau. No heater
shall be installed less than two feet above the floor of any control room.
   (M)   Coin-operated gasoline dispensing machines. No coin-operated gasoline
dispensing machine shall be permitted on the premises.
   (N)   Storage of cleaning supplies. Mops or rags used for cleaning purposes
shall be stored, kept, or maintained at least 25 feet from any pump.
   (O)   Waste material containers. All waste materials and rubbish shall be
placed and kept in an all metal or metal-lined container equipped with a self-
closing top. All such waste materials and rubbish shall be kept in such
container until disposed of or removed from the premises.
   (P)   Spilled gasoline and oil. All gasoline or oil spilled on the premises
shall be cleaned up immediately.
('65 Code, § 8-7.09) (Ord. 720, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 202-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.115 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any gasoline
filling station or automobile service station in the city except as provided in
this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 8-7.10) (Ord. 475, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
SANDBLASTING
§ 150.140 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any sandblasting on the outside of
any building within the city without first having obtained a permit from the
Building Official. A separate permit shall be required for each separate job or
location at which such sandblasting is to be done.
('65 Code, § 8-12.01) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.141 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   An applicant for a permit shall first file an application therefor in
writing in the Community Development Department. The Building Official shall
prepare and furnish forms for that purpose. Each application shall state:
   (A)   The location of the job;
   (B)   The building or portion thereof to be sandblasted;
   (C)   The length of time it is estimated the job will take;
   (D)   The date when sandblasting work is to commence;
   (E)   The number of persons to be employed; and
   (F)   The type of equipment which will be used.
('65 Code, § 8-12.02) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed - - )
§ 150.142 PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   At the time of filing such application a permit fee shall be paid in
an amount established by Council resolution. The amount of the permit fee shall
be computed according to the number of days stated in such application as the
estimated length of time the job will take.
   (B)   In the event sandblasting work should be commenced by any person,
firm, or corporation before such permit is issued a penalty shall be charged as
established by Council resolution.
('65 Code, § 8-12.03) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - -
)
§ 150.143 INSURANCE.
   Prior to the issuance of a permit by the Building Official, the applicant
shall provide evidence of the insurance coverage required under the city's
insurance coverage standards as promulgated by the City Manager.
§ 150.144 NOTICE.
   Before the applicant shall commence any sandblasting work he shall give
three days notice in writing to all owners or occupants of buildings
immediately adjacent to the building on which the proposed work is to be done,
and the applicant shall submit evidence to the Building Official in a form
satisfactory to the Building Official that such three day notice has been
given; provided, however, where an immediately adjacent building is an
apartment building or other multiple-family building, and a manager is in
attendance, notice to such manager shall be considered as notice to all
occupants of such building.
('65 Code, § 8-12.05) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.145 RESTRICTIONS.
   The following restrictions shall apply to all sandblasting:
   (A)   Each sandblasting operation shall at all times be protected and
separated from any adjoining property in residential zones by canvas or other
suitable barriers sufficient to prevent splashing, or blowing of water or sand,
or both.
   (B)   No sandblasting machine shall be permitted to be operated before 8:00
a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. of any weekday, nor shall such machine be permitted on
a Sunday or legal holiday unless special permission has been granted by the
Building Official, in the interests of public convenience. On Sundays and legal
holidays no sandblasting machine shall be permitted to be operated before 10:00
a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. of such days.
   (C)   No dry sandblasting shall be permitted except by special permission of
the Building Official, and permission therefor shall be granted only in those
situations wherein wet sandblasting cannot be done due to peculiar
circumstances, and any application for dry sandblasting shall state therein
that permission is requested for dry sandblasting and the reasons why wet
sandblasting cannot be used.
   (D)   The Building Official is authorized to impose such other reasonable
precautionary regulations as he deems required to prevent damages to nearby
buildings or their contents, or to prevent dust or other particles from
polluting the air or becoming a public nuisance or menace to health.
('65 Code, § 8-12.06) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.146 OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS.
   If obstructions are to be placed in city streets or public places, all
provisions of the California Vehicle Code, Chapter 32 of the California
Building Code, and applicable provisions of this code shall be complied with.
('65 Code, § 8-12.07) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-
20-07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.147 CAUSE FOR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Noncompliance with any provision of this subchapter shall be cause for the
immediate revocation of any permit issued for sandblasting and the immediate
stoppage of sandblasting on any job. The Building Official shall have the power
to revoke such permit and order the stoppage of such work without previous
notice. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any such sandblasting after a
permit therefor has been revoked.
('65 Code, § 8-12.08) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.148 APPLICATION OF OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be deemed to exempt the applicant
or permittee from the provisions of any other requirements of this code, nor
from the payment of any other fees, or the obtaining of any other permits
required by this code.
('65 Code, § 8-12.09) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed - - )
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTORS
§ 150.160 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the construction and
installation of solar energy collectors while encouraging the construction and
installation of efficient solar energy systems at a reasonable cost and
establishes an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process to achieve
timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar
energy systems in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.5. This chapter is
designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing barriers, minimizing
costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property
owners to install solar energy systems.
   (B)   This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting
the public health and safety and to protect and promote the attractive
appearance of neighborhoods.
(‘65 Code, § 8-13.01) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 620-C.S., passed 9-
1-15)
§ 150.161 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING DEPARTMENT. The Building and Safety Division of the City of San
Gabriel.
   DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director for the City of San Gabriel, or
his or her designee.
   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of email for a submittal.
   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. All of the following:
      (1)   A solar energy system that is not larger than 10 kilowatts
alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.
      (2)   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire,
structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the
city and all State of California health and safety standards.
      (3)   A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex
family dwelling.
      (4)   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum
legal building height as defined by this code.
   SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR. Equipment constructed or installed on, or located
near the exterior of, any structure, as defined in §
153.003 of this title, for the purpose of collecting, storing, or transferring
solar energy.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary
purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar
energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.
      (2)   Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose
is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
electricity generation, space heating, space cooling, or water heating.
(‘65 Code, § 8-13.02) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 620-C.S., passed 9-
1-15)
§ 150.162 STANDARDS FOR GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTORS.
   Ground-mounted solar energy collectors shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
   (A)   Location. Ground-mounted solar energy collectors are permitted in all
zoning districts provided the solar energy collectors and their mounting
framework are located, installed, and maintained so as not to be visible from
any street or public thoroughfare. Visible ground-mounted solar energy
collectors are permitted in nonresidential zoning districts after review and
approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission in accordance
with §§
153.240 through
153.248. The Planning Commission shall find that adequate screening will be
provided.
   (B)   Height. The maximum height of a ground-mounted solar energy collector
system is 25 feet when located on a property not abutting a residential zone.
The maximum height of a ground-mounted solar energy collector system is 15 feet
when located on a property abutting a residential zone.
   (C)   Setbacks. Installations less than six feet in height may project up to
two feet into a required setback. Installations six feet or more in height
shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from all property lines.
(‘65 Code, § 8-13.03) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-
10-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.163 STANDARDS FOR ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTORS.
   In addition to all the other requirements set forth in this subchapter,
roof-mounted solar energy collectors shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
   (A)   Projections.
      (1)   Above height limit. Roof-mounted solar energy collectors may
project a maximum of three feet above the maximum height limit in the
underlying zoning district.
      (2)   Above roof surface. In the C-1, C-3 and M-1 Zones, the maximum
height of any collector panel from the roof surface is ten feet. In all other
zones, the maximum height of any collector panel from the roof surface is three
feet.
      (3)   Beyond roof edge. In no instance shall any part of the solar energy
collector extend beyond the edge of the roof
   (B)   Solar energy collectors shall have tubing covered or integrated with
opaque material. Glazing shall be tempered glass or material which is deemed by
the Building Inspector to be equivalent in quality. Solar energy collectors
that are visible from the street must be either composed of building-integrated
components (such as solar shingles) that are not readily evident, or be
designed and mounted to match the shape, proportions, and slope of the roof.
   (C)   No frame or extraneous fitting on the solar energy collector panel
shall extend more than four inches from the surface of the solar energy
collector panel.
   (D)   All plumbing and piping connections contiguous to the solar energy
collector panel or on an exterior wall of any structure shall be covered with
metal flashing. The color of the solar energy collector panel frame and
flashing shall be compatible with the color of the roof or wall of the
structure.
   (E)   All storage tanks, piping runs, and extraneous controls related to a
solar energy collector shall be installed below the roof line, wherever
possible, and shall not be visible from any street.
(‘65 Code, § 8-13.05) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-
10-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.164 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The owner of any property on which a solar energy collector will be
constructed or installed may apply to the Community Development Director for a
modification of, or exception from, any of the requirements of this subchapter
in accordance with §§
153.440 through
153.447. The Community Development Director may approve a modification or
exception if it finds that:
      (1)   The application of the requirement would create an undue hardship
for the property owner because of the size, shape, or location of the property
or any structure thereon; and
      (2)   The modification or exception will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare or to surrounding property values.
   (B)   In approving a modification or exception, the Community Development
Director may impose reasonable conditions, including, but not limited to, a
requirement that amenities be provided to compensate for the modification or
exception concerning any of the requirements of this subchapter.
(‘65 Code, § 8-13.06) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-
10-14)
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS
§ 150.165 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to the permitting of all small residential
rooftop solar energy systems in the city.
   (B)   Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or
permitted prior to the effective date of this subchapter are not subject to the
requirements of this subchapter unless physical modifications or alterations
are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small
rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine
operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit.
   (C)   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.
(Ord. 620-C.S., passed 9-1-15)
§ 150.166 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety
standards and requirements imposed by the city and the state.
   (B)   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and
for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be
certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing
and Mechanical Code.
   (C)   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.
(Ord. 620-C.S., passed 9-1-15)
§ 150.167 DUTIES OF THE BUILDING DIVISION AND BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   All documents required for the submission of a small residential
rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the city
website.
   (B)   Electronic submittal of the required application and documents via
email, the city’s website, or facsimile shall be made available to all small
residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.
   (C)   An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms,
applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.
   (D)   The Building Department shall develop and implement a standard plan
and checklist of all requirements for which small residential rooftop solar
energy systems shall be eligible for expedited review. The standard plan and
checklist shall substantially conform to the checklist and standard plans
contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting
Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.
   (E)   All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop
solar energy systems must comply with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65850.55 and 66015 and
Cal. Health & Safety Code § 17951.
(Ord. 620-C.S., passed 9-1-15)
§ 150.168 PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Building Department shall implement the following administrative,
nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential
rooftop solar energy system applications.
      (1)   Review of an application for a small residential rooftop solar
energy system shall be limited to the Building Official’s review of whether the
applicant meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements.
      (2)   For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy
system that meets the requirements of the city’s checklist and standard plan,
the Building Department shall issue a non-discretionary permit within a timely
manner of the filing of the application and payment of the permit fee.
      (3)   For solar installations on historic resources and/or buildings of
historic merit, as identified by the city, there shall be a review by the City
Preservation Architect to ensure that the solar system will not compromise the
historical integrity of said resource.
      (4)   If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy
system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all
deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation
required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant
for resubmission.
   (B)   The Director may require an applicant to apply for a site plan review
if the Director finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy
system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety.
The Director shall issue such a decision in writing within a timely manner of
an application meeting the requirements of the city’s checklist and standard
plan.
   (C)   The Director may not deny an application for the use permit unless the
Director makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record
that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon
public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily
mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact.
   (D)   Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate
the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible
cost.
   (E)   Approval of an application shall not be conditioned upon the approval
of an association, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 4080.
   (F)   Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building
Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for
expedited review.
   (G)   The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include
consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within a timely
manner of a request.
   (H)   If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a
subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of
this section.
(Ord. 620-C.S., passed 9-1-15)
SWIMMING POOL FENCING
§ 150.180 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS; FENCING.
   Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner,
purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, or licensee, upon which is situated a
swimming pool shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises upon which
such pool is located, and completely surrounding such pool, lot, or premises, a
fence or other solid structure not less than five feet in height with no
opening therein (other than doors or gates) larger than three square inches.
All gates or doors opening through such enclosures shall be equipped with a
self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep, and capable of keeping,
such door or gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use;
provided, however, the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and
forming any part of the enclosure required by the provisions of this section
need not be so equipped.
('65 Code, § 8-10.02) (Ord. 680, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.181 COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS; FINAL APPROVAL.
   All plans submitted to the city for swimming pools to be constructed shall
show compliance with the requirements of §
150.180, and final inspection and approval of all pools shall be withheld until
all requirements of such applicable section shall have been complied with.
('65 Code, § 8-10.04) (Ord. 680, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
WATER-EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.200 INTENT OF REQUIREMENTS.
   The intent of this subchapter is to:
   (A)   Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the
need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible.
   (B)   Establish a structure for designing, installing, and maintaining
water-efficient landscapes in new projects.
   (C)   Assist the Design Review Subcommittee in its consideration of new
projects.
('65 Code, § 7-9.01) (Ord. 414-C.S., passed 11-16-93)
§ 150.201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The Community Development Department of the city, unless
otherwise noted.
   DEVELOPER-INSTALLED. The landscaping installed at the time of initial
construction of a project, or installed by or at the direction of a person not
occupying or intending to occupy the dwelling unit.
   ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION PROJECT. A project where the site is intentionally
altered to establish a defined, indigenous, or historic ecosystem.
   HYDROZONE. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water
needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A
HYDROZONE may be irrigated or non-irrigated. For example, a naturalized area
planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once
established is a non-irrigated hydrozone.
   INFILTRATION RATE. The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a
depth of water per unit of time (inches per hour).
   LANDSCAPED AREA. The entire parcel area less the building footprint,
driveway, non-irrigated portions of parking lots, hardscapes such as decks,
patios and other nonporous areas. Water features are included in the
calculation of the landscaped area. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as
orchards or vegetable gardens, are not included.
   MULCH. Any material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, manure, or other
materials left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation.
   OVERSPRAY. The water which is delivered beyond the landscaped area, wetting
pavements, walks, structures, or other non-landscaped areas.
   RAIN SENSING DEVICE. A system which automatically shuts off the irrigation
system when it rains.
   RECREATIONAL AREAS. Areas of active play or recreation such as sports
fields, school yards, picnic grounds, golf courses, or other areas with intense
foot traffic, excluding recreational areas in multi-family residential units
required by the this code.
   REHABILITATED LANDSCAPE. Any relandscaping project which replaces existing
landscaped area that requires or is a component of a required permit, including
a grading permit, building permit or conditional use permit.
   RUNOFF. Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is
applied and flows from the area. For example, runoff may result from water that
is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or
where there is a severe slope.
   SOIL MOISTURE SENSING DEVICE. A device that measures the amount of water in
the soil.
   TURF. A single-bladed grass or sod.
('65 Code, § 7-9.02) (Ord. 414-C.S., passed 11-16-93)
§ 150.202 [RESERVED].
§ 150.203 EXISTING LANDSCAPES.
   (A)   Water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation leading to
excessive runoff, low head drainage, overspray, and other similar conditions
where water flows onto structures is prohibited.
   (B)   All landscape areas, whether installed pursuant to this subchapter or
not, shall be maintained in a healthful and sound condition. Irrigation systems
and their components shall be maintained in a fully functional manner
consistent with the originally approved design and the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (C)   Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water-efficiency. A regular
maintenance schedule should include, but not be limited to, checking, adjusting
and repairing irrigation equipment; resetting the automatic controller;
aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning;
and weeding in all landscaped areas.
('65 Code, § 7-9.04) (Ord. 414-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.204 MINOR DEVIATIONS.
   (A)   The Community Development Director, without public hearing, may grant
minor deviations from ordinance requirements limited to the following:
      (1)   Minor modifications to approved landscaping, irrigation or grading
plans which comply with the spirit and intent of this subchapter, including,
but not limited to, revising or substituting plant varieties, container sizes,
plant locations, irrigation specifications, hardscape components, berm heights,
berm locations, slope features, and the like; and
      (2)   Modifications of planting, installation and/or soil preparation
details.
   (B)   The Community Development Director's decision may be appealed to the
Planning Commission in writing within ten days after the decision of the
Director. Appeals shall be heard in the same manner as provided for in §
30.10 et seq., except that a public hearing shall not be required in granting a
minor deviation. The Director shall not approve more than one minor deviation
per project.
('65 Code, § 7-9.05) (Ord. 414-C.S., passed - - )
BUILDING CODE SECURITY REGULATIONS
§ 150.210 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to new construction and to
buildings or structures to which additions or alterations are made except as
specifically provided by this chapter. When additions or alterations made
within a 12-month period exceed 50% of the value of the existing buildings or
structures, such buildings or structures shall be made to conform to the
security requirements.
   (B)   Existing multiple-family dwelling units and commercial buildings
(multiple occupancy) which are converted to privately-owned units
(condominiums) shall comply with the provisions of § 50.222 and §
150.218, respectively.
   (C)   Any existing structure which converts from its original occupancy
group (i.e., office space to assembly hall), as designated in the Uniform
Building Code, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Any building as defined in the C.B.C. and Title 19 of the California
Code of Regulations, requiring special type releasing, latching, or locking
devices, other than described herein, shall be exempt from the provisions
hereof relating to locking devices of interior and/or exterior doors.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
§ 150.211 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design,
construction, quality of material, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance
of all buildings and structures within the city, as required in Section 14051
of the California Penal Code relating to building security.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99)
§ 150.212 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter certain terms are defined as follows:
   APPROVED. Certified as meeting the requirements of this chapter by the
enforcing authority or its authorized agents, or by other officials designated
by law to give approval on a particular matter dealt with by the provisions of
this chapter with regard to a given material, mode of construction, piece of
equipment, or device.
   AUXILIARY LOCKING DEVICE. A secondary locking system added to the primary
locking system to provide additional security.
   BOLT. A metal bar which, when actuated, is projected (or thrown) either
horizontally or vertically into a retaining member, such as a strike plate, to
prevent a door or window from moving or opening.
   BOLT PROJECTION OR BOLT THROW. The distance from the edge of the door, at
the bolt centerline, to the farthest point on the bolt in the projected
position.
   BURGLARY RESISTANT GLAZING. Those materials that are generally described as
5/16 inch security-laminated glass with .060 inch vinyl interlayer or ¼ inch
polycarbonate.
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A building or portion there of used for a purpose other
than dwelling.
   COMPONENT. As distinguished from a part, means a subassembly which combines
with other components to make up a total door or window assembly. For example,
the primary components of a door assembly include the door, lock, hinges, jamb/
wall, jamb/strike, and wall.
   CYLINDER. The subassembly of a lock containing the cylinder core, tumbler
mechanism, and keyway. A double-cylinder lock is one which has a key-actuated
cylinder on both the exterior and interior of the door.
   CYLINDER CORE OR CYLINDER PLUG. The central part of a cylinder containing
the keyway, which is rotated by a key to operate the lock mechanism.
   CYLINDER GUARD. Tapered or flush metal ring or plate surrounding the
otherwise exposed portion of a cylinder lock to resist cutting, drilling,
prying, pulling, or wrenching with common tools.
   DEADBOLT. A lock bolt which does not have a spring action as opposed to a
latch bolt, which does. The bolt must be actuated by a key or a key and a knob
or thumb turn and when projected becomes locked against return by end pressure.
   DEAD LATCH OR DEADLOCKING LATCH BOLT.  A spring-actuated latch bolt having a
beveled end and incorporating a plunger which, when depressed, automatically
locks the projected latch bolt against return by end pressure.
   DOOR ASSEMBLY. A unit composed of a group of parts or components which make
up a closure for an opening to control passageway through a wall. For the
purpose of this chapter, a door assembly consists of the following parts: door,
hinges, locking device or devices, operation contacts (such as handles, knobs,
push plates), miscellaneous hardware and closures; the frame, including the
head threshold and jambs, plus the anchorage devices to the surrounding wall
and a position of the surrounding wall extending 36 inches from each side of
the jambs and 16 inches above the head.
   DOOR STOP. The projection along the top and sides of a doorjamb which checks
the door's swinging action.
   DOUBLE CYLINDER DEADBOLT. A deadbolt lock, which can be actuated only by a
key on both the interior and exterior.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential
occupancy, including single-family and multiple-family dwellings.
   ENFORCING AUTHORITY. The building inspector.
   FLUSHPOINT. A manual key or turn operated metal bolt normally used on
inactive doors, and is attached to the top and bottom of the door and engages
in the head and threshold of the frame.
   FULLY TEMPERED GLASS. Those materials meeting or exceeding ANSI standard Z
97.1 - Safety Glazing.
   JAMB. That component of a door assembly to which a door is attached and
secured. The wall and jamb used together are considered a unit.
   JAMB/WALL. That component of a door assembly to which a door is attached and
secured. The wall and jamb used together are considered a unit.
   KEY-IN-KNOB. A lockset having the key cylinder and other lock mechanisms
contained in the knob.
   LATCH OR LATCH BOLT. A beveled, spring-actuated bolt, which may or may not
have a deadlocking device.
   LOCK OR LOCKSET. A keyed device (complete with cylinder, latch, or deadbolt
mechanism, and trim such as knobs, levers, thumb turns, escutcheons, etc.) for
securing a door in a closed position against forced entry. For the purpose of
this chapter, a lock does not include the strike plate.
   LOCKING DEVICE. A part of a window assembly, which is intended to prevent
movement of the movable sash, which may be the sash lock or sash operator.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed for
occupancy by two or more families living independently of each other, including
hotels, motels, apartments, duplexes, and townhomes.
   PANIC HARDWARE. A latching device on a door assembly for use when emergency
egress is required due to fire or other threat to life safety. These devices
are designed so that they will facilitate the safe egress of people in case of
an emergency when a pressure not to exceed 15 pounds is applied to the
releasing device in the direction of exit travel. Such releasing devices are
bars or panels extending not less than of the width of the door and placed at
heights suitable for the service required, not less than 30, nor more than 44
inches above the floor.
   PART. As distinguished from component, is a unit (or subassembly) which
combines with other units to make up a component.
   PRIMARY LOCKING DEVICE. The single locking system on a door or window unit
whose primary function is to prevent unauthorized intrusion.
   PRIVATE OR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed exclusively for
occupancy by one family.
   RAIL. The horizontal member of a window or door. A mating rail is one which
mates with a rail of another sash or a framing member of the door or window
frame when the sash is in the closed position.
   SASH. An assembly of stiles, rails, and sometimes mullions assembled into a
single frame, which supports the glazing material. A "fixed sash" is one, which
is not intended to be opened. A 'movable sash" is intended to be opened.
   SILL. The lowest horizontal member of a window frame.
   SINGLE CYLINDER DEADBOLT. A deadbolt lock, which is actuated from the
outside by a key and from the inside by a knob, thumb turn, lever, or similar
mechanism.
   SOLID-CORE DOOR. A door composed of solid wood or composed of compressed
wood equal in strength to solid wood construction.
   STILE. A vertical framing member of a window or door, or that mates with a
stile of another sash when the sash is in the closed position.
   STRIKE. A metal plate attached to or mortised into a door or doorjamb to
receive and to hold a projected latch bolt and/or deadbolt in order to secure
the door to the jamb.
   SWINGING DOOR. A door, hinged at the stile or at the head and threshold.
   THRESHOLD. A metal plate attached to the bottom doorjamb designed to prevent
passage of tools under the door, causing illegal entry when utilizing level-
handled hardware.
   WINDOW ASSEMBLY. The unit which includes a window and the anchorage between
the window and the wall.
   WINDOW FRAME. That part of a window which surrounds and supports the sashes
and is attached to the surrounding wall. The members include side jamb
(vertical), head jamb (upper, horizontal), sill, and mullions.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99)
§ 150.213 KEYING REQUIREMENTS.
   Upon occupancy by the owner or proprietor, each single unit in a tract or
commercial development, constructed under the same general plan, shall have
locks using combinations which are interchange-free (no two locks with the same
combination), from locks used in all other separate dwellings, proprietorships,
or similar distinct occupancies. Every applicant shall be required to provide
the enforcing authority with written confirmation of compliance with these
requirements.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99)
§ 150.214 FRAMES, JAMBS, STRIKES, AND HINGES.
   (A)   Installation and construction of frames, jambs, strikes, and hinges
shall be as follows:
      (1)   Door jambs shall be installed with solid backing in such a manner
that no void exists between the strike side of the jamb and the frame opening
for a vertical distance of six inches on each side of the strike.
      (2)   In wood framing, horizontal blocking shall be placed between studs
at door lock height for three stud spaces on each side of the door openings.
Trimmers shall be 2 full lengths from header to the floor with solid backing
against sole plates.
      (3)   Door stops on wooden jambs for in-swinging doors shall be of one
piece construction with the jamb. Jambs for all doors shall be constructed or
protected so as to prevent violation of the strike.
      (4)   The strike plate for deadbolts on all wood framed doors shall be
constructed of minimum 16 U.S. gauge steel, bronze, or brass, and secured to
the jamb by a minimum of two screws, which must penetrate at least two inches
into solid backing beyond the surface into which the strike is attached. All
strike plates shall be reinforced.
      (5)   Hinges for out-swinging doors shall be equipped with non-removable
hinge pins or a mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the
exterior by removing the hinge pins.
      (6)   Aluminum frame door jambs shall prohibit any interference from
window frame installation and improper locking embedment. Double door header
assemblies shall be of a one piece installation or by utilizing a non-removable
method.
      (7)   Metal door jambs shall be of a minimum 16 U.S. gauge.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99)
§ 150.215 WINDOW AND SLIDING GLASS DOORS.
   (A)   The following requirements must be met for glass doors, windows, and
sliding glass doors with locking devices:
      (1)   Testing standards. Except as otherwise specified in §
150.218 (Special Residential Building Provisions) and §
150.219 (Special Commercial Building Provisions), all operable exterior windows
and sliding glass doors shall comply with the tests as set forth in C.B.C.
Other door and locking devices shall conform to tests as set forth in C.B.C.
The C.B.C. is incorporated as presented, whether or hereafter amended, by
reference into this code as though fully set forth.
      (2)   Louvered windows shall not be used when any portion of the window
is less than 12 feet vertically or six feet horizontally from any accessible
surface or any adjoining roof, balcony, landing, stair tread, platform, or
similar structure.
      (3)   All windows that are accessible from any surface or any adjoining
roof, balcony, landing, stair tread, platform, or similar structure shall be
equipped with auxiliary locking devices and anti-lift devices acceptable to the
crime prevention office.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
§ 150.216 GARAGE-TYPE DOORS, ROLLING OVERHEAD, SOLID OVERHEAD, SWING, SLIDING,
OR ACCORDION.
   The garage-type doors, rolling overhead, solid overhead, swing, sliding, or
accordion, shall conform to the following standards:
   (A)   Wood doors shall have panels a minimum of inch in thickness, with the
locking hardware being attached to the support framing. Vertical support
framing members shall be spaced at 24 inches maximum, on center.
   (B)   Aluminum doors shall be a minimum thickness of .0215 inches and
riveted together a minimum of 18 inches on center along the outside seams.
There shall be a full-width horizontal beam attached to the main door
structure, which shall meet the pilot or pedestrian access, door framing within
three inches of the strike area of the pilot or pedestrian access door.
   (C)   Fiberglass doors shall have panels with a minimum density of six
ounces per square foot from the bottom of the door to a height of seven feet.
Panels above seven feet and panels in residential structures shall have a
density of not less than five ounces per square foot.
   (D)   Doors utilizing a cylinder lock shall have a minimum five pin tumbler
operation with the locking bar or bolt extending into the receiving guide a
minimum of one inch.
   (E)   Doors that exceed 16 feet in width shall have two lock receiving
points; or, if the door does not exceed 19 feet, a single bolt may be used if
placed in the center of the door with the locking point located either at the
floor or door frame header; or, torsion spring counter balance type hardware
may be used.
   (F)    Except in a residential building, doors secured by electrical
operation shall have a keyed-switch to open the door when in a closed position,
or by a signal-locking device (remote control).
   (G)    Doors with slide bolt assemblies shall have frames a minimum of .120
inches in thickness, with a minimum bolt diameter of ½ inch and protrude at
least 1½ inches into the receiving guide. A bolt diameter of inch may be used
in a residential building. The slide bolt shall be attached to the door with
non-removable bolts from the outside. Rivets shall not be used to attach slide
bolt assemblies.
   (H)   Except in a residential building, padlock(s) used with exterior-
mounted slide bolts shall have a hardened steel shackle locking both at heel
and toe and a minimum five pin tumbler operation with non-removable key when in
an unlocked position. Padlocks used with interior-mounted slide bolts shall
have a hardened steel shackle with a minimum four pin tumbler operation.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99)
§ 150.217 ADDITION TO THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE-SECURITY BARS, GRILLS, OR
SCREENS.
   (A)    Every person who owns, operates, or maintains any hotel, apartment
house, or dwelling on which security bars, grills, or screens exist, or are
hereinafter installed, shall install or modify the security bars, grills, or
screens so that the same are removable or can be opened from the inside of the
building without the need of a key, tool, or excessive force. When in the
removed or open position, the net unobstructed open area shall not be less than
that which would exist if such bars, grills, or screens were not in place. The
provisions of this section shall apply only to the exterior doors and one
window at least 5.7 square feet in size located in each bedroom or other room
utilized for sleeping purposes; or as set in the California Building Code;
Section 1029.2, exception.
   (B)   Any existing facilities not in conformity with the provisions hereof
shall be modified to conform to the requirements of this section within one
year following the effective date thereof.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587
C.S., passed 12-7-10)
§ 150.218 SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Except for vehicular access doors, all exterior swinging doors of any
residential building and attached and detached garages, including the door
leading from the garage area into the dwelling unit, shall be equipped as
follows:
      (1)   All wood doors shall be of solid-core construction with a minimum
thickness of 1¾ inches or with panels not less than 9/16 inch thick.
      (2)   A single or double door shall be equipped with an approved double
or single cylinder deadbolt lock. A double cylinder deadbolt lock shall not be
used unless it complies with the C.B.C.’s existing requirements. The bolt shall
have a minimum projection of one inch and be constructed so as to repel cutting
tool attack. The deadbolt shall have an embedment of at least ¾ inch into the
strike receiving the projected bolt. The cylinder shall have an approved
cylinder guard, a minimum of five pin tumblers, and shall be connected to the
inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at least ¼ inch in diameter.
All installation shall be done so that the performance of the locking device
will meet the intended anti-burglary requirements. A dual-locking mechanism
constructed so that both deadbolt and latch can be retracted by a single action
of the inside doorknob or lever may be substituted provided it meets all other
specifications for locking devices. Two-inch screws will be utilized on all
strike plates and all strike plates shall be reinforced.
      (3)   The inactive leaf of double doors shall be equipped with metal
flush bolts having a minimum embedment of one inch into the head and threshold
of the doorframe.
      (4)   Glazing on exterior doors or windows within 40 inches of any
locking mechanism installed on an exterior door shall be of fully tempered
glass or rated burglary-resistant glazing, except when double-cylinder deadbolt
locks are installed in compliance with the C.B.C.
      (5)   Except where clear vision panels are installed to allow visibility
through the front exterior door, excluding handicapped facilities, all front
exterior doors shall be equipped with a wide angle (180 degree) viewer, to be
mounted not higher than 58 inches from the threshold of said door.
         (a)   All handicapped facilities shall be equipped with an additional
door viewer not more than 44 inches from the bottom of the door.
   (B)   Street numbers and other identifying data shall be displayed as
follows:
      (1)   There shall be positioned at each entrance of a multiple-family
dwelling complex an illuminated diagrammatic representation of the complex
which shows the location of the viewer and the unit designations within the
complex. In addition, each individual unit within the complex shall display a
prominent identification number, not less than six inches in height, which is
easily visible to approaching vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   Buildings shall be numbered in such a manner and sequence to meet
with the approval of the enforcing authority, including the Police and Fire
Departments.
      (3)   Flag lots and driveways more than 40 feet shall display street
numbers in such a position that the number is easily visible to approaching
emergency vehicles.
      (4)   In multiple-family dwelling complexes, individual buildings shall
have their respective street number ranges and/or letters as the case may be,
prominently displayed in a manner that facilitates emergency vehicles. An 8½
in. x 11 in. map of the complex shall be furnished to the Police and Fire
Departments prior to completion of construction. The map shall include building
identification and unit identification.
   (C)   Exterior lighting for single-family dwellings shall be as follows:
      (1)   All exterior lighting devices shall be protected and maintained by
using vandalism and weather resistant covers and lenses.
      (2)   All exterior lighting shall be designed to turn on automatically,
either by motion sensor or photoelectric sensor.
   (D)   Lighting in multiple-family dwellings shall be as follows:
      (1)   Aisles, passageways, and recesses related to and within the
building complex shall be illuminated with intensity at least .25 foot-candles
at ground level during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be
protected and maintained by using weather resistant and vandalism resistant
covers and lenses.
      (2)   Open parking lots, exterior garage door areas, carports and access
thereto, shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one foot-candle of
light on the parking surface during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices
shall be protected and maintained by using weather and vandalism resistant
covers and lenses.
      (3)   All required lighting shall be designed to turn on automatically.
Luminaries shall be directed or shielded so as to not be directly visible from
a dwelling unit or cause off-site glare or nuisance.
      (4)   In dwellings/units where a common laundry is equipped, it shall be
constructed so that the interior is visible from the exterior. Lighting shall
be provided during the hours of darkness with a minimum of one internal
vandalism resistant fixture, which shall be connected to the lighting
circuitry.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 587
C.S., passed 12-7-10)
§ 150.219   SPECIAL COMMERCIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Swinging exterior glass doors, wood or metal doors with glass panels,
solid wood or metal doors shall be constructed or protected as follows:
      (1)   Wood doors shall be solid-core construction with a minimum
thickness of 1¾ inches. Wood panel doors with panels less than one inch thick
shall be covered on the inside with a minimum 16 U.S. gauge steel, or its
equivalent, which is to be attached with screws on minimum six-inch centers.
Hollow steel doors shall be of a minimum 16 U.S. gauge steel and have
sufficient reinforcement to maintain the designed thickness of the door when
any locking device is installed; such reinforcement being able to restrict
collapsing of the door around the locking device.
      (2)   Except when double cylinder deadbolts are utilized, any glazing
utilized within 40 inches of any door locking mechanism shall be constructed or
protected as follows:
         (a)   Fully tempered glass or rated burglary-resistant glazing;
         (b)   * Iron or steel grills of at least 1/8 inch material with a
minimum two-inch mesh secured on the inside of the glazing may be utilized; or
         (c)   * The glazing shall be covered with iron bars of at least ½ inch
round or 1 x ¼ inch flat steel material, spaced not more than five inches
apart, secured on the inside of the glazing.
   *Paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision shall not interfere with the
operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the
C.B.C.
   (B)   All swinging exterior wood and steel doors shall be equipped as
follows:
      (1)   A single or double door shall be equipped with an approved double
or single cylinder deadbolt. If a double-cylinder deadbolt is used, it shall
comply with the C.B.C.’s existing requirements. The bolt shall have a minimum
projection of one inch and be constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack.
The deadbolt shall have an embedment of at least ¾ inch into the strike
receiving the projected bolt. Two-inch screws shall be used on all strike
plates. All strike plates shall be reinforced. The cylinders shall have a
cylinder guard, a minimum of five pin tumblers, and shall be connected to the
inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at least ¼ inch in diameter.
The preceding provisions do not apply where:
         (a)   Panic hardware is required; or
         (b)   An equivalent device is approved by enforcing authority.
      (2)   Double doors shall be equipped as follows:
         (a)   The inactive leaf of double doors shall be equipped with metal
flush bolts having a minimum embedment of one inch into the head and threshold
of the doorframe.
         (b)   Double doors shall have an astragal construction of steel a
minimum . 125 inches thick, which will cover the opening between the doors. The
astragal shall be a minimum of two inches wide and extend a minimum of one inch
beyond the edge of the door to which it is attached. The astragal shall be
attached to the outside of the active door by means of welding or with non-
removable bolts spaced apart on not more than ten inch centers. The door to
which such astragal is attached must be determined by the fire safety codes
adopted by the city.
   (C)   Aluminum-frame swinging doors shall be equipped as follows:
      (1)   The jamb on all aluminum-frame swinging doors shall be so
constructed or protected to withstand 1,600 pounds of pressure in both a
vertical distance of three inches and a horizontal distance of one inch on each
side of the strike, so as to prevent violation of the strike.
      (2)   A single or double door shall be equipped with a double-cylinder
deadbolt with a bolt projection exceeding one inch, or a hook-shaped or
expanding dog bolt that engages the strike sufficiently to prevent spreading.
The deadbolt lock shall have a minimum of five pin tumblers and a cylinder
guard. All strike plates shall be reinforced.
   (D)   Panic hardware, whenever required by the C.B.C. or Title 19 of the
California Code of Regulations, shall be installed as follows:
      (1)   Panic hardware shall contain a minimum of two locking points on
each door; or
      (2)   On single doors, panic hardware may have one locking point, which
is not to be located at either the top or bottom rails of the doorframe. The
door shall have an astragal construction of steel .125 inches thick, which
shall be attached with non-removable bolts to the outside of the door. The
astragal shall extend a minimum of six inches vertically above and below the
latch of the panic hardware. The astragal shall be a minimum of two inches wide
and extend a minimum of one inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is
attached.
      (3)   Double doors containing panic hardware shall have an astragal
attached to the doors at their meeting point, which will close the opening
between them, but not interfere with the operation of either door.
   (E)   Horizontal sliding doors shall be equipped with a metal guide track at
the top and bottom and a cylinder lock and/or padlock with a hardened steel
shackle which locks at both heel and toe, and a minimum five pin tumbler
operation with non-removable key when in an unlocked position. The bottom track
shall be so designed that the door cannot be lifted from the track when the
door is in a locked position.
   (F)   In office buildings (multiple occupancy), all entrance doors to
individual office suites shall meet the construction and locking requirements
for exterior doors.
   (G)   Windows shall be deemed accessible if located less than 12 feet from
the ground. Accessible windows having a pane exceeding 96 square inches in an
area with the smallest dimension exceeding six inches and not visible from a
public or private thorough fare shall be protected in the following manner:
      (1)   Fully-tempered glass or burglary-resistant glazing; or
      (2)   The following window barriers may be used, but shall be secured
with non-removable bolts;
         (a)   Inside iron bars of at least ½ inch round or 1 x ¼ inch flat
steel material, spaced not more than five inches apart and securely fastened,
or
         (b)   Inside iron or steel grills of at least inch material with not
more than a two inch mesh and securely fastened.
      (3)   If a side or rear window is of the type that can be opened, it
shall, where applicable, be secured on the inside with either a slide bar,
bolt, crossbar, auxiliary locking device, and/or padlock with hardened steel
shackle, and a minimum four pin tumbler operation;
      (4)   The protective bars or grills shall not interfere with the
operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the
C.B.C., and shall be installed in a manner by which they are concealed during
normal business hours.
   (H)   All exterior transoms exceeding 96 square inches on the side and rear
of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be protected by
one of the following:
      (1)   Fully-tempered glass or rated burglary-resistant glazing;
      (2)   The following barriers may be used but shall be secured with non-
removable bolts:
         (a)   Inside iron bars of at least ½ inch round or 1x¼ inch flat steel
material, spaced no more than five inches apart and securely fastened, or
         (b)   Inside iron or steel grills of at least inch with not more than
a two inch mesh and securely fastened.
      (3)   The protective bars or grills shall not interfere with the
operation of opening the transoms if such transoms are required to be openable
by the California Building Code or Title 19 of the California Code of
Regulations.
   (I)   Roof openings shall be equipped as follows:
      (1)   All skylights on the roof of any building or premises used for
business purposes shall be provided with:
         (a)    Rated burglary-resistant glazing;
         (b)    Iron bars of at least ½ inch round or 1x¼ inch flat steel
material under the skylight and securely fastened; or
         (c)   A steel grill of at least inch material with a maximum two-inch
mesh under the skylight and securely fastened.
      (2)   All hatchway openings on the roof of any building or premises used
for business purposes shall be secured as follows:
         (a)   If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on
the inside with at least 16 U.S. gauge sheet metal, or its equivalent, attached
with screws;
         (b)   The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar
or slide bolt;
         (c)   Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with
non-removable pins when using pin-type hinges.
      (3)   All air duct or air vent openings exceeding 96 square inches on the
roof or exterior walls of any building or premises used for business purposes
shall be secured by covering the same with either of the following:
         (a)    Inside iron bars of at least ½ inch round or 1x¼ inch flat
steel material spaced no more than five inches apart and securely fastened; or
         (b)   Inside iron or steel grills of at least inch material with a
minimum two inch mesh and securely fastened.
      Air duct or air vent security measures must not interfere with venting
requirements creating a potentially hazardous condition to health and safety or
conflict with the provisions of the C.B.C. or Title 19 of the California Code
of Regulations.
   (J)   Permanently fixed ladders leading to roofs shall be fully enclosed
with sheet metal to a height of ten feet. This covering shall be locked against
the ladder with a case-hardened hasp, secured with non-removable pins when
using pin-type hinges. If a padlock is used, it shall have a hardened steel
shackle, locking at both heel and toe, and a minimum five pin tumbler operation
with non-removable key when in unlocked position.
   (K)   A building located within eight feet of utility poles or similar
structures, which can be used to gain access to the building's roof, windows,
or other openings, shall have such access area barricaded or fenced with
materials to deter human climbing.
   (L)   The following standards shall apply to lighting, address
identification, and parking areas:
      (1)   The address number of every commercial building shall be
illuminated during the hours of darkness so that it shall be easily visible
from the street. The numerals in these address numbers shall be no less than
six inches in height and be of a color contrasting to the background. If the
building is more than one story in height, address numbers should be no less
than ten inches in height, contrasting to the background. In addition, any
business that affords vehicular access to the rear through any driveway,
alleyways, or parking lot shall also display the same numbers on the rear of
the building.
      (2)   All exterior commercial doors, during the hours of darkness, shall
be illuminated with a minimum of one foot-candle of light. All exterior bulbs
shall be protected by weather and vandalism resistant cover(s).
      (3)   Open parking lots and access thereto, for use by the general
public, shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one foot candle of light
on the parking surface from dusk until one hour after the termination of the
business day.
      (4)   All required lighting shall be designed to turn on and off
automatically. Luminaries shall be directed or shielded so as not to be
directly visible from any dwelling unit or to cause off-site glare or nuisance.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
§ 150.220 ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any
material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter,
provided any such alternate has been approved by the enforcing authority, nor
is it the intention of this chapter to exclude any sound method of structural
design or analysis not specifically provided for in this chapter. Material,
methods of construction, or structural design limitations provided for in this
chapter, are to be used unless the enforcing authority grants an exception.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99)
§ 150.221 APPEALS.
   The provisions of §
150.002 of this code shall apply to interpretations and appeals regarding
building security regulations contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99)
§ 150.222   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The Building Official or his or her authorized representatives are empowered
and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter relating
to physical security requirements for building in the city. Plans and
specifications for proposed construction must be approved by the building
superintendent or his authorized representatives in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. No building permit is to be finally approved or
utility release given unless the applicant for the permit has satisfied to the
enforcing authority that the applicant has complied with this chapter.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99; Am. Ord. 575-C.S., passed 11-20-07)
§ 150.223 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, convert, or demolish, equip, use,
occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished for each offense.
(Ord. 501-C.S., passed 6-3-99)
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
§ 150.300 EXPEDITED ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITTING.
   Electric vehicle charging stations which quality for expedited permit
processing, pursuant to Gov’t Code § 65850.7, shall be subject to the
administrative permitting procedures set forth in the city’s expedited electric
vehicle charging station permitting ordinance.
(Ord. 708, passed 6-18-24)
CHAPTER 151: HOUSE TRAILERS
Section
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Parking
   
151.03   Occupancy
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any partnership, firm, company, corporation, tenant, owner, lessee,
permittee, or licensee or their agents, heirs, or assigns.
   TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure designed and constructed so as to permit
occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct
of any business, profession, occupation, or trade (or use as a selling or
advertising device), and so designed and constructed that it is or may be
mounted on wheels and propelled by its own, or drawn by other, motive power.
   TRAILER PARK. A parcel of land designed, intended, or maintained for the
purpose of supplying a location or accommodation for any trailer and upon which
any trailer is parked, and shall include all buildings used or intended for use
as part of the equipment of such trailer park, whether or not a charge is made
for the use of the trailer park and its facilities. TRAILER PARK shall not be
construed to include automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied
trailers are parked for the purposes of inspection and sale.
   TRAILER-UNIT. A section of ground in a trailer park designated as the
parking space for one trailer.
('65 Code, § 6-6.01) (Ord. 547, passed - - )
§ 151.02 PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall park any trailer on any street, alley, highway, or
other public place, or occupy any trailer on any tract of land, occupied or
unoccupied, or establish, operate, or maintain any trailer park except as
provided in this chapter and by the laws of the state.
   (B)   No trailer parked on any premises shall be occupied by any person for
more than 15 days in any calendar year unless such trailer shall have been
registered with the Motor Vehicle Department of the state for such calendar
year.
   (C)   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking shall be permitted on any
street, alley, or highway for not longer than 24 hours, subject, however, to
any other and further prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the
traffic and parking laws of the city governing the use of streets.
   (D)   No trailer shall be parked on any premises other than an approved
trailer park, and no person shall occupy any trailer parked on any premises
other than an approved trailer park.
   (E)   No trailer in a trailer park shall be parked within the required
unoccupied front yard of the zoning district in which such trailer park is
located, nor less than four feet from the side and rear boundary lines of the
premises on which located, nor less than ten feet from any building or other
trailer located on the same premises; provided, however, where an individual
and separate service building is provided for a trailer-unit and adjacent
thereto, an open space between such trailer and such individual service
building shall not be required.
('65 Code, § 6-6.02) (Ord. 547, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 549, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 32-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 151.03 OCCUPANCY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in, live in, or occupy as living
or sleeping quarters any tent, wagon, trailer, or vehicle upon any lot in the
city except in duly licensed sites as provided by the laws of the state.
('65 Code, § 6-6.03) (Ord. 547, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   General Plan conformance; time for or waiver of reports
   
152.02   Citation and authority
   
152.03   Definitions
   
152.04   Advisory agency
   
152.05   Parcel map procedures
   
152.06   Processing fees
   
152.07   Filing of tentative maps
   
152.08   Tentative map requirements
   
152.09   Variances
   
152.10   Public hearings
   
152.11   Expiration of tentative map approval
   
152.12   Failure to file parcel maps
   
152.13   Appeals
   
152.14   Waivers of direct access to streets
   
152.15   Conditions of approval of map
   
152.16   Dedications for minor land divisions and parcel maps
   
152.17   Method of dedicating
   
152.18   Record title interests on parcel maps
   
152.19   Evidence of title for parcel maps
   
152.20   Payment of fees required
   
152.21   Purpose
   
152.22   Improvement security
   
152.23   Soils reports
   
152.24   Final maps; monuments
   
152.25   Lot and block requirements and lot widths
   
152.26   Street and alley requirements
   
152.27   Public utility and other requirements
   
152.28   Street tree requirements
   
152.29   Expense of improvements
   
152.30   Final and record of survey maps; checking agency designated
   
152.31   Lot line adjustment
Vesting Tentative Maps
   
152.40   Citation and authority
   
152.41   Purpose
   
152.42   Consistency
   
152.43   Definitions
   
152.44   Application
   
152.45   Filing and processing procedures
   
152.46   Filing fees
   
152.47   Expiration of map approval
   
152.48   Vesting on approval of vesting tentative maps
   
152.49   Development inconsistent with zoning; conditional approval
   
152.50   Applications inconsistent with current policies
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 GENERAL PLAN CONFORMANCE; TIME FOR OR WAIVER OF REPORTS.
   (A)   A report as to conformity to the General Plan, which is required
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 65402 as the result of a proposed division of
land, may be included as part of and at the same time as the action taken by
the Advisory Agency on such division of land.
   (B)   Such report shall not be required for a proposed subdivision which
involves:
      (1)   The disposition of the remainder of a larger parcel which was
acquired and used in part for street purposes;
      (2)   Acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening; or
      (3)   Alignment projects, provided the Advisory Agency expressly finds
that any such disposition for street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions, or
abandonments for street widening, or alignment projects is of a minor nature.
('65 Code, § 9-2.01) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.02 CITATION AND AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act
of the state (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66140 et seq.) and may be cited as the
Subdivision Law of the City of San Gabriel.
('65 Code, § 9-2.02) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever any words or phrases as used in this chapter are not defined in
this chapter but are defined in the Subdivision Map Act of the state as last
amended, such definitions are incorporated in this chapter and shall be deemed
to apply as though set forth in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-2.03) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.04 ADVISORY AGENCY.
   The Planning Commission shall constitute the Advisory Agency for tentative
maps, parcel maps, and minor subdivision maps.
('65 Code, § 9-2.04) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.05 PARCEL MAP PROCEDURES.
   When a parcel map is required by this chapter, a tentative parcel map shall
first be filed with the Planning Commission. Such map shall meet all the
requirements for tentative maps provided by the Subdivision Map Act of the
state and this chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-2.05) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.06 PROCESSING FEES.
   (A)   Every person submitting a request for subdivision or other lot line
adjustment pursuant to this chapter shall pay a processing fee in an amount
established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution.
   (B)   If additional lots or acres are added before the processing of the map
is completed, the fee shall be increased in an amount established by the City
Council, from time to time, by resolution. If a revised map is substituted for
an approved or conditionally approved map, an additional fee equal to one-
fourth the original fee shall be paid for processing the revised map.
   (C)   A filing fee shall be required for all appeals from Planning
Commission decisions, and such filing fee shall be an amount established by
Council resolution.
('65 Code, § 9-2.06) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 250-C.S., passed - -
; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.07 FILING OF TENTATIVE MAPS.
   Tentative maps shall be filed with the secretary of the Planning Commission
and shall be processed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act of the state
and the provisions of this chapter. The subdivider shall file as many copies of
the tentative map as may be required by the Community Development Director.
('65 Code, § 9-2.07) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.08 TENTATIVE MAP REQUIREMENTS.
   Any tentative map of a minor subdivision, parcel map, or subdivision map
shall show:
   (A)   The tract number, if a subdivision as defined in the Subdivision Map
Act of the state;
   (B)   The date, north point, and scale;
   (C)   Sufficient legal description of land to define the boundaries of the
proposed division of land;
   (D)   A key map indicating the location of the proposed division of land in
relation to the surrounding area;
   (E)   The name and address of the record owner, the subdivider, and the
civil engineer or licensed surveyor under whose direction the map was prepared
including registration number of the engineer or surveyor;
   (F)   The existing topography of the land proposed to be divided using
contour intervals of not more than five feet, and of not more than two feet
where the grade of the land is less than 5%. The contours of adjacent land
shall also be shown wherever the surface features of such land affect the
design and/or improvement of the proposed division. The tentative map shall
contain a statement by the person preparing the map stating the source of
contours shown on the map;
   (G)   The approximate location and outline to scale of each building or
structure on the property proposed for division. Building or structures on
adjacent property shall also be shown if such buildings or structures affect
the design of the proposed subdivision. Each building shown shall be identified
by house number or other identifying feature, including a notation for each
building or structure to be retained;
   (H)   The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm
water overflow and the location, width, and direction of flow of each
watercourse;
   (I)   The approximate location of each area covered by trees with a
statement of the nature of the cover and the kind and approximate location of
all trees standing within the boundaries of proposed public rights-of-way;
   (J)   The location, width, approximate grade, and curb radii of all existing
and proposed streets and highways within and adjacent to the proposed
subdivision;
   (K)   The width, purpose, and approximate location of all existing and
proposed easements or rights-of-way, whether public or private, within and
adjacent to the proposed subdivision;
   (L)   The approximate radius and arc length of each center line curve;
   (M)   The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot
and of each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished
grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of
proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale, and
the number of each lot; the proposed areas for public use; and the angle of
intersecting streets or highways if such angle deviates from a right angle by
more than four degrees;
   (N)   The location of all cut and fill slopes or a separate grading plan;
   (O)   Each street shown by its actual street name or by a temporary name or
letter for purposes of identification until the proper name of such street is
determined;
   (P)   The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services
were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map;
   (Q)   (1)   A geologic soils report, prepared by a civil engineer who is
registered by the state, based upon adequate test borings or excavations,
unless the Community Development Department shall determine that, due to the
knowledge such Department has as to the soil qualities of the soil of such
subdivision or lot, no preliminary analysis is necessary. If the preliminary
soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil
problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, the person
filing the tentative map shall submit a soils investigation of each lot in the
subdivision prepared by a civil engineer who is registered in the state which
will recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage
to each dwelling proposed to be constructed on the expansive soil. The
Community Development Department shall approve the soils investigation if it
determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage
to each dwelling to be constructed and shall require that the approved
recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each dwelling as a
condition to the building permit.
      (2)   If the Community Development Director finds that a written
geological report is necessary to determine whether the property to be divided
is subject to an existing or potential geological hazard, the person filing the
tentative map shall submit such a report to the Community Development Director.
The report shall be prepared by a registered engineering geologist;
   (R)   (1)   The Community Development Director may require all proposed
dedications or offers of dedication to be made by deed.
      (2)   Such information may be furnished separately from the map itself.
      (3)   The Community Development Director may waive any of the foregoing
requirements whenever he finds that the type of subdivision is such that
compliance is unnecessary or that other circumstances justify the waiver. The
Community Development Director may require such drawings, data, or other
information as are deemed necessary; and
   (S)   The Planning Commission shall make investigations and reports on the
design and improvement of any proposed division of real property for which a
tentative map, parcel map, or minor subdivision map is filed, and shall have
the authority to impose requirements and conditions upon such division of land,
and to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove such map and division of
land. The Community Development Director shall advise and assist in making
investigations and reports on tentative maps.
('65 Code, § 9-2.08) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.09 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Some divisions of land create legal and technical problems which are
beyond the control of the landowner. When practical difficulties, unnecessary
hardships, or results inconsistent with the general purposes of the zoning
regulations or of this chapter occur through a strict interpretation of their
provisions, the Planning Commission may exempt such division of land from some
or all of the provisions of this chapter. Such divisions of land shall include,
but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The conveyance or transfer of land, or any interest therein, to the
United States, or any agency thereof, the state, county, a city, school
district, special district, or public utility;
      (2)   The division of a parcel of land to correct or make minor
adjustments in a boundary line between existing parcels provided the parcel
remaining after such division conforms in area to the zoning regulations; and
      (3)   The division of a parcel of land for the purpose of increasing the
size of parcels adjoining such parcel provided the parcel remaining after such
division conforms in area to the zoning regulations.
   (B)   The Planning Commission, in the exercise of sound, reasonable
judgment, may grant such variations as it determines warranted or required
because of the size, use, physical condition, or other conditions of the
property or the type of subdivision; provided, however, no variation may be
made to any requirement imposed by the Subdivision Map Act of the state.
('65 Code, § 9-2.09) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.10 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the tentative map,
and notice thereof shall be given as provided in Cal. Gov't Code § 66451.3 of
the Subdivision Map Act of the state and as provided in an application for a
variance from the zoning provisions set out in §§
153.260 through
153.269. Any interested person may appear at such a hearing and shall be heard.
('65 Code, § 9-2.10) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.11 EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAP APPROVAL.
   (A)   Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map
shall expire two years after the date the map was approved or conditionally
approved.
   (B)   Extensions. The person filing the tentative map may request an
extension of the tentative map approval or conditional approval by a written
application to the Community Development Director, such application to be filed
before the approval or conditional approval is due to expire. The application
shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. In granting an extension,
new conditions may be imposed, and existing conditions may be revised. A fee
shall be paid to the city upon the filing of each request for extension in an
amount established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution, for
the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings set
forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Time limits on extensions. An extension or extensions of tentative map
approval or conditional approval shall not exceed an aggregate of three years.
   (D)   Effect of map modifications on extensions. The modification of a
tentative map after approval or conditional approval shall not extend the time
limits imposed by this section.
   (E)   Expirations of tentative maps. Expiration and extensions of tentative
maps shall be further governed by the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 66452.6.
('65 Code, § 9-2.11) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 252-C.S., passed - -
; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.12 FAILURE TO FILE PARCEL MAPS.
   Failure to file a parcel map with the County Recorder within 90 days after
the approval or conditional approval of such map shall terminate all
proceedings. Any subdivision of the same land shall require the filing of a new
map.
('65 Code, § 9-2.12) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.13 APPEALS.
   (A)   The subdivider may appeal from any action of the Planning Commission
with respect to a tentative map to the Council as provided in Cal. Gov't Code §
66452.5. Such appeal and the hearing thereon shall be conducted in the manner
provided by Cal. Gov't Code § 66452.5(a) and (b) and the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Any interested person may appeal any decision of the Planning
Commission relative to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66473.5, 66474,
66474.1, and 66474.6 to the Council. Such appeals and the hearings thereon
shall be conducted in the manner provided by Cal. Gov't Code § 66452.5(d) and
(b) and the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-2.13) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.14 WAIVERS OF DIRECT ACCESS TO STREETS.
   The Advisory Agency may impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of
dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to such
street from any property shown on a final map as abutting thereon and that, if
the dedication is accepted, such waiver shall become effective in accordance
with the provisions of the waiver of direct access.
('65 Code, § 9-2.14) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.15 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL OF MAP.
   As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make
an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the
subdivision that are needed for streets, alleys, including access rights and
abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public
easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all
streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public
utility easements, and other public easements.
('65 Code, § 9-2.15) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.16 DEDICATIONS FOR MINOR LAND DIVISIONS AND PARCEL MAPS.
   Dedications or offers of dedication of real property for streets, highways,
and other public ways; access rights and abutter's rights; drainage and public
utility easements; building restriction rights; and other public easements may
be required for a minor land division or parcel map.
('65 Code, § 9-2.16) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.17 METHOD OF DEDICATING.
   If dedications or offers of dedication are required for a minor land
division or parcel map, they may be made either by certificate on the parcel
map or by separate instrument.
('65 Code, § 9-2.17) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.18 RECORD TITLE INTERESTS ON PARCEL MAPS.
   The signatures of all parties having any record title interest in the real
property being subdivided shall not be required on any final parcel map, unless
dedications or offers of dedication are made by certificate on the parcel map.
('65 Code, § 9-2.18) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.19 EVIDENCE OF TITLE FOR PARCEL MAPS.
   Evidence of title shall be submitted with all final parcel maps. This shall
show all fee interest holders, all interest holders whose interest could ripen
into a fee, all trust deeds, together with the name of the trustee, and all
easement holders.
('65 Code, § 9-2.19) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.20 PAYMENT OF FEES REQUIRED.
   Prior to the filing of any final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall
pay, or cause to be paid, any fees for defraying the actual or estimated costs
of constructing planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and
storm waters from local or neighborhood drainage areas or sanitary sewer
facilities for local sanitary sewer areas established pursuant to the
provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 66483.
('65 Code, § 9-2.20) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.21 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to make provisions for assessing and
collecting fees as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of
issuing a building permit for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated
costs of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares pursuant to the provisions
of Cal. Gov't Code § 66484.
('65 Code, § 9-2.21) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.22 IMPROVEMENT SECURITY.
   (A)   Required. Any improvement agreement, contract, or act required or
authorized by the Subdivision Map Act of the state for which security is
required shall be secured in the manner provided for in Cal. Gov't Code § 66499
of said Subdivision Map Act. ('65 Code, § 9-2.22)
   (B)   Amount.
      (1)   The improvement security shall be in the amount of 100% of the
total estimated cost of the improvement as set forth or authorized in Cal.
Gov't Code § 66499.3 of the Subdivision Map Act of the state. If the
improvement security is other than a bond or bonds furnished by duly authorized
corporate surety, an additional amount shall be included as determined by the
Council as necessary to cover the cost and reasonable expenses and fees,
including reasonable attorneys' fees, which may be incurred by the city in
successfully enforcing the obligation secured.
      (2)   The improvement security shall also secure the faithful performance
of any changes or alterations in the work to the extent that such changes or
alterations do not exceed 10% of the original estimated cost of the
improvement.
('65 Code, § 9-2.23)
   (C)   Release. The improvement security required by the provisions of this
chapter shall be released in the following manner:
      (1)   Security given for the faithful performance of any act or agreement
shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work,
subject to the provisions of division (C)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The Community Development Director may release a portion of the
security in conjunction with the acceptance of the performance of the act or
work as it progresses upon an application therefor by the subdivider; provided,
however, no such release shall be for an amount less than 10% of the total
improvement security given for the faithful performance of the act or work, and
the security shall not be reduced to an amount less than 50% of the total
improvement security given for faithful performance until the final completion
and acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the Community Development
Director authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce
such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of
the act or work and any other obligation imposed by this chapter, the
Subdivision Map Act of the state, or the improvement agreement.
      (3)   Security given to secure payment to the contractor, his
subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment may,
six months after the completion and acceptance of the act or work, be reduced
to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of which
notice has been given to the legislative body, plus an amount reasonably
determined by the Community Development Director to be required to assure the
performance of any other obligations secured thereby. The balance of the
security shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and
obligations for which the security was given.
      (4)   No security given for the guaranty or warranty of work shall be
released until the expiration of the period thereof. ('65 Code, § 9-2.24)
(Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.23 SOILS REPORTS.
   (A)   A preliminary soils report, prepared by a civil engineer registered in
the state and based upon adequate test borings, shall be submitted to the
Community Development Director for every subdivision.
   (B)   A preliminary soils report may be waived by the Community Development
Director providing the Community Development Director finds that, due to the
knowledge the city has as to the soils qualities of the soils in the
subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary.
   (C)   (1)   If the city has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils report
indicates, the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems
which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils
investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the Community
Development Director. Such soils investigation shall be done by a civil
engineer registered in the state, who shall recommend the corrective action
which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be
constructed in the area where such soils problem exists.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may approve the subdivision or portion
thereof, where such soils problems exist if the Planning Commission determines
that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each
structure to be constructed, and a condition to the issuance of any building
permit may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the
construction of each structure.
('65 Code, § 9-2.25) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.24 FINAL MAPS; MONUMENTS.
   (A)   At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or
surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards
described in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 8771 so that another engineer or surveyor
may readily retrace the survey.
   (B)   All monuments necessary to establish the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision and the center lines of streets and alleys in the subdivision shall
be set or referenced prior to the recordation of the final map.
('65 Code, § 9-2.26) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.25 LOT AND BLOCK REQUIREMENTS AND LOT WIDTHS.
   The lot and block design shall be satisfactory to the Planning Commission as
to standards set forth in this chapter, and the size of lots shall conform to
the requirements of the zoning regulations of the city. Every lot hereafter
created, established, or altered in Zones R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 shall have a
width of not less than 50 feet at the front setback line.
('65 Code, § 9-2.27) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.26 STREET AND ALLEY REQUIREMENTS.
   The width, grade, and location of streets and alleys shall conform with
other established or dedicated streets and alleys and with the Master Plan of
Highways of the county or of the city.
('65 Code, § 9-2.28) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.27 PUBLIC UTILITY AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   Public utilities, fire hydrants, sewers, drainageways, and easements shall
be properly located and provided.
('65 Code, § 9-2.29) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.28 STREET TREE REQUIREMENTS.
   Street trees shall be located wherever required by the Community Development
Department and shall be of a type approved by the Community Development
Director.
('65 Code, § 9-2.30) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.29 EXPENSE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   All sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pavement, street lights, drainage structures,
sanitary sewers, public utilities, and laterals to the property line shall be
constructed at the expense of the subdivider and according to the plans,
profiles, and specifications approved by the Community Development Director.
('65 Code, § 9-2.31) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 152.30 FINAL AND RECORD OF SURVEY MAPS; CHECKING AGENCY DESIGNATED.
   The County Surveyor is hereby designated as the agency for checking all
final subdivision maps and record of survey maps as to their compliance with
the Subdivision Map Act of the state and the provisions of this chapter. Such
checking shall be completed prior to the submission of each such map to the
Council for final approval. Adequate, permanent survey monuments, located and
established to the satisfaction of the County Surveyor, shall be shown on each
such map.
('65 Code, § 9-2.32) (Ord. 168-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.31 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.
   A lot line adjustment is an adjustment between four or fewer adjoining
parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel
and where no additional parcels are created. Lot line adjustments may be used
to merge four or fewer adjoining lots into a fewer number of lots. Except as
otherwise specified in this Chapter 152, a lot line adjustment shall conform to
the provisions of this section and shall be processed as provided for herein.
   (A)   An application for a lot line adjustment shall be filed with the
Community Development Department. Such application shall include:
      (1)   Proof that the lots involved have been legally created;
      (2)   A plot plan indicating existing lot dimensions and the location of
existing structures, utilities, infrastructure and easements;
      (3)   Deeds suitable for recording showing the proposed new lot
configurations and if required by Business and Professions Code section 8762, a
record of survey;
      (4)   Any other information necessary to determine whether the proposed
adjustment will conform with zoning and building codes; and
      (5)   A fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City
Council for the purpose of defraying costs to process the request.
   (B)   The Community Development Director shall act upon the lot line
adjustment application within 60 days from the date that the environmental
documentation is completed or the determination is made that the project is
exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act.
   (C)   The Director shall approve or conditionally approve the application in
writing after investigation and receipt of reports from other departments, if
it is found that the proposed lot line adjustment conforms to all of the
following requirements:
      (1)   Does not create an additional lot;
      (2)   The resulting parcels conform to the City's General Plan, Zoning
and Building Codes;
      (3)   Does not cut off any lot from frontage on a public street or alley;
      (4)   Does not cut off any lot from access to a public utility or
easement, or create a need or a new utility or easement, other than relocation
of existing utilities or easements;
      (5)   Does not cause the need for a new or extended public street or
easement other than relocation of an existing street easement;
      (6)   Does not cause the need for any new infrastructure, other than the
relocation of existing infrastructure;
      (7)   Does not cause an existing building or structure located on the
parcels to be in violation of the City's General Plan, Zoning or Building
Codes;
      (8)   Complies with requirements as to area, easements, utilities,
improvement, design, floodwater drainage, sanitary disposal facilities and
water supply availability.
   (D)   If the Director approves or conditionally approves the lot line
adjustment, the Director shall so certify the deed and the City Engineer shall
issue a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance,
both of which shall be filed with the County Recorder's office after the appeal
period has expired.
   (E)   Appeals shall be made to the City Council in accordance with the
provisions set forth in §
153.004.
(Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
§ 152.40 CITATION AND AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Cal. Gov't
Code Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 4.5, commencing with § 66498.1 (referred to
in this chapter as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute) and may be cited as the
Vesting Tentative Map Law.
('65 Code, § 9-4.101) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.41 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to establish the procedures
necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute and to
supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state and the
subdivision provisions. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this
subchapter, the subdivision provisions set forth in
Chapter 152 of this title shall apply to the Vesting Tentative Map Law.
   (B)   To accomplish this purpose, the regulations set forth in this
subchapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public
health, safety, and general welfare and for the promotion of orderly growth and
development.
('65 Code, § 9-4.102) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.42 CONSISTENCY.
   No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative
map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the General Plan and any
applicable Specific Plan or not permitted by the zoning provisions or other
applicable provisions of this code.
('65 Code, § 9-4.103) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.43 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, VESTING TENTATIVE MAP shall mean a
“tentative map” for a residential subdivision, as such term is used in §§
152.07 through
152.09 of this title, which map shall have printed conspicuously on its face
the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed in accordance with §
152.08 of this title and is thereafter processed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   All other definitions set forth in
Chapter 152 of this title relating to subdivisions shall be applicable.
('65 Code, § 9-4.104) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.44 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act of the state, as
implemented and supplemented by the subdivision provisions set forth in
Chapter 152 of this title, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative
parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead
be filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting
Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a
prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for
construction, or work preparatory to construction.
('65 Code, § 9-4.105) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.45 FILING AND PROCESSING PROCEDURES.
   A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, and have the same
contents, accompanying data, and reports, and shall be processed in the same
manner as set forth in
Chapter 152 of this title for a tentative map, except as follows:
   (A)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed
conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”
   (B)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, a subdivider shall also
supply the following information:
      (1)   Complete architectural and building plans as required by the
Community Development Department when filing for a building permit;
      (2)   Plans for sewer, water, storm drain, and street improvements,
including engineering studies, to confirm the adequacy of the proposed
improvements;
      (3)   Information of the uses to which the building will be put;
      (4)   Detailed grading plans;
      (5)   Plans and studies for street lighting and traffic control devices;
      (6)   Flood control information; and
      (7)   Any other information or studies required by the Community
Development Director.
('65 Code, § 9-4.201) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.46 FILING FEES.
   Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees
required by §
152.07 of this title.
('65 Code, § 9-4.202) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.47 EXPIRATION OF MAP APPROVAL.
   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire
at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same
extensions, established by §
152.12 of this title.
('65 Code, § 9-4.203) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.48 VESTING ON APPROVAL OF VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS.
   (A)   (1)   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map
shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial
compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Cal. Gov't
Code § 66474.2.
      (2)   However, if said Cal. Gov't Code § 66474.2 is repealed, the
approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a
vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the
ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative
map is approved or conditionally approved.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this section, a
permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied
if any of the following is determined:
      (1)   That a failure to do so would place the residents of the
subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to
their health or safety, or both; or
      (2)   That the condition or denial is required in order to comply with
state or federal laws.
   (C)   The rights referred to in this section shall expire if a final map is
not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided
in §
152.47 of this subchapter. If the final map is approved, such rights shall last
for the following periods of time:
      (1)   An initial time period of two years. Where several final maps are
recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative
map, such initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for
that phase is recorded;
      (2)   The initial time period set forth in division (C)(1) of this
section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a
complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review
if such processing exceeds 30 days after the date a complete application is
filed;
      (3)   A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before
the initial time period set forth in division (C)(1) of this section expires.
If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal such denial to the
Council within 15 days; and
      (4)   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building
permit during the periods of time specified in divisions (C)(1) and (3) of this
section, the rights referred to in this section shall continue until the
expiration of such permit or any extension of such permit.
('65 Code, § 9-4.301) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.49 DEVELOPMENT INCONSISTENT WITH ZONING; CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.
   (A)   Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision
whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning provisions in
existence at such time, such inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city
may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the
subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the
zoning provisions to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning
provisions is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting
tentative map, notwithstanding §
152.48(A), shall confer the vested right to proceed with the development in
substantial compliance with a change in the zoning provisions and the map as
approved.
   (B)   The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set
forth in §
152.48(C).
('65 Code, § 9-4.302) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
§ 152.50 APPLICATIONS INCONSISTENT WITH CURRENT POLICIES.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his or
her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from
the ordinances, policies, and standards described in §
152.48(A) and in §
152.49, and local agencies may grant such approvals or issue such permits to
the extent the departures are authorized under applicable laws.
('65 Code, §9-4.303) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed - - )
CHAPTER 153: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Adoption of zoning code; purpose
   
153.003   Definitions
   
153.004   Decisions, appeals, notices
   
153.005   Violations
Establishment of Zones
   
153.015   Zones established
   
153.016   Map
   
153.017   Classification of zones
   
153.018   Boundaries of zones; uncertainties
   
153.019   Classification of annexed territory
   
153.020   Use of buildings and land in established zones
Single-Family Residence Zones (R-1)
   
153.030   Intent and purpose
   
153.031   Uses permitted
   
153.032   Uses permitted by a conditional use permit
   
153.033   Minimum site area
   
153.034   Minimum lot width
   
153.035   Maximum height limit
   
153.036   Minimum dwelling width
   
153.037   Front yards
   
153.038   Side yards; single story
   
153.039   Rear yards
   
153.040   Second story massing
   
153.041   Distances between buildings
   
153.042   Lot coverage
   
153.043   Floor area ratio; second story
   
153.044   Floor area; second story
   
153.045   Minimum floor area; dwelling unit
   
153.046   Architecture
   
153.047   Accessory dwelling units (ADU) and junior accessory dwelling units
(Junior ADU)
   
153.048   Urban dwelling units and urban lot splits
   
153.049   Garage space required
   
153.050   Selected uses permitted by a conditional use permit; limitations and
development standards
   
153.051   Sleeping quarters air space requirements
Limited Two-Family Residence Zones (R-1A)
   
153.055   Uses permitted
   
153.056   Height limit
   
153.057   Site area
   
153.058   Front yards
   
153.059   Side yards; single story
   
153.060   Side yards; second story
   
153.061   Rear yards
   
153.062   Distances between buildings
   
153.063   Lot coverage
   
153.064   Floor area ratio; second story
   
153.065   Floor area; second story
   
153.066   Architectural design
   
153.067   Additional garage space required
Low Density Multiple-Family Residence Zones (R-2)
   
153.079   Purpose
   
153.080   Uses permitted
   
153.081   Height limit
   
153.082   Site area
   
153.083   Front yards
   
153.084   Side yards
   
153.085   Rear yards
   
153.086   Distances between buildings
   
153.087   Minimum size of dwelling units
   
153.088   [Reserved]
   
153.089   Open space/recreational areas required
   
153.090   Acoustical analysis
   
153.091   Single-family structure in R-2 zone
Multiple-Family Residence Zones (R-3)
   
153.099   Purpose
   
153.100   Uses permitted
   
153.101   Height limit
   
153.102   Site area
   
153.103   Front yards
   
153.104   Side yards
   
153.105   Rear yards
   
153.106   Distances between buildings
   
153.107   Minimum size of dwelling units
   
153.108   Apartment buildings; elevators
   
153.109   [Reserved]
   
153.110   Acoustical analysis
Multi-Family Recreational Areas
   
153.115   Open space/recreational areas required
   
153.116   [Reserved]
   
153.117   Development standards
General District Requirements
   
153.125   Building sites
   
153.126   Accessory buildings and structures
   
153.127   Fences and walls in residential zones
   
153.128   Ornamental screening walls
   
153.129   Swimming pools
   
153.130   Dismantling, parking, repairing, and storage in residential zones
   
153.131   Garbage and rubbish and collection areas
   
153.132   Stormwater runoff
   
153.133   Other applicable regulations
   
153.134   Objective design standards for multi-family and mixed-use projects
Open Space and Public Facilities District
   
153.140   Creation
   
153.141   Intent
   
153.142   Permitted uses
Commercial and Industrial Zones (C-1, C-3, and M-1)
   
153.150   Intent and purpose
   
153.151   Use regulations
   
153.152   Performance standards
   
153.153   Business license required
   
153.154   Precise plan of design required
   
153.155   Development standards
   
153.156   Permitted projections into setback areas
   
153.157   Exceptions to height limit
   
153.158   Fences, walls, and hedges
   
153.159   Outdoor storage and display
   
153.160   Landscape
   
153.161   Restrictions on divisions of space/indoor swap meets
   
153.162   Special conditions for specific land uses
   
153.163   Vending carts
   
153.164   Mixed use in the C-1 and C-3 zone districts
   
153.165   Other applicable regulations
   
153.166   Trash/recycling facilities required
   
153.167   Supplemental development standards
Automobile Parking as a Conditional Use in Non-Commercial Zones
   
153.170   Intent and purpose
   
153.171   Permitted uses
   
153.172   Precise plan of design required
   
153.173   Locational requirements
   
153.174   Development standards
Off-Street Parking
   
153.220   Number of parking spaces required
   
153.221   Access requirements; residential
   
153.222   Access requirements; commercial and industrial
   
153.223   Development plans and standards
   
153.224   Development specifications
   
153.225   Nonresidential parking spaces; location
   
153.226   Parking lot landscape and screening
   
153.227   Special parking districts
   
153.228   Valet parking
   
153.229   Bicycle parking
Conditional Uses Permits
   
153.240   Authorized
   
153.241   Application; fee
   
153.242   Massage establishment requirements
   
153.243   Notice of hearing
   
153.244   Application investigation
   
153.245   Public hearing
   
153.246   Granting or denial of permit - Findings
   
153.247   Appeal of decision
   
153.248   Assignment; prosecution of work; voiding
Variances
   
153.260   Authorization
   
153.261   Findings
   
153.262   Application; fees
   
153.263   Supplementary information
   
153.264   Notice of hearing
   
153.265   Application investigation
   
153.266   Public hearing
   
153.267   Granting or denial of permit
   
153.268   Appeal of decision
   
153.269   Assignment; prosecution of work; voiding
Planned Development Overlay Zone (P-D)
   
153.280   Created; designated
   
153.281   Area
   
153.282   Purpose
   
153.283   Use permitted
   
153.284   Provisional plans
   
153.285   Procedure
   
153.286   Precise plan
Valley Boulevard Specific Plan
   
153.290   Valley Boulevard Specific Plan created
Mission District Specific Plan
   
153.300   Mission District Specific Plan created
Medical Facilities Zone (MF)
   
153.310   Medical facilities zone created
   
153.311   Nonconforming uses
   
153.312   Permitted uses
   
153.313   Height limit
   
153.314   Site area
   
153.315   Building area
   
153.316   Setback distances
   
153.317   Automobile parking spaces and garages
   
153.318   Open space
Signs
   
153.320   Purpose
   
153.321   General policies
   
153.322   Definitions
   
153.323   Permit procedures
   
153.324   Signs permitted in residential zones
   
153.325   Signs permitted in the C-1, C-3, and M-1 Zones
   
153.326   General requirements and limitations
   
153.327   Exempt signs
   
153.328   Prohibited signs
   
153.329   Maintenance of signs
   
153.330   Abatement of pre-existing illegal and/or abandoned signs
   
153.331   Abatement of signs in general
   
153.332   Extension of time from amortization period
   
153.333   Signs of special significance
   
153.334   City Council permit for public street banners
Design Review
   
153.350   Purposes
   
153.351   Design Review Commission established
   
153.352   Applicability
   
153.353   Application for precise plan of design or site plan review
   
153.354   Action on application
   
153.355   Evaluation criteria
   
153.356   Time limit
   
153.357   Minor revision
   
153.358   Notice of hearing
Application Review
   
153.365   Purposes
   
153.366   Application review
   
153.367   Pre-application review
Commercially Utilized Condominiums
   
153.380   Definition
   
153.381   Requirements for commercial condominium projects
   
153.382   Application fee
   
153.383   Processing procedure
Trip Reduction and Travel Demand Measures
   
153.400   Definitions
   
153.401   Review of transit impacts
   
153.402   Transportation demand and trip reduction measures
   
153.403   Monitoring
   
153.404   Enforcement
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
   
153.420   Definitions
   
153.421   Continuation of nonconforming uses
   
153.422   Continuation of nonconforming structures
   
153.423   Continuation of nonconforming lots
   
153.424   Notification of termination and appeal
   
153.425   Request for relief
   
153.426   Enforcement
   
153.427   Amortization and discontinuance of nonconforming massage
establishments
Minor Modifications
   
153.440   Minor modifications–authority to approve
   
153.441   Applications; fees
   
153.442   Hearing; notice
   
153.443   Investigation of applications
   
153.444   Appeals from decision of Director
   
153.445   Decision on modification to be final prior to issuance of permit
   
153.446   Voiding of modification
   
153.447   Extension of time
Density Bonus
   
153.450   Purpose
   
153.451   Definitions
   
153.452   General provisions
   
153.453   Density bonus
   
153.454   Incentives and concessions
   
153.455   Development Standards
   
153.456   Affordable housing agreement
   
153.457   Location/quality of below market rate units
   
153.458   Parking standards
   
153.459   Condominium conversions
   
153.460   Appeals
   
153.461   Application of CEQA
Amendments
   
153.470   Authorization
   
153.471   Filing of applications
   
153.472   Fee
   
153.473   Commission recommendations
   
153.474   Council decisions
   
153.475   General Plan
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.480   Enforcement by the Community Development Director
   
153.481   Enforcement by administrative officers
   
153.482   Enforcement by police officers
   
153.483   Violations; declaration of nuisance; abatement
   
153.484   Reasonable accommodationpurpose
   
153.485   Sameapplicability
   
153.486   Sameadministration
   
153.487   Samereview and determination
   
153.488   Samerequired findings
   
153.489   Same–conditions of approval
   
153.490   Same–appeals
Wireless Telecommunications Equipment
   
153.500   Definitions
   
153.501   Purpose for regulations
   
153.502   Residential zones
   
153.503   Commercial/manufacturing zones
   
153.504   Conditions for issuance of conditional use permit
   
153.505   School properties
   
153.506   Public property and rights-of-way
Cannabis Prohibition and Personal Cultivation Regulations
   
153.515   Purpose
   
153.516   Definitions
   
153.517   Prohibition
   
153.518   Medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer
   
153.519   Personal cultivation regulations
   
153.520   Violation
   
153.521   Violation–misdemeanor
   
153.522   Public nuisance
   
153.523   Civil penalties
Landscape
   
153.530   Definitions
   
153.531   Purpose
   
153.532   Applicability
   
153.533   Landscape and irrigation plans
   
153.534   Landscape design principles
   
153.535   Areas to be landscaped
   
153.536   Materials
   
153.537   Irrigation specifications
   
153.538   Installation and completion
   
153.539   Maintenance
Historic Preservation and Cultural Resources
   
153.600   Title
   
153.601   Enabling authority
   
153.602   Purpose
   
153.603   Definitions
   
153.604   Historic Preservation and Cultural Resource Commission
   
153.605   San Gabriel Inventory of Cultural Resources
   
153.606   San Gabriel Register of Cultural Resources
   
153.607   Designation criteria for historic landmarks
   
153.608   Designation criteria for historic districts
   
153.609   Designation procedures–historic landmarks
   
153.610   Designation procedures–historic districts
   
153.611   Conservation overlay zones–criteria and procedures
   
153.612   Amendment or rescission of designation
   
153.613   Duty to maintain designated cultural resources
   
153.614   Initial review–requirement
   
153.615   Initial review, administrative clearance for minor
alterations–procedures
   
153.616   Initial review, administrative clearance for minor
alterations–findings
   
153.617   Initial review by Commission, major alterations–procedures
   
153.618   Initial review by Commission, major alterations–findings
   
153.619   San Gabriel Inventory and initial review–requirement
   
153.620   Relocation of designated cultural resources
   
153.621   Certificate of demolition
   
153.622   Work hold pending designation
   
153.623   Certificate of economic hardship
   
153.624   Unsafe or dangerous conditions
   
153.625   Environmental review
   
153.626   Appeals
   
153.627   Preservation incentives
   
153.628   Application filing fees
   
153.629   Enforcement and penalties
   
153.630   Identification, documentation, and management of archaeological and
Native American resources
   
153.631   Severability of provisions
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Zoning Code of the city.
('65 Code, § 9-3.101) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.002 ADOPTION OF ZONING CODE; PURPOSE.
   To provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly
planned use of land resources and to conserve and promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare, there is hereby adopted and established a Zoning
Code for the city.
('65 Code, § 9-3.102) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY. A building or use which is subordinate to the main building or
use and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the main building
or use on the same lot.  ('65 Code, § 9-3.202) (Ord. 556, passed - -)
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A constructed (detached or attached) or
converted permanent living unit which provides complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same parcel upon which
the primary single-family residence is situated. ADU shall include an
efficiency unit, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17958.1, and a
manufactured home, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 18007.
   ADULT ORIENTED MERCHANDISE. Merchandise such as books, videos, toys,
contraception, lotions and sprays characterized by an emphasis on matter used
for, depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or male/
female anatomical parts as detailed in §121.01. (Ord. 520-C.S., passed 11-4-03)
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-
half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage
purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances. ('65 Code, § 9-3.203) (Ord. 955, passed - - )
   AUTOMOBILE LUBE AND TUNE FACILITY. An establishment that provides minor
maintenance services for automobile engines and brake systems. Such businesses
are characterized by short service visits. Overnight outdoor parking or storage
of automobiles being serviced is prohibited. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.203.2) (Ord. 455-
C.S., passed 11-21-95)
   BEDROOM. A room that is at least 70 square feet in size, contains a closet,
and is capable of being used for sleeping purposes, but is not designated as a
kitchen, dining room, living room, family room, bathroom, or den.
   BLOCK. One side of a street between two intersecting streets or between an
intersecting street and the end of a street. ('65 Code, § 9-3.204) (Ord. 556,
passed - - )
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building, or portion thereof, which is used to
accommodate, for compensation, not more than five boarders and/or roomers in
addition to the members of the occupant's immediate family occupying such
building. ('65 Code, § 9-3.205) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   BUILDING or STRUCTURE. A structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls and shall include all forms of vehicles permanently located. The word
BUILDING shall include the word STRUCTURE. ('65 Code, § 9-3.207) (Ord. 556,
passed - - )
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average (mean)
natural grade of the lot, including semi-subterranean garages, to the highest
point of the structure, exclusive of chimneys and ventilators. BUILDING HEIGHT
for subterranean garages is the vertical distance measured from top of curb at
the right-of-way line to the highest point of the structure as shown in the
illustration. In cases of ambiguity and for unique architectural elements, the
determination of building height will be determined by the Community
Development Director. ('65 Code, § 9-3.208) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord.
535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
   BUILDING SITE. The floor area of a building, together with all open spaces,
as required by the provisions of this chapter. ('65 Code, § 9-3.209) (Ord. 556,
passed - - )
   CISTERN. A reservoir, tank, or container for storing or holding water. A
CISTERN may be used to retain stormwater for on-site landscaping or other
purposes.
   CLUB. An association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, for
some social or cultural purpose, and usually characterized by certain
membership qualifications, payment of dues and/or fees, regular meetings and a
constitution, charter and/or bylaws, but shall not include groups organized
primarily to render a service carried on as a commercial enterprise. (‘65 Code,
§ 9-3.210) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   COLD FRAME. An unheated outdoor structure consisting of a wooden or concrete
frame and a top of glass or clear plastic, used for protecting seedlings and
plants from the cold.
   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.211) (Ord.
556, passed - - )
   COMMON AREAS. Recreational and leisure areas, other than private areas,
which are conveniently located and accessible to all residents of a multi-
family project. (Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
   COMMUNITY GARDEN. A piece of land used for the cultivation of fruits,
vegetables, plants, flowers, or herbs by multiple users. COMMUNITY GARDENS may
be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or
may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas
maintained or used by group members. Sites are typically managed by public or
civic entities, nonprofit organizations or other community-based organizations
that are responsible for maintenance and operations.
   COMPOSTING BINS. A bin into which is placed grass clippings, leaves,
vegetable and fruit peelings, and/or other organic waste, in order to create
compost. Enclosed bins provide an alternative to heaping or piling yard debris.
Worm bins allow for organic kitchen scraps to be converted to organic soil
conditioner.
   CONSTRUCTED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). The development of the second
residential unit, detached or attached to the primary unit, by adding new
square footage to the lot.
   CONVERTED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). The development of the second
residential unit by converting existing space into living space without adding
new square footage to the lot.
   DIRECTOR  or COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Community Development
Director or his or her designee. (Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
   DISABILITY. A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or
mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life
activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has
record of such impairment.
   DWELLING, GROUP. Two or more separate buildings not more than two stories in
height, each containing one or more dwelling units, located upon a single lot
or parcel of land in one ownership. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.212) (Ord. 556, passed - -
)
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof, designed for or
occupied by three or more families living independently of each other. (‘65
Code, § 9-3.213) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A building containing but one kitchen and designed
and/or used to house not more than one family, including all domestic employees
of such family. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.214) (Ord. 556, passed - -)
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building containing not more than two kitchens and
designed and/or used to house not more than two families living independently
of each other, including all domestic employees of each such family. (‘65 Code,
§ 9-3.215) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   FAMILY. A single residential unit or a person or group of persons living
together as a domestic unit in an single residential unit. (‘65 Code, § 9-
3.216) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR).
      (1)   The numerical value obtained by dividing the gross floor area of a
building or buildings located on a lot or parcel of land by the total area of
such lot or parcel of land. The following shall be included in the floor area
ratio calculation, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Residential habitable space for any residential building on the
lot;
         (b)   Gross horizontal commercial area measured from exterior wall to
exterior wall, including basement area;
         (c)   Interior space greater than 12 feet in height shall be counted
twice in the R-1 zone;
         (d)   Space in an attached residential garage in excess of the
required parking spaces;
         (e)   Integral garage (at least two sides connected to the residence);
         (f)   Permanently covered patios;
         (g)   Permanently covered balconies;
         (h)   Permanently covered decks;
         (i)   Permanently covered porches;
         (j)   Permanently covered courtyards;
         (k)   Portions of basements that meet Building Code requirements for
habitable space;
         (l)   Lofts;
         (m)   Mezzanines;
         (n)   Communal areas designated for residential use such as indoor
gyms, lobbies, and the like;
         (o)   Permanently covered outdoor dining areas;
         (p)   Interior hallways and corridors;
         (q)   Work area for an automotive repair business; and
         (r)   Podium parking areas at or above grade (including the parking
spaces, driveways, and drive aisles) for commercial or mixed-use projects.
      (2)   A determination if a portion of a project is included in the floor
area ratio shall rest with the Community Development Director.
   GARAGE. An enclosed structure large enough to accommodate from one to four
automobiles. (Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
   GARDEN AREA. An area of land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables,
plants, flowers, or herbs by multiple users.
   GREENHOUSE. A temporary or permanent structure typically made of, but not
limited to, glass, plastic, or fiberglass in which plants are cultivated.
Includes hoophouses, typically made of, but not limited to, piping or other
material covered with translucent plastic, constructed in a “half-round” or
“hoop” shape.
   GROCERIES. Staple foodstuffs, meats, seafood, produce and dairy products.
(Ord. 479-C.S., passed 4-15-97)
   GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA). The total floor area square footage contained within
a building that is measured from the external walls.
   GUESTS. Persons who, during the hours when meals are regularly served
therein, come to a bona fide public eating place for the purpose of obtaining,
and actually order and obtain at such time, in good faith, a meal therein.
Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed to require that any food
be sold or purchased with any beverage. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.218) (Ord. 955, passed
- - )
   HEDGE. Any horizontal or vertical formation of planted trees, shrubs, or
other vegetation that creates a physical boundary or barrier.
   HIGH-QUALITY TRANSIT CORRIDOR. A corridor with fixed route bus service with
service internals no longer than 15 minutes during peak commute hours.
   HOTEL. See definition contained in §
153.162(G)(7) of this code. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.219) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 297-C.S., passed - - )
   INSTRUCTIONAL SERVICES, LARGE. An establishment that offers specialized
programs in personal growth and development such as music, martial arts, vocal,
fitness, visual arts, dancing, reading and math instruction exceeding six
students at a time.
   INSTRUCTIONAL SERVICES, SMALL. An establishment that offers specialized
programs in personal growth and development such as music, martial arts, vocal,
fitness, visual arts, dancing, reading and math instruction not to exceed six
students at a time.
   JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A unit that is no more than 500 square feet
in size and contained entirely within an existing single-family residence. A
JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT may include separate sanitation facilities, or
may share sanitation facilities with the existing residence.
   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT. Singing, dancing, acting, or similar performances
provided by a performer who is hired or otherwise secured by the operator of
the business where the entertainment is presented. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.219.2)
(Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
   LOT. A parcel of real property as shown with a separate and distinct number
or letter on a plot recorded or filed with the County Recorder, or a parcel of
real property abutting upon at least one public street or a recorded private or
public street or road easement and held under separate ownership prior to May
23, 1939. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.220) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the junction of two or more intersecting
streets, with a boundary line thereof bordering continuously on each of the two
streets. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.221) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot which is not a corner lot. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.222) (Ord.
556, passed - - )
   LOT, KEY. The first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot. (‘65
Code, § 9-3.223) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the side street line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear. (‘65
Code, § 9-3.224) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   LOT, THROUGH. An interior lot having frontage on two streets. (‘65 Code, §
9-3.225) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance measured between the midpoint of the
front property line of a lot to the midpoint of the rear property line of a
lot, or to the most distant point on any other lot line when there is no rear
lot line.
   LOT LINE. The recorded boundary between a lot and other property or the
public right-of-way.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. On an interior lot, the lot line separating the lot from
the street. On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street. If the lot
lines of a corner lot are equal in length, then the front lot line shall be
determined by the Community Development Director or designee. On a through lot,
the lot line abutting the street providing the primary front entrance to the
property. On a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the
street from which access is obtained.
   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front
lot line, does not intersect the front lot line, and which is most closely
parallel to the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
   LOT LINE, STREET SIDE. A side lot line of a corner lot that is parallel and
closest to the street.
   MAJOR TRANSIT STOP.
      (1)   An existing rail or bus rapid transit station;
      (2)   A ferry terminal served by either bus or rail transit service; or
      (3)   The intersection of two or more major bus routes with a frequency
or service interval of 15 minutes or less during the morning and afternoon peak
commute periods.
   MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. An establishment engaging in the processing,
assembling, and/or packaging of goods, utilizing large amounts of raw materials
in a manner that it produces noise, dust, vibration, and/or other pollutants
while yielding large quantities of output. Heavy manufacturing uses include,
but are not limited to, heavy trucking activity, storage and/or processing of
potentially hazardous materials, and requirement for specialized state or
federal permits.
   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. An establishment engaging in the processing,
assembling, and/or packaging of previously prepared materials, including
incidental storage, sales, and distribution in a manner that does not produce
noticeable odors, air emissions, or other environmental effects. Light
manufacturing uses typically have limited trucking activity.
   MAP. The Official Zoning Map of the city. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.226) (Ord. 556,
passed - - )
   MASSAGE. Any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial,
health, hygienic, or relaxation purpose as further defined by §
122.02 of the San Gabriel Municipal Code.
   MEAL. The usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at various hours of the
day. The service of such food and victuals only as sandwiches or salads shall
not be deemed a compliance with this requirement. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.227) (Ord.
955, passed - - )
   MOTEL. See definition contained in §
153.162(G)(7) of this code. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.227.5) (Ord. 297-C.S., passed - -
)
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). National program to
control water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants
into waters of the United States.
   NATURAL/PRE-EXISTING GRADE. Average (mean) of the highest and lowest point
of the lot prior to construction. (See illustration of building height). (Ord.
535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
   OBJECTIVE DESIGN STANDARD. Standards that involve no personal or subjective
judgment by a public official and are uniformly verifiable by reference to an
external and uniform benchmark or criterion available and knowable by both the
development applicant or proponent and the public official before submittal.
   OFFICE, MEDICAL. An establishment providing outpatient health services by a
health care professional including, but not limited to, preventative and
rehabilitation treatment, diagnostic services, X-ray and laboratory services.
Inpatient or overnight care may not be provided. This use includes offices
providing dental, surgical, podiatric, optometric, chiropractic, psychiatric
services, acupuncture, medical spas, and physical therapy.
   OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL. An establishment providing direct professional
services to consumers in terms of data processing and engage in the production
of intellectual property. This use includes real estate offices, accounting
offices, law offices, insurance offices, travel agencies, and other similar
uses. This use does not include medical offices.
   OPEN AIR MARKETS. A public marketplace where multiple vendors set up booths,
tables, or stands to sell food and merchandise. OPEN AIR MARKETS  include
farmers’ markets, craft markets, flea markets, produce markets, and other
similar uses.
   PASSIVE AMENITIES. Passive recreational and leisure areas composed of
natural features or improvements designed for visual and/or auditory enjoyment,
such as ornamental landscaping, waterfalls, fountains, plazas, streams,
landscaped slopes in excess of a 10% gradient, etc. (Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-
20-04)
   PERSONAL CARE FACILITY.  A place where personal care services are performed
by a personal care technician, including but not limited to beauty, hair,
facial, and nail salons. Hair salons and barbershops that perform hair services
exclusively are excluded. PERSONAL CARE FACILITY does not include a massage
establishment as defined by §
122.02 of the San Gabriel Municipal Code. (Ord. 520-C.S., passed 11-4-03)
   PERSONAL CARE SERVICE. Services that treat the skin, hands, feet, face, neck
or hair. Also included is the treatment of any person with various lotions,
sprays, creams, tonics, herbs, or other similar substances for the purpose of
reconditioning or improving the skin. PERSONAL CARE SERVICES do not include
massage services. (Ord. 520-C.S., passed 11-4-03)
   PERSONAL CARE TECHNICIAN.  A person who receives compensation for performing
any personal care service. These would not include doctors, chiropractors,
acupuncturists, and licensed medical professionals. PERSONAL CARE TECHNICIAN
does not include a massage technician as defined by §
122.02 of the San Gabriel Municipal Code. (Ord. 520-C.S., passed 11-4-03)
   POOL AND BILLIARD HALL. An establishment providing access to pool tables and
other billiard games. (Ord. 520-C.S., passed 11-4-03)
   PREMISES. Property, land, or buildings or land and buildings. (‘65 Code, §
9-3.229) (Ord. 995, passed - - )
   PRIMARY USE. The main purpose for which a site or unit is developed and
occupied, including activities that are conducted on the site a majority of the
hours during which activities occur.
   PRIVATE AREAS. Outdoor recreational and leisure areas which are partially or
fully open to the sky, directly connected to and solely accessible through an
individual dwelling unit. (Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
   RAIN BARREL. A system that collects and stores rainwater from your roof that
would otherwise be lost to runoff and diverted to storm drains and streams. A
RAIN BARREL typically includes a 55-gallon drum, a vinyl hose, PVC couplings,
and a screen gate to filter debris.
   REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUEST. A request for reasonable accommodation may
include a modification or exception to the rules, standards, and practices for
the site, development, and use of housing-related facilities that would
eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal
opportunity to housing of their choice.
   RECREATION AND LEISURE AREAS.  An unobstructed outdoor space or an enclosed
facility which is usable in either a natural or developed form for active or
passive recreational or leisure time activities common to residential
lifestyles. (Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD.  A food-service establishment which supplies food and
beverages primarily in disposable containers, and which is characterized by
high automobile accessibility, self-service, and short stays by customers. (‘65
Code, § 9-3.229.4) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
   RESTAURANT, FULL-SERVICE. An establishment which prepares and provides full
sit-down table service of meals to guests, for compensation, at tables located
at that establishment. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.229.2) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
   RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment that offers a limited variety of
food or beverages. Transactions are sales for off-site consumption. Customers
are served either at a counter or service window. Retail food establishments
shall not feature any tables for on-site consumption. Typical uses include
bakeries, coffee and tea shops, ice cream and frozen dessert stores, delivery-
only pizza establishments, small delicatessens, and similar establishments.
   SECONDHAND STORE. A retail establishment which sells or rents used
merchandise or equipment, including antiques. Pawnshops are not considered
secondhand stores. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.229.6) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
   SELF-SERVICE LAUNDERETTE. Any establishment for laundering where there is no
pickup or delivery service and no steam or hand laundry of any type; provided,
however, all washing machines, accessory extractors, and dryers shall be
installed on a single floor without double-decking; there shall be no
intermingling of customers’ laundries. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.230) (Ord. 556, passed
- - ; Am. Ord. 599, passed - - )
   SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO) DEVELOPMENT. A structure with six or more guest
rooms in which 30% or more of the units do not have a private bath and toilet
within the unit.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between a floor and the finished
ceiling next above or the finished undersurface of the roof directly over that
particular floor. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.231) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   SUBTERRANEAN GARAGE. A garage in which the structure is completely below the
natural grade. (See illustration) (Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
   SEMI-SUBTERRANEAN GARAGE. A garage in which a portion of the structure is
below and above or within the natural grade. (See illustration) (Ord. 535-C.S.,
passed 1-20-04)
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure constructed using metal, plastic or wood
frames or posts to support covers made of cloth, canvas, thermoplastic
composite and/or other similar non-rigid materials that provide a weather
barrier. Alternative terms to describe such structures include, but are not
limited to, temporary canopies and tarps. (Ord. 541-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
   URBAN DWELLING UNIT. Dwelling units established in accordance with Cal.
Gov’t Code § 65852.21 and §
153.048 of this code.
   URBAN LOT SPLIT. Subdivision of a parcel within single-family residential
zones in conformance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66411.7 and §
153.048 of this code.
   USABLE RECREATION/LEISURE AREAS. Unconstrained by topographic, structural,
environmental or spatial conditions which would limit the accessibility, safety
or function of the recreational/leisure area. (Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
   VENDING CART. A wheeled device capable of being pushed by a person, from
which food or beverages are sold. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.233.5) (Ord. 455-C.S.,
passed 11-21-95)
   VENDING MACHINE. Any unattended self-service device that, upon insertion of
a coin, coins, token or by similar means, dispenses anything of value including
food, water, beverages, goods, wares, merchandise or services including reverse
vending machines. This does not include newspaper racks, automatic teller
machines (ATMs) or public telephones. (Ord. 520-C.S., passed 11-4-03)
   VIP ROOM. A private portion of a restaurant set aside for the hosting of
private parties/events. These rooms are meant to accommodate various size
parties. The room size is typically less than 400 square feet. (Ord. 520-C.S.,
passed 11-4-03)
   YARD. An unoccupied space on a lot on which a building is situated and,
except where otherwise provided in this chapter, open and unobstructed from the
ground to the sky. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.233) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   YARD, FRONT. A yard enclosed between the side yard lines and extending from
the front lot line to the line of the main building or the closest portion of
any enclosed or covered porch. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.234) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured
between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building nearest
the rear line of the lot. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.235) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
   YARD, SERVICE. A portion of the side or rear yard used for the storage of
containers for trash, debris, and rubbish. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.237) (Ord. 245-
C.S., passed - - )
   YARD, SIDE. A yard on either side of a building between the building and the
side line of the lot and extending from the front line of the lot to the rear
yard. (‘65 Code, § 9-3.236) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
(Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 552-C.S., passed 11-21-06; Am.
Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14; Am. Ord. 618-
C.S., passed 1-20-15; Am. Ord. 619-C.S., passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord. 631-C.S.,
passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 632-C.S., passed 5-2-17; Am. Ord. 644-C.S., passed 6-
19-18; Am. Ord. 652, passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 661, passed 1-7-20; Am. Ord. 662,
passed 1-21-20; Am. Ord. 683, passed 2-1-22; Am. Ord. 693, passed 12-5-23; Am.
Ord. 706, passed 5-7-24; Am. Ord. 717, passed 2-4-25)
§ 153.004 DECISIONS, APPEALS, NOTICES.
   The provisions of this section shall apply in the absence of more specific
regulations.
   (A)   Notice of action on any application made pursuant to the Zoning
Ordinance shall be given to the applicant in writing within 10 business days
from the date of the decision. The decision on the application shall be final
unless within 10 business days from the date of the decision, the applicant or
any member of the public or a Council member shall file a written appeal
thereon.
   (B)   The notice shall specify that the decision is final absent a timely
appeal to the Planning Commission or the City Council as the case may be. In
the case of a final decision where there is no further appeal, the notice shall
so specify.
   (C)   If a decision is appealable to the Planning Commission, a written
appeal shall be filed with the Community Development Department. If a decision
is appealable to the City Council, a written appeal shall be filed with the
City Clerk. Appeals shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council. No fee shall be required if the
appeal is made by a member of the City Council.
   (D)   A hearing on the appeal shall be held not less than 10 business days,
nor more than 40 business days, from the date of receipt of the appeal by the
city. The appellant shall be notified of the hearing in writing and notice of
the hearing shall also be given in the manner prescribed by state law if
applicable. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent.
   (E)   At the date and time set for the appeal hearing, the Planning
Commission or the City Council, as the case may be, shall proceed to hear
evidence, take testimony from all interested parties and render a decision
based upon the evidence and testimony received, approving, denying, or
modifying, in whole or in part, the decision which is being appealed.
   (F)   All notices should be personally served or be accompanied by an
affidavit or proof of service of mailing. Failure to include such affidavit or
proof of service shall not invalidate any decision or notice given pursuant to
this section.
(Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.005 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who owns, occupies, leases, maintains or uses any building,
structure or property in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every day the violation remains shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
2004 S-12
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
§ 153.015 ZONES ESTABLISHED.
   In order to carry out the purposes of this title, and to implement the
city's general plan, the following zones are hereby established:
R-1      Single-Family Residence Zone
R-1A   Limited Two-Family Residence Zone
R-2      Low Density Multiple-Family Residence Zone
R-3      Multiple-Family Residence Zone
C-1      Retail Commercial Zone
C-3      Commercial and Limited Manufacturing Zone
M-1   Light Manufacturing Zone
P-1      Automobile Parking Zone
D      Architectural Design Zone
PD      Planned Development Overlay Zone
   MD   Mission District Zone
   MF   Medical Facilities Zone
   PF/OS   Public Facilities/Open Space Zone
('65 Code, § 9-3.301) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 80-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 247-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 248-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 491-
C.S., passed - - )
§ 153.016 MAP.
   The zones established by
§ 153.015 are shown and delineated on that certain map on file in the office of
the Community Development Director entitled “Zoning Map of the City of San
Gabriel, California,” which map is hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter. Such map, and each part and unit, and the notations, references, and
other information shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if
the matters and information set forth by such map were all fully described in
this chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.302) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 652, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 686, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 912, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 491-C.S., passed - -
)
§ 153.017 CLASSIFICATION OF ZONES.
   It is hereby declared that in the creation of the respective classes of
zones set forth in this chapter, the Council has given due and careful
consideration to the peculiar suitability of each and every such zone for the
particular use enumerated therefor and the necessary proper and comprehensive
groupings and arrangement of the various industries, businesses, and population
of the city in relation to the established plans in the unincorporated area of
the county and the incorporated areas of adjoining municipalities in accordance
with a well-considered plan for the comprehensive development of the city. ('65
Code, § 9-3.303) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.018 BOUNDARIES OF ZONES; UNCERTAINTIES.
   (A)   The boundaries of the zones shown upon the map adopted by this
chapter, or on amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and approved, and the
regulations of this chapter governing the use of land and buildings, the height
of buildings, the size of yards about buildings, and other matters as set forth
are hereby established and declared to be in effect upon all land included
within the boundaries of each and every zone shown upon said map.
   (B)   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown on
said map, the following rules shall apply:
      (1)   Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following
street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
      (2)   In unsubdivided property or where a zone boundary divides a lot,
the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions,
shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.
      (3)   In the event any uncertainty exists, the Community Development
Director shall determine the location of boundaries.
      (4)   Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or
abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to such
vacated or abandoned street or alley.
('65 Code, § 9-3.304) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.019 CLASSIFICATION OF ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   Any property annexed to or consolidated with the city on or after April 26,
1949, shall be deemed to be classified as the classification in this code which
most closely corresponds to the previous classification; provided, however, if
such property has not theretofore been classified, the same shall be deemed to
be R-1, Single-Family Residence Zone, until such time as otherwise classified
in the manner set forth in this chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.305) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 609, passed - - )
§ 153.020 USE OF BUILDINGS AND LAND IN ESTABLISHED ZONES.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter:
   (A)   No building shall be erected, and no existing building shall be moved,
altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, or premises be
used, designed, or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other
than for a use listed in this chapter as permitted in the zone in which such
land, building, or premises are located.
   (B)   No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be
moved, reconstructed, or structurally altered, to exceed in height the limits
established by the provisions of this chapter for the zone in which such
building is located.
   (C)   No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be
moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor shall any open spaces surrounding any
building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with
the building site requirements and the area and yard regulations established by
the provisions of this chapter for the zone in which such building is located.
   (D)   No yard or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for any other building or structure.
('65 Code, § 9-3.306) (Ord. 556, passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE ZONES (R-1)
§ 153.030 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The following regulations shall be applicable to all uses of property in the
R-1 zone to promote the general welfare and encourage smart growth by achieving
the following:
   (A)   Encourage improved residential site planning and architectural design
to ensure compatibility with the character inherent within the surrounding
neighborhood and to provide harmony between the old and the new;
   (B)   Encourage originality, creativity and diversity in design;
   (C)   Protect the low-density character of single-family residential
neighborhoods;
   (D)   Promote the upgrading and remodeling of existing single-family
dwellings in promotion of high property value and accommodation of changing
lifestyles;
   (E)   Create well-designed dwellings that evidence a good sense of
proportion and balance, both in exterior form and the placement of such
features as windows, doors, and other architectural features;
   (F)   Ensure that the size of new structures and additions does not exceed
the scale of their surroundings;
   (G)   To provide adequate separation between structures and the surrounding
properties and streets to allow for light, ventilation and access; and
   (H)   To conform to residential design guidelines as they may be adopted
from time to time by the City Council.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.031 USES PERMITTED.
   The following uses shall be permitted by right in Single-Family Residence
Zones (R-1):
   (A)   Single-family dwellings of a permanent character placed in a permanent
location.
   (B)   Accessory building:
      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses incidental to each single-family
dwelling, including a private garage for the accommodation of automobiles,
children's playhouses, lath or greenhouses, tool sheds, work rooms, barbecues,
recreation rooms, home offices, pool houses/dressing rooms, and sheds for the
housing of domestic animals. Such accessory buildings shall be placed upon the
same lot or parcel of land and shall not be used or operated commercially. No
accessory building shall be used for permanent occupancy by persons, nor exceed
a maximum of 200 square feet, except for garages as provided therein.
      (2)   Plumbing for laundry hook-ups may be considered in a garage,
provided: there is ample space in the garage so as not to encroach within the
minimum required garage size or interfere with vehicles; there is direct and
logical access to the main dwelling; and approval is granted by the Community
Development Director.
      (3)   A covenant shall be recorded with the County Recorder's Office
stating that the accessory structure shall not be used for permanent occupancy
by persons and that the accessory structure shall not contain a kitchen or
kitchen facilities.
   (C)   Home occupation:
      (1)   Maintaining mail addresses for home occupations, provided no stock-
in-trade, supplies, parts, no manufacturing, assembly equipment or materials,
and no chemicals are kept on the premises; no employees or assistants are
engaged for services on the premises, and no on-premises sales to customers are
conducted thereon.
      (2)   Additionally, all home occupations shall comply with the following
provisions:
         (a)   Delivery and shipment of materials from the home occupation
shall be by the United States Postal Service, or private delivery services
generally recognized to make deliveries in residential neighborhoods.
Deliveries or pickups by commercial vehicles containing three or more axles
shall be prohibited.
         (b)   No home occupation shall generate any traffic, parking,
sewerage, or water use in excess of what is normal for residential use.
         (c)   No home occupation may emit any smoke or emission that is
visible to the naked eye or that violates any standards established by the
South Coast Air Quality Management District and the California Air Resources
Board.
         (d)   No home occupation may violate the noise standards contained in
this code. No home occupation may generate any obnoxious or adverse odor that
can be detected beyond the boundary of the premises.
         (e)   No home occupation may generate any ground-transmitted vibration
that is perceptible to the human sense of touch measured at the outside
boundary of the lot or individual space.
         (f)   No home occupation may create any electrical disturbance that
adversely affects any operations, equipment, appliances, communications
devices, or other electrical devices other than those of the creator of such
disturbances.
   (D)   Manufactured housing, including factory-built housing, provided the
same is developed and maintained in accordance with this subchapter.
   (E)   Publicly-owned and operated parks, playgrounds, and recreation
centers, including all the necessary facilities therefor.
   (F)   Flower, fruit and vegetable gardening, for the purposes of propagation
and culture for use in cottage food operations or for sale at off-site
locations, is allowed in rear yards. Such gardening, when solely for the
purposes of propagation and culture for household consumption and not for later
sale, may be permitted in the front and side yards as well. On-site sales,
signs, displays, and stands are prohibited. Cottage food operations and the
sale of produce at off-site locations such as farmers' markets are allowed,
subject to applicable rules and regulations. Compost materials shall be set
back a minimum of ten feet from property lines and shall be stored in a manner
that is not visible from the adjacent property, controls odor, prevents
infestation, and minimizes runoff into waterways and onto adjacent properties.
   (G)   Community gardens on vacant property developed and maintained in
accordance with §
153.162 herein.
   (H)   Licensed family care homes, foster homes, or group homes serving six
or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and
neglected children where authorized pursuant to Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 5116.
   (I)   Accessory dwelling units as provided for in §
153.047.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02; Am. Ord.
534-C.S., passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14; Am. Ord. 639-C.S.,
passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord. 638-C.S., passed 10-17-17; Am. Ord. 644-C.S., passed
6-19-18; Am. Ord. 653, passed 10-1-19)
§ 153.032 USES PERMITTED BY A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   The following uses may be permitted subject to the issuance of a conditional
use permit, pursuant to the provisions of this title:
   (A)   Church, chapel, or other religious facility, provided that such use is
developed and maintained in accordance with §
153.050 herein.
   (B)   Educational institutions (private elementary and secondary), provided
that such use is developed and maintained in accordance with §
153.050 herein.
   (C)   Licensed family care homes, foster homes, or group homes serving seven
or more mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and
neglected children where authorized pursuant to Cal. Welf. & Inst Code § 5116,
provided that such use is developed and maintained in accordance with §
153.050 herein.
   (D)   Open air markets only on parking lots and other paved areas serving
churches, synagogues, temples, mosques and other worship facilities; schools;
or other public or quasi-public uses.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
608-C.S., passed 5-10-14; Am. Ord. 653, passed 10-1-19)
§ 153.033 MINIMUM SITE AREA.
   Each lot hereafter created shall maintain a minimum building site area of
not less than 7,260 square feet.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.034 MINIMUM LOT WIDTH.
   Each lot hereafter created shall have and maintain a lot width of not less
than 50 feet, except that a corner lot shall have and maintain a lot width of
not less than 55 feet.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.035 MAXIMUM HEIGHT LIMIT.
   (A)   Residential buildings in the R-1 Zone may be two stories in height.
One-story residential buildings shall not exceed a height of 18 feet, and two-
story residential buildings shall not exceed a height of 28 feet measured from
the lowest adjoining grade to the highest point of the structure, or any
appurtenances thereto. One-story residential buildings may utilize
architectural features (including but not limited to chimneys, tower elements,
dormers) which exceed the maximum height limit by no more than three feet, so
long as they are appropriate to the proposed architectural style and massing.
   (B)   No accessory building or detached garage in the R-1 Zone shall be more
than 15 feet in height or the height of the primary residential structure,
whichever is less, measured from the lowest adjoining grade to the highest
point of the structure.
   (C)   The adjoining grade shall be the elevation of the top of the curb
adjacent property.
   (D)   The top plate of an entryway structure, including but not limited to
porches, patios, and archways, shall not exceed a height of ten feet or the
height of the top plate of the first floor, whichever is less.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 639-C.S., passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord.
638-C.S., passed 10-17-17) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.036 MINIMUM DWELLING WIDTH.
   Each principal dwelling or habitable structure shall have and maintain a
minimum width of not less than 20 feet exclusive of any appurtenant structures,
and which shall be measured from the outside of the building wall.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.037 FRONT YARDS.
   (A) Required front yards.  
      (1)   Each front yard in an R-1 Zone shall be not less than 20 feet, nor
more than 35 feet; and provided, further, no building erected or structurally
altered upon such frontage shall project beyond the average front yard line of
the developed lots next adjacent thereto on either side. A vacant lot shall not
be considered for purposes of determining front yard setbacks. A lot having a
front yard more than 35 feet in depth shall be considered for this purpose as
having a front yard 35 feet in depth. A lot having a front yard of less than 20
feet in depth shall be considered for this purpose as having a front yard 20
feet in depth.
      (2)   A nonconforming front yard area may be extended to the side yards,
provided that it does not create a deficiency in the required side and rear
yard areas.
   (B)   Front yards on key lots. On key lots the minimum front yard shall be
the average of the required front yard for the adjoining interior lot and the
required street side yard of the adjoining reversed corner lot. Where existing
buildings on either or both of such adjoining lots are located nearer to the
street than the yards required above, the yards required above shall be used in
computing the front yard for a key lot.
   (C)   Permitted uses in front yard. The following uses shall be permitted in
the required front yard areas, but shall not exceed 15 feet in height:
      (1)   Open, unenclosed platforms, or landing places not covered by a
roof, awning, or canopy provided it shall not extend or project into the front
yard more than six feet, nor be more than six inches in height above adjacent
ground level.
      (2)   Fountains, flag poles, statues and decorative ponds.
      (3)   Walkways not more than 42 inches in width directly connecting a
sidewalk and/or driveway with an entry to the main residential unit.
      (4)   Driveways shall be no greater than 12 feet in width leading from
the street to a garage, except that a driveway 20 feet in width is permissible,
provided the garage is adjacent, attached or detached and parallel in the front
of the principal dwelling with the entrance to the garage parallel to the
street.
   (D)   Prohibited uses in front and street side yard areas. The following
shall be prohibited in the required front yard and street side yard areas:
      (1)   Parking areas for vehicles.
      (2)   Accessory structures.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14) Penalty, see
§
153.999
§ 153.038 SIDE YARDS; SINGLE STORY.
   (A)   Total side yards in the R-1 Zone shall be 16 feet with a minimum of
six feet on any one side. Cornices and eaves may extend into the required side
yard for a distance not to exceed 24 inches. No other miscellaneous
encroachments such as chimneys, bay windows or any other architectural features
are permitted, except in a side yard of six feet or more, in which case an
encroachment of a maximum of 24 inches is allowed. Porches or landing places
unenclosed and unroofed may encroach into a required side yard of six feet for
a distance not to exceed three feet.
   (B)   On corner lots, the side yard on the street side shall be not less
than 12 feet, except that a garage structure, attached or detached, with the
garage door parallel to the street shall have and maintain a minimum setback of
20 feet from the street side property line.
   (C)   Detached noninhabitable accessory buildings not exceeding 15 feet in
height shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of four feet if the building
is less than 100 feet from the front property line, and two feet if the
building is more than 100 feet from the front property line.
   (D)   In the case of a single family residence with a non-conforming side
yard, a single story addition may be constructed by maintaining the existing
building line of the house, provided that the existing side yard setback is at
least four feet.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.039 REAR YARDS.
   (A)   The rear yard in R-1 Zones shall be no less than 25 feet in depth.
   (B)   In computing the depth of the rear yard from any building where such
yard opens upon a public street, alley, way, or park, one-half, but not to
exceed ten feet, of the width of such street, alley, way, or park, may be
considered to be a portion of the rear yard.
   (C)   A detached accessory building may occupy not more than one-half the
area of the rear yard.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.040 SECOND STORY MASSING.
   (A)   Any portion of a single-family dwelling that is in excess of one story
shall be in compliance with the front yard requirements as established in §
153.037 and shall not encroach beyond the angled planes specified herein.
   (B)   At the front and rear property lines, the measurement shall be taken
from the height of the building pad elevation, but in no case shall the
measurements be taken at a lower height than the curb as indicated by the
attached diagram, adopted and made a part of this subchapter. The side property
line measurements shall be taken from a height ten feet above the building pad
elevation as indicated by the attached diagram, adopted and made a part of this
subchapter.
   (C)   Front yard. The height of the dwelling shall fall within the angled
plane of 45° drawn from the front property line of the development site as
indicated by the attached diagram, adopted and made a part of this subchapter.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6235.jpg]
 
   (D)   Side yard. The height of the dwelling shall fall within the angled
plane of 45° drawn from a point ten feet above the side property lines of the
development site or maintain minimum side yard setbacks of ten feet from each
side property line as indicated by the attached diagram, adopted and made a
part of this subchapter. Cornices and eaves may extend into the encroachment
line or required side yards for a distance not to exceed 24 inches. No other
miscellaneous encroachments such as chimneys, bay windows or any other
architectural features are permitted, except in a side yard of six feet or
more, in which case an encroachment of a maximum of 24 inches is allowed.
Buildings with vaulted ceilings that are more than 15 feet in height shall
comply with the provisions of this division (D). (See illustration.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6237.jpg]
 
   (E)   Rear yard. The height of the dwelling shall fall within the angled
plane of 35° drawn from the rear property line of the development site as
indicated by the attached diagram, adopted and made a part of this subchapter.
   (F)   No linear wall of a second story shall extend more than 25 feet
without architectural articulation or an offset of at least two feet. (Refer to
Figure 153.040(A).)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6233.jpg]
 
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord.
639-C.S., passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord. 638-C.S., passed 10-17-17) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.041 DISTANCES BETWEEN BUILDINGS.
   No detached accessory building, or detached ADU, shall be closer than six
feet to any other accessory building, or to the main building, on the same
building site. The six foot distance shall be measured from the closet points
of the building walls or structure walls. Additionally, a minimum of four feet
shall be maintained between eave overhangs, chimneys, bay windows or any other
architectural feature. No accessory building shall be used as a dwelling,
except as provided in §§
153.047 and
153.048 herein.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
644-C.S., passed 6-19-18) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.042 LOT COVERAGE.
   Lot coverage shall not exceed 35% of the total net lot area. For the
purposes of this calculation, buildings, impervious surfaces greater than 42
inches in width (other than required driveways), covered and uncovered patios
(other than required landings), accessory structures (including but not limited
to garages, carports, storage sheds, gazebos, pool equipment rooms and similar
structures), and raised and at-grade decks shall be counted toward the lot
coverage.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 561-C.S., passed 5-9-06; Am. Ord. 608-C.S.,
passed 5-10-14; Am. Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.043 FLOOR AREA RATIO; SECOND STORY.
   No single family dwelling in excess of one story in whole or part shall
exceed a floor area ratio (FAR) of .35. Any interior space with a height
greater than 12 feet shall count twice towards the FAR. Detached garages and
any other accessory building not intended for habitable use shall be excluded
from the calculation. The space within an attached garage providing required
parking shall be excluded from the calculation, refer to Figure 153.043(A).
Permanently covered patios and balconies shall be included in the calculation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6239.jpg]
 
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord.
639-C.S., passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord. 638-C.S., passed 10-17-17; Am. Ord. 652,
passed 5-21-19) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.044 FLOOR AREA; SECOND STORY.
   The second story gross floor area shall be 25% less than the first story
gross floor area. Interior spaces with a height greater than 12 feet shall be
treated as two stories and shall count towards the second story gross floor
area. Attached garages are included within the calculation. Detached garages
and any other accessory building not intended to be habitable shall be excluded
from the calculation. Permanently covered patios and balconies shall be
included in the calculation.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord.
639-C.S., passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord. 638-C.S., passed 10-17-17; Am. Ord. 652,
passed 5-21-19) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.045 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA; DWELLING UNIT.
   (A)   Each new dwelling unit hereafter constructed, or any reconstruction,
addition or alteration to an existing dwelling which exceeds 50% of the
existing dwellings floor area shall have a minimum floor area, based on the
bedroom count as follows. Calculations of the floor area for this requirement
shall exclude garages and other similar structures not considered habitable
space.
      (1)   One bedroom dwelling, 1,000 square feet;
      (2)   Two bedroom dwelling, 1,150 square feet;
      (3)   Three bedroom dwelling, 1,300 square feet;
      (4)   Four bedroom dwelling, 1,450 square feet;
      (5)   For each dwelling in excess of four bedrooms, an additional 150
square feet of floor area per bedroom shall be provided.
   (B)   A bedroom shall be considered any room which is not a kitchen, dining
room, living room, family room, or bathroom and which is designated as a
bedroom or is capable of being used for sleeping quarters and which meets the
requirements contained in
§ 153.051. A determination of the identity of any room shall rest with the
Community Development Director.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.046 ARCHITECTURE.
   (A)   Garage structures shall be located in the side or rear yard zones, and
may not extrude beyond the front of the residential building. On corner lots, a
garage shall be located in the rear yard zone, and shall not extrude beyond the
street-side of the residential building. Additionally, if access to a garage is
provided from the rear of the lot, the required side yards for the first floor
may be reduced to a total 12 feet with a minimum of six feet on any one side,
adopted and made a part of this subchapter.
   (B)   All building structures shall be built and maintained in accordance
with the following architectural standards:
      (1)   Exterior siding. Each building structure shall have and maintain
exterior siding of brick, wood, stucco, concrete or other similar material as
approved by the Community Development Director.
      (2)   Roofing material. Each building structure shall have and maintain a
roof constructed with woodshake, shingle, asphalt composition, tile (i.e.,
slate, concrete, clay), or other roofing material as approved by the Community
Development Director and the Fire Marshal, provided, that metal roofing is
prohibited except as permissible by the single-family residential design
guidelines. All roofing materials on a building or structure, which is visible
from the public right-of-way and from adjoining lots, shall be of the same type
unless prior approval has been granted by the Community Development Director.
“Green roof” features that promote stormwater infiltration may also be
permitted, and need not cover the entire roof area.
   (C)   Any addition to a single-family residence shall be required to:
      (1)   Conform to city design guidelines;
      (2)   Maintain the architectural integrity and context of the residential
environment in which it is located;
      (3)   Reflect the existing materials, textures, design features,
including doors and windows, and treatments associated with the existing
architecture of the building, unless the entire building will be so changed as
to secure city approval under the city’s codes, specific plans, and
architectural and landscape design guidelines;
      (4)   Use colors and finishes approved by the City Planner or his or her
designee, sufficient to show a high degree of quality and craftsmanship as
specified in city design guidelines and specific plans; and
      (5)   Provide consistent architectural treatment on all elevations so as
to ensure that any wall visible from offsite so as to conform to the
requirements of this division (C).
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord.
608-C.S., passed 5-10-14; Am. Ord. 639-C.S., passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord. 638-C.S.,
passed 10-17-17) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.047 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADU) AND JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
(JUNIOR ADU).
   ADUs or junior ADUs shall be permitted by the Community Development Director
or designee upon determining that the application meets all of the following
requirements.
   (A)   An ADU and junior ADU shall be permitted in the city's residential
zones under the following circumstances:
 
Zone type          Existing Structures # of ADUs Allowed      # of Junior ADUs
                   On-Site                                    Allowed
Single-Family Zone Single-Family       One ADU                One Junior ADU
                   Structure
Multi-Family Zone  Single-Family       One ADU                One Junior
                   Structure
                                       Two Detached ADUs and
                                       allow up to 25% of the
                                       existing multi-family
                   Multi-Family        units on the lot to
Single-Family Zone Structure           provide an ADU within  None
                                       the existing dwelling
                                       units or one unit,
                                       whichever is greater
                                       (*,**)
                                       Two Detached ADUs and
                                       allow up to 25% of the
                                       existing multi-family
                   Multi-Family        units on the lot to
Multi-Family Zone  Structure           provide an ADU within  None
                                       the existing dwelling
                                       units or one unit,
                                       whichever is greater
                                       (*, **)
*Multi-family structures that are proposed to be developed with an ADU within
the units must still comply with the minimum size of dwelling units set forth
in §
153.107 of the SGMC.
** Portions of existing multi-family structures used as non-habitable space
such as (boiler rooms, storage rooms, attics, basements, garages, laundry
rooms, etc.) may be converted intoADUs.
 
   (B)   The ADU shall not be sold, but may be rented. (ADUs shall be rented
for terms longer than 30 days).
   (C)   ADU construction shall be in compliance with the regulations and
requirements set forth in this chapter, including, but not limited to side and
rear yard setbacks, building height, and parking requirements; the city would
not be able impose standards related to lot coverage, floor area ratio, open
space, or minimum lot size that would otherwise prohibit the creation of an ADU
of at least 800 square feet. The ADU shall be constructed in accordance with
provisions of the latest edition of building and other codes applicable to the
city.
   (D)   A maximum of 850 square feet shall be allowed for a studio or one-
bedroom detached ADU and a maximum of 1,000 square feet shall be allowed for a
two-bedroom detached ADU. The square footage that is over 800 square feet shall
be included in the maximum lot coverage and floor area ratio totals for the
lot.
   (E)   When an ADU is attached to the existing primary dwelling unit, the
maximum allowed size of that accessory dwelling unit shall be no more than 50%
of the main dwelling size, or according to division (D), whichever is less.
   (F)   Second residential units that have been previously approved by the
city and constructed with building permits may be converted up to the
previously city-approved square footage allowance of 850 or 1,000 square feet,
based on the number of bedrooms.
   (G)   A maximum of two bedrooms shall be allowed for an ADU.
   (H)   No additional setback would be required when an existing living area
or accessory structure is demolished in order to construct an ADU in its place.
The new ADU can be placed in the same location as the demolished structure as
long as it contains the same dimensions as the structure that was demolished.
   (I)   A demolition permit for a detached garage that is to be replaced with
an accessory dwelling unit shall be reviewed with the application for the
accessory dwelling unit and issued at the same time. The demolition of a
detached garage that is to be replaced with an accessory dwelling unit shall
not require written notice or posting of a placard, unless the property is
located within an architecturally and historically significant district.
   (J)   The ADU may be metered separately from the main dwelling unit for gas,
electricity, communications, water, and sewer services.
   (K)   Fire sprinklers are required in the ADU when existing or required to
be provided in the primary unit. The construction of an ADU shall not require
the installation of fire sprinklers in the existing primary dwelling unit.
   (L)   For fire safety purposes, new ADUs and junior ADUs may only be located
on a residential lot that has at least a ten-foot wide fire lane within 150
feet of the subject property and a minimum fire flow of 1,000 gallons per
minute. This restriction shall not apply to ADUs and JADUs that are exempt from
going through a separate planning review, pursuant to division (M).
   (M)   A converted ADU shall comply with the following development standards:
      (1)   When an existing garage, carport, or covered parking structure is
converted into an ADU, replacement parking spaces for the main dwelling unit
shall not be required.
      (2)   No additional parking spaces are required for the space converted
to an ADU.
      (3)   No setback is required for an existing legally permitted garage or
accessory structure that is converted into a portion of an ADU.
      (4)   A converted ADU shall comply with the following design standards:
         (a)   When a garage is converted into an ADU, the garage door must be
removed and replaced with either windows, a door, or other design features that
are consistent with the overall architectural design of the ADU and the primary
dwelling unit;
         (b)   The exterior design of the ADU shall match that of the main
dwelling unit in term of building forms, materials used, color, exterior
finishes, roof forms, and style of windows/doors. The ADU must retain the
appearance of a single-family dwelling and shall be integrated into the design
of the existing primary dwelling unit on the property or as determined by the
Community Development Director or his or her designee;
         (c)   The design of an ADU shall be compatible with the architectural
design of the primary dwelling unit in order to ensure long term compatibility
regardless of whether the use of the ADU is continued or terminated. The
separate entrance shall be located on the side or rear of the structure and
whenever possible, located facing toward the interior yard areas. The
additional entrance is prohibited from being located on the front of the
primary dwelling unit. The second entrance shall be well lit and free of
concealment from landscaping to assure safe entrance and exit for the
occupants;
         (d)   All ADU facade elevations that are visible from the public right
of way must provide either entries, windows, or other architectural features
that are compatible with the existing primary dwelling unit;
         (e)   The main entrance of the ADU must face the same direction as the
entrance for the primary dwelling unit or face the side property lines,
whichever is more compatible to the neighborhood character as determined by the
City Planner. An ADU entrance that is proposed to face an alley or rear
property line is subject to review and approval by the City Planner;
         (f)   Shall conform to all single-family residential design guidelines
adopted by the city; and
         (g)   The design and construction of each ADU shall conform to all
applicable provisions of the Building Code. The ADU shall comply with all
provisions of the code pertaining to the adequacy of water, sewer, electrical,
drainage, and fire and emergency services to the property on which the ADU will
be located as well as all applicable codes pertaining to building, fire,
health, and/or safety.
   (N)   A constructed ADU, whether attached or detached (unless otherwise
mentioned), shall comply with the following development standards.
      (1)   Detached units shall meet the required front yard setback in the
applicable zone unless the applicant can demonstrate that the enforcement of
the front yard setback on the subject property prohibits the creation of an 800
square-foot ADU.
      (2)   Construction of an ADU shall be allowed in designated historical
districts; however, it must not be visible from the public-right-of-way.
      (3)   The unit shall not be more than 16 feet in height measured from the
lowest adjoining grade to the highest point of the structure, except in any of
the following circumstances:
         (a)   On a lot that is located within one-half of one mile walking
distance of a major transit stop or high-quality transit corridor, as defined
in § 21155 of the Public Resources Code, a maximum height of 18 feet along with
an additional two feet in height to accommodate roof pitch on the accessory
dwelling unit that is aligned with the roof pitch of the primary dwelling unit
shall be allowed.
         (b)   On a lot with an existing or proposed multi-family, multi-story
dwelling, a maximum height of 18 feet shall be allowed.
         (c)   When an accessory dwelling unit is attached to a primary
dwelling, a maximum height of 25 feet, not to exceed two stories, shall be
allowed.
      (4)   A two-story detached ADU shall only be allowed when the creation of
an 800 square-foot ADU cannot be achieved as a one-story, subject to building
height and setback standards.
      (5)   Construction of new units over an existing residential unit or a
non-habitable accessory structure are not permitted.
      (6)   The unit shall be set back a minimum of four feet from any side or
rear lot line.
         (a)   When a garage or other accessory structure exists and is legally
permitted with building permits, the existing legal non-conforming setback can
be maintained. However, the required minimum side and rear yard setback of four
feet shall still apply to any added square footage to the structure.
      (7)   The unit shall maintain six feet separation to any other accessory
building or main building on the same building site. The six-foot distance
shall be measured from the closest points of the building walls or structure
walls. Additionally, a minimum of four feet shall be maintained between eave
overhangs, chimneys, bay windows or any other architectural feature.
      (8)   The ADU may not be located in a way that would prohibit access to a
designated parking area or impede safe ingress and egress from a required
front, side, or rear setback.
      (9)   One parking space (provided as covered, uncovered, mechanical
automobile parking lift, or tandem space on the existing driveway) is required
per one bedroom or unit, whichever is less, except in any of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   The ADU is located within one-half mile walking distance of
public transit (measured by walking distance route);
         (b)   The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically
significant historic district;
         (c)   When on-street parking permits are required to park in the city,
but not offered to the occupant of the ADU;
         (d)   When there is a car share vehicle located within one block of
the ADU; or
         (e)   When a permit application for an ADU is submitted with a permit
application to create a new single-family or multi-family dwelling on the same
lot, provided that the ADU or the parcel satisfy any other criteria listed in
the above referenced exceptions.
      (10)   When the existing parking spaces for the primary unit are
demolished in conjunction with the development of a constructed ADU, the
replacement parking spaces for the main dwelling unit shall not be required.
      (11)   Constructed ADUs shall conform to the following design standards:
         (a)   The exterior design of the ADU shall match that of the main
dwelling unit in term of building forms, materials used, color, exterior
finishes, roof forms, and style of windows/doors. The ADU must retain the
appearance of a single-family dwelling and shall be integrated into the design
of the existing primary dwelling unit on the property or as determined by the
Community Development Director or his or her designee;
         (b)   The design of an attached ADU shall be compatible with the
architectural design of the primary dwelling unit in order to ensure long term
compatibility regardless of whether the use of the ADU is continued or
terminated. The separate entrance shall be located on the side or rear of the
structure and whenever possible, located facing toward the interior yard areas.
The additional entrance is prohibited from being located on the front of the
primary dwelling unit. The second entrance shall be well lit and free of
concealment from landscaping to assure safe entrance and exit for the
occupants;
         (c)   All ADU facade elevations that are visible from the public
right-of-way must provide either entries, windows, or other architectural
features that are compatible with the existing primary dwelling unit;
         (d)   The main entrance of a detached ADU must face the same direction
as the entrance for the primary dwelling unit or face the side property lines,
whichever is more compatible to the neighborhood character as determined by the
City Planner. An ADU entrance that is proposed to face an alley or rear
property line is subject to review and approval by the City Planner;
         (e)   If attached to the garage, there shall be no direct access from
the garage to the ADU;
         (f)   Shall be screened with a combination of trees, massed shrubbery,
and ground plantings sufficient in the opinion of the City Landscape Architect
to comply with the San Gabriel Municipal Code and city design guidelines;
         (g)   Shall conform to all single-family residential design guidelines
adopted by the city and must be reviewed ministerially without a hearing and
within the 60-day allowed time window; and
         (h)   The design and construction of each ADU shall conform to all
applicable provisions of the Building Code. The ADU shall comply with all
provisions of the code pertaining to the adequacy of water, sewer, electrical,
drainage, and fire and emergency services to the property on which the ADU will
be located as well as all applicable codes pertaining to building, fire,
health, and/or safety.
   (O)   Upon issuance of a building permit for an ADU, a covenant shall be
recorded with the County of Los Angeles in a form approved by the city prior to
recordation. The following declaration will be binding on all future owners of
the parcel:
      (1)   The ADU may not be sold separately from the primary dwelling unit
unless certain conditions are met according to Cal. Gov't Code § 65852.26; and
      (2)   The unit may not be rented out for a term of less than 30 days.
   (P)   All of the provisions of this section shall apply to a junior ADU
unless otherwise stated in the following:
      (1)   A junior ADU is limited to a maximum of 500 square feet.
      (2)   One junior ADU is allowed per residential zoned property that has a
single-family dwelling unit.
      (3)   A junior ADU must be built within the primary residence.
      (4)   The junior ADU must be constructed within the existing walls of the
structure and must include an existing bedroom.
      (5)   The junior ADU must provide a separate entrance from the entrance
that is provided for the main dwelling unit.
      (6)   The junior ADU may include an expansion of not more than 150 square
feet beyond the same dimensions of the existing accessory structure. This
expansion shall be limited to accommodating ingress and egress.
      (7)   The junior ADU shall require the recordation of a deed restriction,
which shall run with the land, shall be filed with the city, and shall include
the following:
         (a)   Require owner-occupancy in the single-family residence in which
the junior accessory dwelling unit will be permitted. The owner may reside in
either the remaining portion of the structure or the newly created junior
accessory dwelling unit. Owner-occupancy shall not be required if the owner is
another governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization;
         (b)   A prohibition on the sale of the junior ADU separate from the
sale of the single-family residence, including a statement that the deed
restriction may be enforced against future purchasers; and
         (c)   A restriction on the size and attributes of the junior ADU that
conforms with this section.
      (8)   The junior ADU must provide an efficiency kitchen, which shall
include the following:
         (a)   A cooking facility with appliances; and
         (b)   A food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of
reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.
      (9)   Additional parking may not be required as a condition to allow a
junior ADU.
      (10)   An inspection, including the imposition of a fee for that
inspection to determine whether the junior ADU is in compliance with applicable
building standards may be required at any time after the junior ADU has been
built.
      (11)   For the purposes of any fire or life protection ordinance or
regulation, a junior ADU shall not be considered a separate or new dwelling
unit. This section shall not be construed to prohibit a city, county, city and
county, or other local public entity from adopting an ordinance or regulation
relating to fire and life protection requirements within a single-family
residence that contains a junior accessory dwelling unit so long as the
ordinance or regulation applies uniformly to all single-family residences
within the zone regardless of whether the single-family residence includes a
junior ADU or not.
      (12)   For the purposes of providing service for water, sewer, or power,
including a connection fee, a junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be
considered a separate or new dwelling unit.
      (13)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit a local agency
from adopting an ordinance or regulation, related to parking or a service or a
connection fee for water, sewer, or power, that applies to a single-family
residence that contains a junior ADU, so long as that ordinance or regulation
applies uniformly to all single-family residences regardless of whether the
single-family residence includes a junior ADU.
   (Q)   The city shall ministerially approve an application to move forward
with the building plan check process if the following criteria is met:
      (1)   One accessory dwelling unit and one junior accessory dwelling unit
per lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling if all of the
following apply:
         (a)   The accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit is
within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling or existing space of a
single-family dwelling or accessory structure and may include an expansion of
not more than 150 square feet beyond the same physical dimensions as the
existing accessory structure. An expansion beyond the physical dimensions of
the existing accessory structure shall be limited to accommodating ingress and
egress;
         (b)   The space has exterior access from the proposed or existing
single-family dwelling;
         (c)   The side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire and safety;
and
         (d)   The junior accessory dwelling unit complies with the
requirements of Cal. Gov't Code § 65852.22.
      (2)   One detached, new construction, accessory dwelling unit that does
not exceed four-foot side and rear yard setbacks for a lot with a proposed or
existing single-family dwelling. The accessory dwelling unit may be combined
with a junior accessory dwelling unit described in division (Q)(1).
         (a)   The detached ADU is limited to 800 square feet and a maximum
height of 16 feet.
      (3)   Multiple accessory dwelling units within the portions of existing
multi-family dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, including,
but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics,
basements, or garages, if each unit complies with state building standards for
dwellings.
         (a)   The city shall allow at least one accessory dwelling unit within
an existing multi-family dwelling and shall allow up to 25% of the existing
multi-family dwelling units.
      (4)   Not more than two accessory dwelling units that are located on a
lot that has an existing multi-family dwelling, but are detached from that
multi-family dwelling and are subject to a height limit of 16 feet and four-
foot rear yard and side setbacks.
   (R)   The owner of any permitted senior housing unit may file an application
to have such unit approved as an ADU pursuant to this section and eliminate the
conditional use permit. The application shall be granted if the senior housing
unit meets all of the requirements of this section.
   (S)   The city shall not require, as a condition for ministerial approval of
a permit application for the creation of an ADU or a junior ADU, the correction
of non-conforming zoning conditions, building code violations, or unpermitted
structures that do not present a threat to public health and safety and are not
affected by the construction of the ADU or junior ADU.
   (T)   Impacts fees shall not be charged for an ADU that is less than 750
square feet. Any impact fees charged for an ADU of 750 square feet or more
shall be charged proportionately in relation to the square footage of the
primary dwelling unit or the number of its drainage fixtures.
   (U)   The Public Works Department shall determine address assignments for
new ADUs/junior ADUs and shall verify any public easements and land dedications
required by the San Gabriel Municipal Code.
   (V)   All existing conditional use permits and existing permits for ADUs
(formerly second residential units or senior housing units) shall remain
subject to conditions imposed thereon at the time such permits were granted,
except that any condition that limits the occupants of a permitted unit to
certain named persons, or certain classes of persons, or which requires the
permittees to identify the residents of the unit to the city by name, or to
obtain a new permit for the purpose of authorizing a new resident, shall not
longer be applicable.
   (W)   The permitting agency shall either approve or deny the application to
create an accessory dwelling unit or a junior accessory dwelling unit within 60
days from the date the local agency receives a completed application if there
is an existing single-family or multi-family dwelling on the lot. If the permit
application to create an accessory dwelling unit or a junior accessory dwelling
unit is submitted with a permit application to create a new single-family or
multi-family dwelling on the lot, the permitting agency may delay approving or
denying the permit application for the accessory dwelling unit or the junior
accessory dwelling unit until the permitting agency approves or denies the
permit application to create the new single-family or multi-family dwelling,
but the application to create the accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory
dwelling unit shall be considered without discretionary review or hearing. If
the applicant requests a delay, the 60-day time period shall be tolled for the
period of the delay. If the permitting agency denies an application for an
accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit, the permitting
agency shall, within the time period described, return in writing a full set of
comments to the applicant with a list of items that are defective or deficient
and a description of how the application can be remedied by the applicant.
   (X)   A permit application for an ADU or a junior ADU shall be considered
and approved ministerially without discretionary review or a hearing. The city
shall approve or deny the application to create an ADU or a junior ADU within
60 days from the date that the city receives a completed application if there
is an existing single-family or multi-family dwelling on the lot. If the permit
application to create an ADU or a junior ADU is submitted with a permit
application to create a new single-family dwelling on the lot, the city may
delay approving or denying the permit application for the ADU or the junior ADU
until the city approves or denies the permit application to create the single-
family dwelling, but the application to create the ADU or the junior ADU shall
be considered without discretionary review or hearing. If the applicant
requests a delay, the 60-day time period shall be tolled for the period of the
delay. If the local agency has not acted upon the completed application within
60 days, the application shall be deemed approved.
   (Y)   In enforcing building standards pursuant to Article 1 (commencing with
§ 17960) of Chapter 5 of Part 1.5 of Division 13 of the Cal. Health and Safety
Code for an accessory dwelling unit described in divisions (1) or (2) below, a
local agency, upon request of an owner of an accessory dwelling unit for a
delay in enforcement, shall delay enforcement of a building standard, subject
to compliance with § 17980.12 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code:
      (1)   The ADU was built before January 1, 2020;
      (2)   The ADU was built on or after January 1, 2020, in a local
jurisdiction that, at the time the ADU was built, had a noncompliant ADU
ordinance, but the ordinance is compliant at the time the request is made.
   (Z)   Any person proposing to develop an ADU and/or junior ADU must submit
the following materials to the Planning Division:
      (1)   A complete application form;
      (2)   Site plan, floor plan, elevations, pictures, and such materials as
may be deemed necessary by the City Planner to make a determination on the
application;
      (3)   A copy of the property deed establishing the identity of the owner
of record for the property; and
      (4)   The applicable site plan review fee in accordance with the City of
San Gabriel adopted citywide fee schedule in effect at the time that the
application is submitted. An application shall not be deemed complete until all
necessary information has been provided.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
544-C.S., passed 8-17-04; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14; Am. Ord. 644-C.S.,
passed 6-19-18; Am. Ord. 653, passed 10-1-19; Am. Ord. 661, passed 1-7-20; Am.
Ord. 662, passed 1-21-20; Am. Ord. 706, passed 5-7-24) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.048 URBAN DWELLING UNITS AND URBAN LOT SPLITS.
   Urban dwelling units and/or urban lot splits shall be permitted by the
Community Development Director or designee upon determining that the
application meets all of the following requirements.
   (A)   Urban dwelling units. The following requirements shall apply to urban
dwellings units in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.21:
      (1)   Zoning designation. Any proposed urban dwelling unit must be
located in a single-family residential zone including the R-1 (Single-Family
Residence), R-1CC (Single-Family Residence Country Club), and the R-1V (Villa
Residential within the Mission District Specific Plan) zones.
      (2)   Historical designation. Any proposed urban dwelling unit must not
be located within a historic district or property included on the State
Historic Resources Inventory (see Cal. Public Resources Code § 5020.1), or
within a site that is designated or listed as a city or county landmark or
historic property or district pursuant to a city or county ordinance.
      (3)   Demolition and alteration. A proposed urban dwelling unit must not
require demolition or alteration of any of the following types of housing:
         (a)   Housing that is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or
law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of
moderate, low, or very low income.
         (b)   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control
through a public entity's valid exercise of police power.
         (c)   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three
years.
      (4)   Restriction on demolition. A proposed urban dwelling unit must not
require the demolition of more than 25% of the existing exterior structural
walls. This restriction would not apply if the existing housing has been owner-
occupied or vacant (not occupied by a tenant) in the last three years.
      (5)   A proposed urban dwelling unit must not be on a parcel on which an
owner of residential real property has exercised the owner's rights under
Chapter 12.75 (commencing with § 7060) of Division 7 of Title 1 to withdraw
accommodations from rent or lease within 15 years before the date that the
development proponent applies.
      (6)   Two units per lot. The parcel for the proposed urban dwelling unit
development must contain no more than two units. Existing and proposed ADUs and
Junior ADUs will be counted toward the maximum number of units.
      (7)   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) and Junior ADUs. An urban dwelling
unit shall not be permitted if the property is already developed with an ADU or
Junior ADU. In addition, if an urban dwelling is developed on the property, an
ADU or Junior ADU shall not be permitted thereafter.
      (8)   Short term rentals prohibited. Urban dwellings units shall not be
rented as short term rentals. Any rental of the urban dwelling unit must be for
a term longer than 30 consecutive calendar days.
      (9)   Single story minimum setbacks. The urban dwelling unit must have a
minimum of four feet side and rear yard setback from the property line. No
setback is required for an existing, permitted structure or a structure
constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing,
permitted structure.
      (10)   Parking requirement. At least one on-site uncovered parking space
must be provided for each urban dwelling unit unless the newly created parcel
meets one of the following exceptions:
         (a)   The parcel is within one-half mile from a "high quality transit
corridor".
         (b)   The parcel is within one-half mile from a "major transit stop".
         (c)   A car share vehicle is located within one block of the parcel.
      (11)   Fire sprinklers are required in the urban dwelling unit.
      (12)   Ministerial review. Proposed projects for an urban dwelling unit
must be reviewed ministerially, without a discretionary review process and/or
public hearing, and shall be subject to the administrative clearance process
outlined in §
153.048(D).
      (13)   Request for lot split. An applicant that requests an urban lot
split must provide so in writing on both the planning application form as well
have it clearly identified on the project plans.
   (B)   Objective development and design standards. Urban dwelling units shall
be subject to the following development and design standards:
      (1)   Size. The maximum size of an urban dwelling unit must not exceed
800 square feet and must be a minimum of 500 square feet.
      (2)   Height. The maximum allowed height is 16 feet and must be limited
to a one story structure. In instances where an 800 square-foot urban dwelling
unit cannot be achieved as a one-story, a second story would be allowed to meet
minimum square footage requirements. In the case that a two-story urban
dwelling unit is allowed, the maximum height allowed is 28 feet.
      (3)   Front yard setback. A minimum front yard setback of 20 feet is
required for urban dwelling units. The measuring point shall be taken from the
front lot line to the closest point of the urban dwelling unit.
      (4)   Two-story structure. A two-story urban dwelling unit may only be
allowed when an 800 square-foot urban dwelling unit cannot be achieved as a
one-story.
      (5)   Setback for two-story structure. In the case that a two-story urban
dwelling unit is allowed, the second floor must provide a four-foot side
setback from the first story if the setback does not preclude the development
of a minimum 800 square foot unit.
      (6)   Building separation. No detached urban dwelling unit shall be
closer than six feet to any other accessory building, urban dwelling unit, or
to the main building or dwelling, on the same lot or parcel. The six-foot
distance shall be measured from the closet points of the building walls or
structure walls. Additionally, a minimum of four feet shall be maintained
between eave overhangs, chimneys, bay windows or any other architectural
feature.
      (7)   Retention of existing architectural style and elements. Additions
or new urban dwelling units added to sites where an existing structure will be
retained must match the architectural style of the main dwelling including but
not limited to the roof pitch, window size, window type, exterior building
materials, lighting fixtures, and paint colors.
      (8)   Neighborhood context. Urban dwelling units should match the context
of the surrounding neighborhood in regards to architectural style, color,
exterior materials, and exterior architectural elements.
      (9)   Open space. Urban dwellings must provide a minimum of 400 square
feet of private open space. The open space must be directly accessible to the
urban dwelling it serves.
      (10)   Building Code compliance. The design and construction of each
urban dwelling unit shall conform to all applicable provisions of the Building
Code. The urban dwelling unit shall comply with all provisions of the San
Gabriel Municipal Code pertaining to the adequacy of water, sewer, electrical,
drainage, and fire and emergency services to the property on which the urban
dwelling unit will be located as well as all applicable codes pertaining to
building, fire, health, and/or safety.
   (C)   Urban lot splits. The following requirements apply to urban lot splits
in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66411.7:
      (1)   Zoning designation. A proposed urban lot split is only allowed in a
Single-Family Residential zone including the R-1 (Single-Family Residence), R-
1CC (Single-Family Residence Country Club), and the R-1V (Villa Residential
within the Mission District Specific Plan) zones.
      (2)   Historic designation. A proposed urban lot split must not be
located within a historic district or property included on the State Historic
Resources Inventory, see Cal. Public Resources Code § 5020.1, or within a site
that is designated or listed as a city or county landmark or historic property
or district pursuant to a city or county ordinance.
      (3)   Demolition and alteration. A proposed urban lot split must not
require the demolition or alteration of any of the following:
         (a)   Housing that is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or
law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of
moderate, low, or very low income.
         (b)   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control
through a public entity's valid exercise of its police power.
         (c)   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three
years.
      (4)   Maximum number of lots. The maximum number of newly created lots as
the result of an urban lot split is two lots.
      (5)   Minimum allowed lot size. Both newly created parcels shall have a
minimum of 1,200 square feet sized lots and be of approximately equal lot area.
No lot shall be smaller than 40% of the lot area of the original lot.
      (6)   Flag lots. No flag lots shall be created as a result of an urban
lot split.
      (7)   Easement. In the case of rear parcel created as a result of an
urban lot split with no direct access to the public right-of-way, an easement
must be provided over the front parcel to the rear parcel for access to the
public right-of-way, providing public services and facilities, maintenance of
utilities, and (if required) fire department access.
      (8)   Existing structure setbacks. No setback is required for an
existing, permitted structure or a structure constructed in the same location
and to the same dimensions as an existing, permitted structure.
      (9)   Adjacent sites. The owner of the parcel of the proposed urban lot
split shall sign an affidavit that states that neither the owner of the parcel
being subdivided nor any person acting in concert with the owner has previously
subdivided an adjacent parcel using an urban lot split as provided for in this
section.
      (10)   Ministerial review. Proposals for urban lot splits must be
reviewed ministerially, without discretionary review or a public hearing, and
shall be subject to the administrative clearance process outlined in §
153.048(D).
      (11)   Subdivision Map Act. Urban lot splits must conform to all
applicable objective requirements of the Subdivision Map Act (Division 2
(commencing with § 66410)), except as expressly provided in this section.
      (12)   Dedication and/or off-site improvements. Dedication and/or off-
site improvements cannot be required as a condition of approval for parcel maps
regarding urban lot splits.
      (13)   Owner affidavit. The owner of the originally subdivided lot must
sign an affidavit that states the owner will reside on-site in one of the units
as their principal place of residence for a minimum of three years from the
date of the approval of the urban lot split.
      (14)   Short term rentals. The use of short term rentals for any unit
created by an urban lot split is prohibited. Any unit created pursuant to this
chapter must be for a term longer than 30 consecutive calendar days.
      (15)   Request for lot split. An applicant that requests an urban lot
split must request the subdivision in writing on both the planning application
form and clearly identified on the project plans.
   (D)   Application process. The provisions of this section apply to the
processing of urban dwelling units and urban lot splits:
      (1)   Application. An application for the urban dwelling unit and/or
urban lot split must be filed with the Community Development Department. The
Community Development Director shall determine the minimum filing procedures,
content and form of materials which must be submitted before the city can
review and take action on the request. The filing procedures and forms shall be
published and made available to the public. No petition shall be received
unless it complies with all filing requirements. All applications must include
the applicable review fees.
      (2)   Approval body. The Community Development Director acts on all
proposed urban dwelling units and urban lot split applications and has the
authority to interpret and establish guidance and procedures for the approving
of such urban dwelling units and/or urban lot splits, consistent with state and
local law. Urban dwelling unit and urban lot split applications must be
reviewed ministerially and do not require a public hearing or noticing.
      (3)   Review process. The Community Development Director will route
applications for urban dwelling units and urban lot splits to necessary city
departments for review and comment. Staff will provide comments to the
applicant for review and consideration from the city departments.
      (4)   Approval. If the application for the urban dwelling unit and/or
urban lot split meets all the requirements established in this section, the
Community Development Director shall approve or approve with conditions, the
application. The action of the Community Development Director is final and
conclusive, in the absence of an appeal.
      (5)   Appeal. Any decision of the Community Development Director may be
appealed to the City Council within the time and manner specified by §
153.004. The City Council may approve, deny or modify, in whole or in part, the
action of the Community Development Director. The City Council shall utilize
the evaluation criteria herein in making its decision.
(Ord. 683, passed 2-1-22)
§ 153.049 GARAGE SPACE REQUIRED.
   (A)   For new houses or for cumulative additions to existing houses of more
than 25% of the existing gross floor area, the enclosed garage space
requirements shall be based on the number of bedrooms as defined in
§ 153.045(B), pursuant to the following:
 
Number of Bedrooms Number of Car Spaces
1 to 4             2
5 or 6             3
7 or more          4 plus 1 space for every 2 additional bedrooms
 
   (B)   Each new garage space required shall have internal dimensions of ten
feet by 20 feet, and be independently accessible. Tandem parking shall not be
permissible for the purposes of determining the required parking spaces.
Carports and any other similar structure(s) shall be prohibited. The internal
dimension requirement shall apply only when a new garage space is required by
the construction of additional bedrooms and shall not be applied as a minimum
dimensional standard to existing garages.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 589 C.S., passed 2-1-11)  Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.050 SELECTED USES PERMITTED BY A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; LIMITATIONS AND
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Such uses as specified in
§ 151.032, except ADUs, shall also comply with the following limitations and
standards:
   (A)   All such uses shall have and maintain a minimum net lot area of not
less than 21,780 square feet; and
   (B)   All such uses shall have and maintain a minimum width, depth and
street frontage of 70 feet; and
   (C)   All such uses the side yard area shall be a minimum width of ten feet,
and the rear yard area shall be a minimum depth of ten feet; and
   (D)   All buildings, structures, and landscaping will be developed in a
manner harmonious and compatible with development on surrounding properties;
and
   (E)   All exterior parking areas will be screened with landscaping in a
manner that ensures compatibility with and an enhancement to surrounding
properties; and
   (F)   All exterior lighting will be designed, oriented, and constructed to
shield adjacent properties from adverse glare effects.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96; Am. Ord. 644-C.S., passed 6-19-18) Penalty, see
§
153.999
§ 153.051 SLEEPING QUARTERS AIR SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   The following provisions are requirements established by the County Health
Code adopted in
§ 97.01 of this code.
   (A)   Each single family dwelling unit located in the R-1 Zone shall comply
with the following air space requirements:
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for a person to occupy or permit another
person to occupy any room in a single family dwelling unit for sleeping
purposes unless such room shall contain at least 560 cubic feet of air space;
and
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for a person to permit other persons or for
two persons to occupy any room in a single family dwelling unit for sleeping
purposes unless such room contains at least 630 cubic feet of air space; and
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for a person to permit other persons or for
two persons to occupy any room in a single family dwelling unit for sleeping
purposes unless such room contains at least 630 cubic feet of air space plus
500 cubic feet of air space for each person occupying the room in excess of two
persons; and
      (4)   Hallways, passageways, closets, bathrooms or toilet rooms shall not
be considered in the determination of the available air space in sleeping
quarters.
   (B)   Existing nonconformity. No building shall be deemed nonconforming
pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section solely on the basis of available
air space in sleeping quarters lawfully constructed in accordance with all
regulations applicable at the time of its construction.
(Ord. 466-C.S., passed 11-5-96) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
LIMITED TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE ZONES (R-1A)
§ 153.055 USES PERMITTED.
   The following uses shall be permitted in Limited Two-Family Residence Zones
(R-1A):
   (A)   All uses permitted in the Single-Family Residence Zones (R-1); and
   (B)   One additional single-family dwelling unit for each 5,500 square feet
of lot area in excess of the minimum site area of 5,500 square feet; and
   (C)   One accessory dwelling unit as provided for in §
153.047, and provided all other requirements relating to the development of
such units in the R-1 Zone are met; and
   (D)   Conditionally permitted uses in the Single-Family Residence Zone (R-1)
shall be permitted by conditional use permit as well in this zone.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.501) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 686, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 427-C.S., passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord. 644-
C.S., passed 6-19-18)
§ 153.056 HEIGHT LIMIT.
   (A)   Buildings in the R-1A Zone may be two stories in height but shall not
exceed 28 feet.
   (B)   No accessory building or detached garage in the R-1A Zone shall be
more than 15 feet in height, measured from the lowest adjoining grade to the
highest point of the structure, without first having obtained a conditional use
permit as provided for in
§§ 153.241 et seq.
('65 Code, § 9-3.502) (Ord. 337-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 398-C.S., passed -
- ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.057 SITE AREA.
   The minimum building site area in R-1A Zones shall be on one lot of not less
than 5,500 square feet.
('65 Code, § 9-3.503) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 686, passed - - )
Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.058 FRONT YARDS.
   (A)   Each front yard in an R-1A Zone shall be not less than 20% of the
average depth of the lots in the block; provided, however, in no case shall the
front yard be less than 20 feet, and it need not exceed 35 feet; and provided,
further, where lots comprising 25% or more of the frontage of the block are
occupied by buildings, no building erected or structurally altered upon such
frontage shall project beyond the average front yard line of the lots next
adjacent thereto on either side. A vacant lot shall be considered for this
purpose as having a front yard as provided heretofore in this section. A lot
having a front yard more than 35 feet in depth shall be considered for this
purpose as having a front yard 35 feet in depth.
   (B)   Open, unenclosed porches, platforms, or land places not covered by a
roof, awning, or canopy and not surrounded by a railing, which porches,
platforms, or landings do not extend above the level of the ground floor of the
building, may extend or project into the front yard not more than six feet.
   (C)   On key lots the minimum front yard shall be the average of the
required front yard for the adjoining interior lot and the required side yard
along the street side of the adjoining reversed corner lot. Where existing
buildings on either or both of such adjoining lots are located nearer to the
street than the yards required above, the yards established by such existing
buildings shall be used in computing the front yard for a key lot.
('65 Code, § 9-3.504) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 686, passed - - )
Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.059 SIDE YARDS; SINGLE STORY.
   (A)   Total side yards in the R-1A Zone shall be 16 feet with a minimum of
six feet on any one side. Cornices and eaves may extend into the required side
yard for a distance not to exceed 18 inches. No other miscellaneous
encroachments such as chimneys, bay windows or other architectural feature are
permitted, except in a side yard of eight feet or more, in which case an
encroachment of a maximum of 18 inches is allowed. For lots of more than 10,000
square feet and 70 feet of lot frontage, each side yard setback shall be
increased by one foot for each 1,000 square feet over the 10,000 square foot
base. Outside stairways, porches, or landing places unenclosed and unroofed may
extend into a required side yard for a distance not to exceed three feet.
   (B)   On corner lots, the side yard on the street side shall not be less
than 12 feet.
   (C)   Detached nonhabitable accessory buildings not exceeding one story in
height shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of four feet if the building
is less than 100 feet from the front property line, and two feet if the
building is more than 100 feet from the front property line. For habitable
accessory buildings, the side yard setback is five feet.
   (D)   A single story addition to a single story house may be constructed by
maintaining the existing building line of the house for a maximum of 50% of the
length of the existing house or 25 feet, whichever is greater, provided that
the existing side yard setback is at least four feet.
('65 Code, § 9-3.505) (Ord. 337-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 357-C.S., passed -
- ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.060 SIDE YARDS; SECOND STORY.
   Any portion of a single-family dwelling that is in excess of one story shall
maintain side yard setbacks of ten feet from each side property line. Cornices
and eaves may extend into the required side yard for a distance not to exceed
18 inches. No other miscellaneous encroachments such as chimneys, bay windows
or any other architectural features are permitted, except in a side yard of
eight feet or more, in which case an encroachment of a maximum of 18 inches is
allowed.
('65 Code, § 9-3.505(a)) (Ord. 337-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.061 REAR YARDS.
   (A)   The rear yard in R-1A yards shall be not less than 20 feet in depth.
   (B)   In computing the depth of the rear yard from any building where such
yard opens upon a public street, alley, way, or park, one-half, but not to
exceed ten feet of the width of such street, alley, way, or park, may be
considered to be a portion of the rear yard.
   (C)   Outside stairways, unroofed and unenclosed, may extend into rear yards
for a distance not to exceed four and one-half feet.
   (D)   A detached accessory building not exceeding one story in height may
occupy not more than one- half the area of the rear yard.
('65 Code, § 9-3.506) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 686, passed - - )
Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.062 DISTANCES BETWEEN BUILDINGS.
   No detached dwelling, or other main building, in the R-1A Zones shall be
closer than 20 feet to any other detached dwelling or main building on the same
building site, and no detached accessory building, or ADU shall be closer than
six feet to any other accessory building or main building on the same building
site. No detached accessory building shall be used as a dwelling prior to the
erection, construction, or occupancy of a dwelling, apartment house, hotel, or
other principal or main structure permitted within the R Zones.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.507) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 686, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord. 653, passed 10-1-19) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.063 LOT COVERAGE.
   Lot coverage for existing and new single-family homes shall not exceed 35%
of the total net lot area. For the purposes of this calculation, buildings,
impervious surfaces greater than 42 inches in width (other than required
driveways), covered and uncovered patios (other than required landings),
accessory structures (including but not limited to garages, carports, storage
sheds, gazebos, pool equipment rooms and similar structures), and raised and
at-grade decks shall be counted toward the lot coverage.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.508) (Ord. 337-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-
17-03; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14; Am. Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.064 FLOOR AREA RATIO; SECOND STORY.
   No single-family dwelling in excess of one story in whole or part shall
exceed a floor area ratio (FAR) of .35. Detached garages are excluded from the
calculation. Excluded from the calculation are any other detached accessory
buildings not intended to be habitable.
('65 Code, § 9-3.509) (Ord. 337-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.065 FLOOR AREA; SECOND STORY.
   The second story floor area shall be 25% less than the first floor area.
Detached garages are excluded from the calculation. Integral garages are
included within the calculation. An integral garage is one with at least two
sides connected to the house.
('65 Code, § 9-3.510) (Ord. 337-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.066 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN.
   If an integrated garage is proposed to be located in the front of a house,
then the garage portion shall be set back an additional ten feet from the
average front line of the house portion. Lots greater than 10,000 square feet
and 70 feet of lot frontage are excluded from this requirement.
('65 Code, § 9-3.511) (Ord. 337-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.067 ADDITIONAL GARAGE SPACE REQUIRED.
   For new or existing houses, if the total living area of the house is more
than 2,500 square feet, then one additional garage space is required.
('65 Code, § 9-3.512) (Ord. 337-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
LOW DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE ZONES (R-2)
§ 153.079 PURPOSE.
   The following regulations shall be applicable to all use of property in the
R-2 zone, to promote the general welfare and encourage smart growth by
achieving the following:
   (A)   To ensure that the size of new structures and additions does not
exceed the scale of their surroundings;
   (B)   To provide adequate separation between structures and the surrounding
properties and streets to allow for light, ventilation and access;
   (C)   To compensate for the density of the residential development through
the provision of adequate passive and active open space areas;
   (D)   To maximize security through the use of common semi-public areas and
mutually visible entries; and
   (E)   To conform to residential design guidelines as they maybe adopted from
time to time by the City Council.
(Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.080 USES PERMITTED.
   The following uses shall be permitted in Low Density Multiple-Family
Residence Zones (R-2):
   (A)   All uses permitted in the Single-Family Residence Zones (R-1) and
Limited Two-Family Residence Zones (R-1A);
   (B)   Group dwellings and multiple-family dwellings;
   (C)   State licensed family day care homes; and
   (D)   Residential care facilities housing six or fewer persons.
   (E)   ADUs shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of §
153.047, and provided all other requirements relating to the development of
such units in the R-l Zone are met.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.601) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 80-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 410-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., approved 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
653, passed 10-1-19)
§ 153.081 HEIGHT LIMIT.
   The maximum building height is two stories or 35 feet.
('65 Code, § 9-3.602) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 80-C.S., passed - - )
Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.082 SITE AREA.
   The minimum building site area in the R-2 Zone shall be one lot, but in no
case shall a lot having an area less than 7,920 square feet be used as a
building site for more than one family dwelling unit; provided, however, the
minimum site area shall be 3,960 square feet of net lot area for each family
dwelling unit. Further, no lot created after September 20, 1985 shall have less
than 70 feet of street frontage or an area of less than 10,000 square feet.
(‘65 Code, §9-3.603) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 80-C.S., passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 543-C.S., passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord. 653, passed 10-1-19) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.083 FRONT YARDS.
   (A)   Each front yard in R-2 Zones shall be not less than 20 feet, and not
more than 25 feet; and provided, further, where lots comprising 25% or more of
the frontage of the block are occupied by buildings, no building erected or
structurally altered upon such frontage shall, project beyond the average front
yard line of the lots next adjacent thereto on either side. A vacant lot shall
be considered for this purpose as having a front yard as provided heretofore in
this section. A lot having a front yard more than 25 feet in depth shall be
considered for this purpose as having a front yard 25 feet in depth.
   (B)   Open, unenclosed porches, platforms, or landing places not covered by
a roof, awning, or canopy and not surrounded by a railing, which porches,
platforms, or landings do not extend above the level of the ground floor of the
building, may extend or project into the required front yard not more than six
feet.
('65 Code, § 9-3.604) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 797, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 80-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.084 SIDE YARDS.
   (A)   Minimum side yards in R-2 Zones shall not be less than five feet for
one story structures, 10 feet for two story structures up to 28 feet in height
and 15 feet for two story structures in excess of 28 feet in height.
   (B)   On corner lots the side yard on the side street shall be not less than
12 feet.
   (C)   Outside stairways, porches, or landing places unenclosed and unroofed
may extend into a side yard for a distance not to exceed three feet.
   (D)   Cornices, canopies, eaves, or any architectural feature not providing
additional floor space within the building may extend into a side yard a
distance not to exceed one foot.
('65 Code, § 9-3.605) (Ord. 556, passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.085 REAR YARDS.
   (A)   The rear yard in R-2 Zones shall be not less than ten feet in depth,
unless the property abuts an R-1Zone, in which case the rear yard shall be not
less than 20 feet.
   (B)   Outside stairways, unroofed and unenclosed, may extend into rear yards
for a distance not to exceed four and one-half feet.
   (C)   A detached accessory building not exceeding one story in height shall
have a rear yard or not less than five feet and may not occupy more than one-
half the area of the rear yard.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.606) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 80-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.086 DISTANCES BETWEEN BUILDINGS.
   No detached dwelling, or other main building, in the R-2 Zone shall be
closer than 20 feet to any other detached dwelling or main building on the same
building site, and no detached accessory building, or ADU shall be closer than
six feet to any other accessory building or main building on the same building
site.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.607) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-17-
03; Am. Ord. 653, passed 10-1-19) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.087 MINIMUM SIZE OF DWELLING UNITS.
   Dwelling units in the R-2 Zone shall meet the following minimum standards:
   (A)   One-bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum of 880 square feet of
floor area.
   (B)   One-bedroom and den or two-bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum
of 1,100 square feet of floor area and shall have a full bathroom.
   (C)   Two-bedroom and den or three-bedroom dwelling units shall have a
minimum of 1,320 square feet of floor area and shall have, as a minimum, a
single bathroom and a 3/4 bathroom.
   (D)   The minimum size of a bedroom shall be 125 square feet, excluding
closet areas.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to ADUs.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.608) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 285-C.S., passed - -
; Am. Ord. 286-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord.
653, passed 10-1-19) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.088 [RESERVED].
§ 153.089 OPEN SPACE/RECREATIONAL AREAS REQUIRED.
   (A)   In the R-2 Zone, no new development of any multi-family dwellings or
group dwellings shall be approved and no building permits, use permits or other
entitlements shall be issued for any such development unless and until the
owner or his designated representative files with and to the satisfaction of
the Community Development Director, a site plan showing in addition to the
buildings and front, side and rear yards, recreational and leisure areas,
passive amenities, private areas and common areas as required by this section.
   (B)   In the R-2 Zone, a minimum of 500 square feet of recreational and
leisure area shall be provided for each bedroom within each multi-dwelling or
group dwelling project site.
   (C)   Such recreational and leisure areas may consist of the following:
      (1)   Private areas. Private areas consisting of patios, yards, or
balconies shall constitute a minimum of 40% of the total recreational and
leisure area provided. Private areas located on the ground level shall have a
minimum dimension of ten feet, a minimum area of 200 square feet and shall be
provided with solid enclosures between three and six feet in height and
composed of material that is compatible in design and color with the adjoining
dwelling unit. Private areas located above ground level shall have a minimum
dimension of six feet and minimum area of 50 square feet. Such balconies shall
be enclosed with railings which meet the safety standards of the latest adopted
edition of the California Building Code.
      (2)   Common areas. All recreational and leisure areas which are not used
for private areas shall consist of common areas. Common areas shall have a
minimum dimension of 20 feet and may include open lawn areas with less than a
10% grade, passive amenities, courtyards, and open spaces between buildings.
Pergolas, swimming pools, tennis courts, play lots, volleyball pits, enclosed
structures such as a gymnasium or racquetball court, or community gardens may
also count as common areas but shall not be located in the front yard. Enclosed
structures shall not constitute more than 10% of the total recreational and
leisure area. The remaining common area shall be open space, which shall be
usable and integral to the project.
      (3)   On-site open space reductions. The Planning Commission may grant up
to a 50% reduction in common open space requirements for developments that:
         (a)   Locate and allow public access to common open space areas
immediately contiguous and directly accessible to a public park;
         (b)   Provide publicly accessible trail easements or pedestrian
connections to existing open spaces, parks, or other public amenities; or
         (c)   Dedicate scenic and public access easements access along the
Alhambra wash or Rubio wash.
      (4)   Off-site dedication. As part of a citywide long-range park and open
space master plan, the city may establish a program where required recreational
and leisure area may be provided off-site through the dedication and
improvement of public open space consistent with city goals and policies.
Improvements may include but are not limited to pocket parks, trails, or public
plazas.
      (5)   In-lieu fee. The city may establish a program allowing for the
payment of fees in lieu of providing on-site common open space. If this program
is established, an applicant may opt to pay a fee at the rate established in
lieu of providing common-site open space. Fees collected may be used to
provide, enhance, or expand park and open space areas for residents.
(Ord. 308-C.S., passed 9-20-88; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord.
601-C.S., passed 3-4-14)
§ 153.090 ACOUSTICAL ANALYSIS.
   Prior to the issuance of any building permits for new homes within 1,000
feet of the I-10 freeway, within 500 feet of any rail line and within 200 feet
of any arterial street, the applicant shall submit an acoustical analysis to
the Community Development Director. This analysis shall indicate the existing
and projected Community Noise Equivalent Levels (CNEL's) on the site and the
method by which the noise is to be controlled or reduced to no more than 45 db
within the interior living space of all proposed dwelling units.
(Ord. 308-C.S., passed 9-20-88; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
§ 153.091 SINGLE-FAMILY STRUCTURE IN R-2 ZONE.
   All single-family residential units constructed in the R-2 Zone shall comply
with the development standards for single-family residential units in the R-
1 Zone.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE ZONES (R-3)
§ 153.099 PURPOSE.
   The following regulations shall be applicable to all use of property in the
R-3 zone, to promote the general welfare and encourage smart growth by
achieving the following:
   (A)   To ensure that the size of new structures and additions does not
exceed the scale of their surroundings;
   (B)   To provide adequate separation between structures and the surrounding
properties and streets to allow for light, ventilation and access;
   (C)   To compensate for the density of the residential development through
the provision of adequate passive and active open space areas;
   (D)   To maximize security through the use of common semi-public areas and
mutually visible entries; and
   (E)   To conform to residential design guidelines as they may be adopted
from time to time by the City Council.
(Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.100 USES PERMITTED.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the Multiple-Family Residence Zone
(R-3):
   (A)   All uses permitted in the Single-Family Residence Zone (R-1), Limited
Two-Family Residence Zone (R-1A), and Low Density Multiple-Family Residence
Zone (R-2);
   (B)   Group dwellings and multiple-family dwellings;
   (C)   Hospital and hospital related uses provided a conditional use permit
is obtained pursuant to §§
153.240 through
153.248; and
   (D)   All single-family residential units constructed in the R-3 Zone shall
comply with the development standards for single-family residential units in
the R-1 Zone (see §§
153.030 through
153.042).
   (E)   ADU shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of §
153.047, and provided all other requirements relating to the development of
such units in the R-1 Zone are met.
   (F)   Transitional and supportive housing as defined in Cal. Health & Safety
Code §§ 50675.2(h) and 50675.14(b).
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.701) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 652, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 241-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 410-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 534-C.S.,
passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord. 644-C.S., passed 6-
19-18)
§ 153.101 HEIGHT LIMIT.
   Maximum height is three stories or 35 feet.
('65 Code, § 9-3.702) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 285-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 286-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.102 SITE AREA.
   The minimum building site area in the R-3 Zone shall be one lot not less
than 5,000 square feet in area; provided, however, the minimum site area shall
be 1,742 square feet of net lot area for each family dwelling unit. No lot
created after September 20,1985 shall have less than 70 feet of street frontage
or an area of less than 10,000 square feet.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.703) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-17-
03; Am. Ord. 653, passed 10-1-19) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.103 FRONT YARDS.
   Each front yard in the R-3 Zone shall have a depth not less than 15 feet;
except that the front yard shall be set back an additional three feet for each
story which is proposed to be built above the first story.
('65 Code, § 9-3.704) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 285-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 286-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.104 SIDE YARDS.
   (A)   Each side yard in the R-3 Zone shall be not less than 10 feet in width
for buildings up to 28 feet in height and not less than 15 feet for buildings
in excess of 28 feet in height.
   (B)   On corner lots the side yard on the side street shall be not less than
ten feet in width.
   (C)   Outside stairways, porches, or landing places unenclosed and unroofed
may extend into a side yard for a distance not to exceed three feet.
   (D)   Cornices, canopies, eaves, or any architectural feature not providing
additional floor space within the building may extend into a side yard a
distance not to exceed one foot.
('65 Code, § 9-3.705) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 285-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 286-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.105 REAR YARDS.
   (A)   The rear yard in the R-3 Zone shall be not less than ten feet in
depth, unless the property abuts an R-1 Zone, in which case the rear yard shall
be not less than 20 feet.
   (B)   The rear yard shall be set back an additional three feet for each
story which is proposed to be built above the first story.
   (C)   Outside stairways, unroofed and unenclosed, may extend into rear yards
for a distance not to exceed four and one-half feet.
   (D)   A detached accessory building not exceeding one story in height may
occupy not more than one-half the area of the rear yard.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.706) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 285-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 286-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14) Penalty, see
§
153.999
§ 153.106 DISTANCES BETWEEN BUILDINGS.
   No detached dwelling, or other main building, in the R-3 Zone shall be
closer than 20 feet to any other detached dwelling or main building on the same
building site, and no detached accessory building, or ADU shall be closer than
six feet to any other accessory building or main building on the same building
site.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.707) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 6-17-
03; Am. Ord. 653, passed 10-1-19) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.107 MINIMUM SIZE OF DWELLING UNITS.
   In the R-3 Zone:
   (A)   One-bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum of 880 square feet of
floor area.
   (B)   One-bedroom and den or two-bedroom dwelling units shall have a minimum
of 1,100 square feet of floor area and shall have a full bathroom.
   (C)   Two-bedroom and den or three-bedroom dwelling units shall have a
minimum of 1,320 square feet of floor area and shall have, as a minimum, a
single bathroom and a 3/4 bathroom.
   (D)   The minimum size of a bedroom shall be 125 square feet, excluding
closet areas.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to ADUs.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.708) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 912, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 285-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 286-C.S., passed - -; Am. Ord. 534-C.S.,
passed 6-17-03; Am. Ord. 653, passed 10-1-19) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.108 APARTMENT BUILDINGS; ELEVATORS.
   Apartment buildings in the R-3 Zone with three or more stories shall comply
with ADA requirements with respect to elevators.
('65 Code, § 9-3.709) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 912, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.109 [RESERVED].
§ 153.110 ACOUSTICAL ANALYSIS.
   Prior to the issuance of any building permits for new homes within 1,000
feet of the I-10 freeway, within 500 feet of any rail line and within 200 feet
of any arterial street, the applicant shall submit an acoustical analysis to
the Community Development Director. This analysis shall indicate the existing
and projected Community Noise Equivalent Levels (CNEL's) on the site and the
method by which the noise is to be controlled or reduced to no more than 45 db
within the interior living space of all proposed dwelling units.
(Ord. 308-C.S., passed 9-20-88; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
MULTI-FAMILY RECREATIONAL AREAS
§ 153.115 OPEN SPACE/RECREATION AREAS REQUIRED.
   (A)   In the R-3 Zone, no new development of any multi-family dwellings or
group dwelling shall be approved and no building permits, use permits or other
entitlements shall be issued for any such development unless and until the
owner or his designated representative files with and to the satisfaction of
the Community Development Director, a site plan showing, in addition to the
buildings and front, side and rear yards, recreational and leisure areas,
passive amenities, private areas and common areas as required by this section.
   (B)   In the R-3 Zone, a minimum 400 square feet of recreational and leisure
area shall be provided for each bedroom within each multi-family dwelling or
group dwelling project site.
   (C)   Such recreational and leisure areas may consist of the following:
      (1)   Private areas. Private areas consisting of patios, yards, or
balconies shall constitute a minimum of 40% of the total recreational and
leisure area provided. Private areas located on the ground floor shall have a
minimum dimension of ten feet, a minimum area of 200 square feet and shall be
provided with solid enclosures between three and six feet in height and
composed of material that is compatible in design and color with the adjoining
dwelling unit. Private areas located above ground level shall have a minimum
dimension of six feet and a minimum area of 50 square feet. Such balconies
shall be enclosed with railings which meet the safety standards of the latest
adopted edition of the California Building Code.
      (2)   Common areas. All recreational and leisure areas which are not used
for private areas shall consist of common areas. Common areas shall have a
minimum dimension of 20 feet and may include open lawn areas with less than a
10% grade, passive amenities, courtyards, and open spaces between buildings.
Pergolas, swimming pools, tennis courts, play lots, volleyball pits, enclosed
structures such as a gymnasium or racquetball court, or community gardens may
also count as common areas but shall not be located in the front yard. Enclosed
structures shall not constitute more than 10% of the total recreational and
leisure area. Paved game courts and rooftops specifically designed for outdoor
leisure activities shall not constitute more than 10% of the total recreational
and leisure area. The remaining common area shall be open space, which shall be
usable and integral to the project.
      (3)   On-site open space reductions. The Planning Commission may grant up
to a 50% reduction in common open space requirements for developments that:
         (a)   Locate and allow public access to common open space areas
immediately contiguous and directly accessible to a public park;
         (b)   Provide publicly accessible trail easements or pedestrian
connections to existing open spaces, parks, or other public amenities; or
         (c)   Dedicate scenic and public access easements access along the
Alhambra wash or Rubio wash.
      (4)   Off-site dedication. As part of a citywide long-range park and open
space master plan, the city may establish a program where required recreational
and leisure area may be provided off-site through the dedication and
improvement of public open space consistent with city goals and policies.
Improvements may include but are not limited to pocket parks, trails, or public
plazas.
      (5)   In-lieu fee. The city may establish a program allowing for the
payment of fees in lieu of providing on-site common open space. If this program
is established, an applicant may opt to pay a fee at the rate established in
lieu of providing common-site open space. Fees collected may be used to
provide, enhance, or expand park and open space areas for residents.
(Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14)
§ 153.116 [RESERVED].
§ 153.117 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   In the R-2 and R-3 zones the following development standards shall apply and
no use permit, building permit or other entitlement shall be issued or approved
unless such standards are complied with:
   (A)   Maximum lot coverage. Buildings and accessory buildings, other than
those accessory buildings which are specifically designed and built as a
recreational or leisure amenity, shall not occupy more than 55% of any lot in
the R-2 Zone or 60% of any lot in the R-3 Zone.
   (B)   Minimum side yards. Each side yard in the R-2 and R-3 Zones shall be
not less than 10 feet for buildings up to 28 feet in height, and not less than
15 feet for buildings in excess of 28 feet in height.
   (C)   Facade articulation. All street-facing facades shall have relief in
plane and texture through projections or recesses and changes in materials.
Building entrances and front porches and projections into required yards such
as stoops, bays, overhangs, fireplaces, and trellises may count towards meeting
this requirement.
   (D)   Building orientation. All units located along public rights-of-way
must have the primary entrance facing this right-of-way. Exceptions to this
requirement may be approved for projects where multiple-family housing is
located on four-lane streets carrying high traffic volumes and/or streets that
do not allow on-street parking. In such cases, the project may be oriented
around courtyards.
   (E)   All buildings, other than accessory buildings, located on the same lot
shall be separated from each other by at least 20 feet. Covered or uncovered
walkway connections, patio covers, architectural features, etc., shall not be
construed as an extension of a building.
   (F)   A minimum of 75 square feet of habitable floor space shall be provided
within each dwelling unit for each occupant. Habitable floor space shall not
include hallways, kitchens, closets, attics, garages, attached or detached
accessory structures, bathrooms, utility storage areas or other storage areas.
   (G)   Trash enclosures shall be located no closer than 25 feet from any door
opening to the outside of or any window of any dwelling unit.
   (H)   (1)   Prior to the issuance of any building permits for new homes
within 1,000 feet of the I-10 Freeway, within 500 feet of any rail line and
within 200 feet of any arterial street, the applicant shall submit an
acoustical analysis to the Director of Public Works. This analysis shall
indicate the existing and projected CNEL’s on the site and the method by which
the noise is to be controlled or reduced to no more than 65 db within the
exterior living space and no more than 45 db within the interior living space
of all proposed dwelling units.
      (2)   In addition, an air quality analysis shall be provided which
describes existing and projected concentration of air pollutants at the site in
relation to standards set by the California Air Resources Board and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency. Design features shall be incorporated which
would control or reduce pollutant concentration to state standards, or if such
provisions are not feasible, an explanation of overriding considerations shall
be provided which justifies approval of the project despite unmitigated air
pollutant exposure.
   (I)   Sufficient right-of-way shall be improved and dedicated to the city,
as needed, to achieve complete half-width street improvements along the
affected lot frontages, in accordance with the city’s master plan of streets.
(Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14)
GENERAL DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.125 BUILDING SITES.
   Any lot shown upon an official subdivision map duly approved and recorded,
any lot for which a deed was of record, any lot shown by a separate number or
letter on a record of survey map filed with the County Recorder, and any lot
for which a contract of sale was in full force and effect on May 23, 1939, may
be used as a building site.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1503) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.126 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   Residential accessory buildings and structures include any uses that are
customarily related to a residence, including garages, greenhouses, storage
sheds, studios, workshops, detached decks and patios made of impervious
materials, rain barrels, cisterns, compost bins, and similar structures.
Uncovered decks and patios under 18 inches in height and fences are not subject
to the regulations of this section.
   (A)   Location.
      (1)   Street line setback. An accessory building which is not an integral
part of the main building shall not be located within the front yard, and, if
within 100 feet of the front street line, it shall have a side yard not less
than four feet in width.
      (2)   Interior setbacks. Accessory structures less than eight feet in
height and less than 120 square feet in size shall be set back a minimum of
three feet from any interior side or rear lot line. Accessory structures eight
feet or more in height or 120 square feet or more in size shall be set back a
minimum of five feet from any interior side or rear lot line or adhere to the
interior side and rear setback requirements for accessory buildings of the
applicable zoning district, whichever results in the greater setback.
      (3)   Attached accessory buildings. Where an accessory building is
attached to and made a part of the main building, at least 50% in length of one
wall of such accessory building shall be an integral part of the main building,
and such accessory building shall comply in all respects with the requirements
of this chapter applicable to the main building, except that the attached
accessory building may be not less than 15 feet from the rear lot line and
occupy not more than 50% of the rear yard area.
   (B)   Location; sloping lots in residence zones excepted. Detached accessory
buildings in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 Zones shall be excepted from the
provisions of division (A)(1) of this section as to their location upon the lot
where the slope of the front half of the lot is greater than 25% from the
established street elevation at the property line, or, where the elevation of
the front half of the lot is more than four feet above or below the established
street elevation at the property line, a private garage may be built not less
than five feet from the front property line.
   (C)   Location; corner lots.
      (1)   In the case of a corner lot, no accessory building shall be
erected, altered, or moved so as to encroach upon the front half of such lot.
      (2)   On corner lots where the rear line abuts a side line of a key lot
to the rear, an accessory building which is not an integral part of the main
building shall be not less than 20 feet from the side street line.
      (3)   On corner lots where the rear line abuts the rear line of a lot to
the rear, an accessory building which is not an integral part of the main
building shall be not less than 12 feet from the side street line.
      (4)   On corner lots where the rear line abuts a side line of a key lot
to the rear, an accessory building which is an integral part of the main
building shall be not less than 15 feet from the rear line.
      (5)   On corner lots where the rear line abuts the rear line of a lot to
the rear, an accessory building which is an integral part of the main building
shall be not less than five feet from the rear lot line.
   (D)   Temporary structures.
      (1)   Location. Temporary structures are prohibited in the front yard and
street side yard in all zones. Temporary structures are permitted only in rear
yards and side yards in all zones, provided that they are not visible from the
public right-of-way, that they meet all applicable setback and height
requirements for accessory buildings, and that they do not obstruct access to
required parking.
      (2)   Repair and maintenance. Temporary structures shall be maintained in
good condition. Torn fabric, bent or broken support members shall be replaced
or repaired as needed. Any temporary structure maintained in disrepair shall be
repaired, replaced or removed from the site. Reflective, mirrored type,
covering material is prohibited.
      (3)   Lot coverage. Temporary structures are subject to building coverage
requirements and shall be included in calculations of maximum lot coverage in
all zones.
      (4)   Nonconforming temporary structures. Temporary structures in
existence as of the effective date of this subsection and which do not comply
with its provisions shall not be considered nonconforming structures as defined
in §
153.420 and shall not be subject to the amortization provisions of §
153.422. Temporary structures in existence as of the effective date of this
subsection and which do not comply with its provisions shall be removed and
made to comply with the provisions of this subsection within 90 days of the
effective date of this subsection.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.1506) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 597, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 628, passed - -; Am. Ord. 541-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 608-C.S.,
passed 5-10-14) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.127 FENCES AND WALLS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   (A)   Six feet shall be the maximum height of any fence and wall along the
rear lot line or between the rear lot line and the front line of the main
building. Four feet shall be the maximum height of any fence or wall located
between the front line of the main building and the front lot line. Fences and
walls shall be set back at least 30 inches from the front property line for
purposes of providing landscaping. Said landscaping shall consist of any
combination of turf, groundcover, shrubs, or vines and shall not exceed the
height of the fence or wall.
   (B)   Property line fences and walls in the rear yard of interior lots and
in the rear yard of corner lots, except along any line that abuts the side line
of a key lot, and except along any portion of a lot line of a corner lot nearer
to the side street than the building setback line of the improvements on the
lot, or the improvements on the lot adjacent thereto, may extend to a total
height of seven and one-half feet under the following conditions:
      (1)   On a key lot no fence, or wall of a height more than four feet
shall extend into the front yard nearer the street on the side abutting the
rear of the corner lot than the closest corner of the main building on the
corner lot.
      (2)   Any fence and wall along the front or side line of a corner lot
within 35 feet of the intersection of the front and side lines shall be no more
than two feet high measured from the elevation of the top of the curb adjacent
to such wall or fence.
      (3)   In those situations where the Police Chief and the Community
Development Director find that an existing fence or wall on a corner lot
creates a public nuisance or traffic hazard, the Council may require that the
restrictions stated in this section be complied with.
      (4)   On corner lots no fence or wall of a height more than four feet
shall extend into the side yard adjacent to the street nearer than any portion
of the main building on such lot; and if the corner lot abuts a key lot to the
rear, no fence or wall of a height more than four feet shall extend into the
side yard adjacent to the street nearer than the closest front corner of the
main building on the key lot.
      (5)   If the owner or occupant of a lot desires to construct and maintain
a swimming pool on such property such swimming pool shall not be constructed,
maintained, or set closer to the street than the front line of the building
setback line established for that block, and he shall conform to the provisions
of the Uniform Building Code, the swimming pool fencing provisions set out in
§§
150.180 through
150.181, and the provisions of §
153.129.
      (6)   If the owner or occupant of a lot desires to construct and maintain
a tennis or badminton court on such premises, such tennis or badminton court
shall not be erected, maintained, or set closer to the street than the front
line of the building setback line established for that block. Such badminton or
tennis court may be enclosed by a fence attached to such supports as may be
required by the Community Development Director as to size, design, strength,
utility, and safety pursuant to the standards set by the Uniform Building Code
and engineering principles pertaining to stresses, strains, and wind
resistance. Nothing shall be grown, placed, or maintained upon or against such
fence that will in any way or manner obstruct the passage of light or air
through such fence above the height of six feet.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.1507) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 911, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 10-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 37-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 608-C.S.,
passed 5-10-14; Am. Ord. 716, passed 5-6-25) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.128 ORNAMENTAL SCREENING WALLS.
   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of
§ 153.127, ornamental screening walls may be erected in the front yard of a lot
in the R-1, R-1A, and R-2 Zones and in the front and side yards of a corner lot
in the R-1, R-1A, and R-2 Zones subject to the following regulations and
conditions:
   (A)   Height. Screening walls shall not exceed a height of six feet above
the average grade of the ground at the base of such screening wall.
   (B)   Regulations pertaining to interior lots.
      (1)   Screening walls shall be no nearer the front property line than
three-fourths of the average setback distance of the residences in the block
but in no case nearer the front property line than 15 feet.
      (2)   The length of such screening walls measured parallel to the front
property line shall not exceed of the length of the front property line, nor in
any case be longer than 20 feet.
      (3)   Screening walls shall be at least four feet from a side property
line and at least five feet from any driveway.
   (C)   Regulations pertaining to corner lots.
      (1)   The front yard setback distance for screening walls shall be the
same as that described for interior lots.
      (2)   The length of screening walls in the front yard shall be the same
as that described for interior lots.
      (3)   Screening walls shall be at least four feet from any interior side
property line and at least five feet from any driveway.
      (4)   Front yard screening walls shall extend to a point no nearer the
side street than the side yard setback distance plus five feet.
      (5)   Screening walls in the side yard shall be no more than 25 feet in
length.
      (6)   Screening walls in the side yard shall be at least five feet from
any driveway or rear property line.
      (7)   Screening walls in the side yard shall be no nearer the front
property line of the lot than the front yard setback distance plus five feet.
      (8)   Screening walls in the side yard of a corner lot shall be at least
five feet from the side property line, and the distance from the screening wall
to the line of the main building shall not exceed one-half the distance from
the side property line to the line of the main building.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1507.1) (Ord. 10-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.129 SWIMMING POOLS.
   Private or public swimming pools shall be protected by adequate fencing as
provided in §§
150.180 and
150.181 of this title, shall be located to the rear of the front building
setback line as provided in
§ 153.127, and shall be located to comply with the following separation
requirements:
   (A)   The distance from the inner surface of the pool wall to a garage or
other accessory building shall be five feet.
   (B)   The distance from the inner surface of the pool wall to a dwelling or
other main building shall be a distance equal to the depth of the pool at any
adjacent point, less one foot, with a minimum of five feet.
   (C)   The distance from the inner surface of the pool wall to a masonry wall
shall be five feet.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1509) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 797, passed - - )
Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.130 DISMANTLING, PARKING, REPAIRING, AND STORAGE IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance used or designed for navigation of, or flight
in, the air.
      BOAT. Watercraft of any size.
      CAMPER, HOUSE CAR, MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE, MOTOR TRUCK, MOTOR
VEHICLE, PASSENGER VEHICLE, TRAILER COACH, TRUCK TRACTOR, TRAILER, IMPLEMENTS
OF HUSBANDRY, SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT and VEHICLE. These terms shall
mean the same as such words are defined in the California Vehicle Code.
      DISASSEMBLED VEHICLE. An aircraft, boat, or vehicle which is not operable
by reason of the removal of or damage to integral component parts.
      DISMANTLE. The removal or stripping of one or more integral component
parts from an aircraft, boat, or vehicle.
      DRIVEWAY AREA. A paved, surfaced, or clearly delineated way not in excess
of 20 feet in width designed for vehicular ingress and egress.
      PARK. The standing of a motor vehicle, aircraft, or boat.
      PERMANENT STORAGE. The presence on the premises for a period of 72 or
more consecutive hours.
      REPAIR. The work necessary to restore a vehicle to a usable condition.
      STORE or STORAGE. To keep or locate for future use.
   (B)   Prohibited storage. Except as otherwise provided by this code, in the
R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 Zones, or with respect to any residential use
maintained in any other zone, no portion of any front yard, no portion of the
outer three feet of any side yard, no portion of the rear three feet of any
rear yard, nor any portion of the side yard on the side street of a corner lot
shall be used for the permanent storage of any aircraft, boat, camper, house
car, implement of husbandry, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motor truck, motor
vehicle, passenger vehicle, special construction equipment, trailer, trailer
coach, truck, tractor, vehicle, or any part or portion of any of the foregoing,
building materials, or temporary structures of any kind; provided, however,
building materials in temporary storage during the time a valid building permit
is in effect for construction upon the premises may be placed upon such
portions of the front, side, or rear yards.
   (C)   Prohibited parking and storage. In the R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 Zones,
or with respect to any residential use maintained in any other zone, no
aircraft, boat, camper, house car, trailer, trailer coach, or similar
contrivance shall be parked, left standing, or temporarily stored on any
private property if such contrivance, or any part thereof, is within eight feet
of any residence or dwelling unit on any adjoining property.
   (D)   Parking aircraft, boats, or vehicles. No person shall park any
aircraft, boat, or vehicle, or any component thereof, for any purpose in any
front or side yard on any lot in the residential zones except in a driveway
area. The parking of such aircraft, boat, or vehicle shall be permitted in rear
yards or side yards if such area is completely enclosed by view-obscuring walls
not less than six feet in height or by the exterior walls of a building or
buildings which completely obscure such aircraft, boat, or vehicle from the
view of persons on public streets or other adjacent properties.
   (E)   Repair or dismantling aircraft, boats, or vehicles prohibited. No
person shall assemble, repair, or disassemble any aircraft, boat, vehicle, or
similar contrivance, other than as provided in this section, on any part of any
lot in the residential zones unless such work is done:
      (1)   Within an enclosed building; or
      (2)   In an open area which is completely enclosed by view-obscuring
walls not less than six feet in height or by the exterior walls of a building
or buildings which completely obscure the work from the view of persons on
public streets or other adjacent properties.
   (F)   Exceptions. The prohibitions imposed in this section shall not be
deemed to apply to the occasional and incidental disassembly or repair of
vehicles owned by the person in possession of the premises in a residential
zone on which the repair or dismantling of vehicles is made or done if the time
to accomplish the same does not exceed a period of 48 hours.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1510) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 19-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 32-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 99-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.131 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH AND COLLECTION AREAS.
   In the R-3 Zone and in all commercial zones there shall be provided adequate
garbage and rubbish storage and collection areas for all apartments and
dwelling units and for all commercial and manufacturing buildings.
   (A)   Location. Such areas shall be located so as to be accessible by motor
vehicles to a public street or alley.
   (B)   Screening. All outside garbage and rubbish areas shall be enclosed on
at least three sides and on all sides visible from streets by a six foot high
masonry wall. Such enclosure shall have a gate or gates made of opaque
materials.
   (C)   Size. The required area shall be of adequate size to permit the
storage and removal of one or more standard three yard steel rubbish bins on
wheel casters. Adequate size shall be determined from information on file in
the Community Development Department at the time a permit for construction is
issued.
   (D)   Floors; access; bumpers. The floors of such storage areas shall be of
concrete, and the required access to the street or alley shall be paved.
Suitable bumpers, either for bin wheels or the rear wall, shall be installed.
Required rubbish and garbage storage areas shall not occupy or obstruct any
required parking or vehicular access.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1512) (Ord. 17-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.132 STORMWATER RUNOFF.
   (A)   Site drainage. The site drainage and stormwater runoff shall comply
with stormwater runoff regulations and National Pollution Discharge Elimination
Systems (NPDES) requirements and Chapter 53, Stormwater and Urban Runoff
Pollution Prevention, of the San Gabriel Municipal Code. Where feasible,
drainage shall be retained on site and directed toward landscaped areas.
   (B)   Best management practices. BMPs shall incorporate numeric design
criteria to infiltrate, filter, or treat storm water runoff. Design criteria
are provided in the NPDES permit. BMPs include but are not limited to
bioretention facilities: catch basin inserts: cisterns: constructed wetlands:
dry wells: extended/dry detention basins or underground detention tanks:
infiltration basins: infiltration trenches: media filtration; porous pavement;
storm drain inserts; vegetated filter strips: vegetated swales; and wet ponds.
(Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14)
§ 153.133 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the requirements contained in this subchapter, the following
additional requirements of this code shall apply to the development and use of
any property in the R-1, R-1A, R-2, and R-3 Zone districts: §§
153.530 through
153.539, Landscape.
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14)
§ 153.134 OBJECTIVE DESIGN STANDARDS FOR MULTI-FAMILY AND MIXED-USE PROJECTS.
   Applicability. These objective design standards apply to all new
construction projects, in all zones, that qualify for streamlined, ministerial
application processing in accordance with state law. These include multi-family
residential projects with two or more units, and mixed-use development projects
that include up to two-thirds of residential use.
   (A)   Design standards. Eligible residential projects shall comply with all
objective design standards, city policies, zoning regulations as established in
the San Gabriel Municipal Code and General Plan.
      (1)   Shelter.
         (a)   A permanently covered entryway or porch must be provided for
each unit.
         (b)   A minimum depth of three feet and width of four feet must be
provided for the entryway/porch.
         (c)   All units located along public rights-of-way must have the
primary entrance facing onto that right-of-way.
         (d)   A minimum of 25% of pedestrian paths shall be shaded by tree
canopy at maturity.
      (2)   Site design/transition.
         (a)   All structures, entries, facilities, amenities, and parking
areas must be internally connected with pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian
walkways must connect to the public sidewalk along each street frontage.
Pedestrian walkways must be separated from roads, driveways, and parking areas
by a physical barrier, such as a grade-separation, of six inches or more or a
raised planter area. Refer to Figure
153.134(2)(b).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6692.png]
         (b)   Paved (non-permeable) areas must not exceed 50% of the required
front or street side setback areas.
         (c)   Allowable number of driveway access points.
            1.   Interior lot. Two driveways are permitted on lots where at
least one street has a frontage more than 100 linear feet.
            2.   Corner lots. One vehicle access driveway where all street
frontages are less than 100 linear feet and two driveways are permitted on lots
where at least one street has a frontage more than 100 linear feet.
         (d)   A minimum of 50% of all retaining walls, freestanding walls, and
fences visible from public streets shall be screened by landscape at maturity.
Plans shall be labeled with heights of any vertical elements to be screened.
         (e)   Private/individual garage doors must not face a public street(s)
but may be oriented toward an alley or a private street/driveway that is an
internal part to the project. Refer to Figure
153.134(2)(f)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6690.png]
         (f)   A walkway with a minimum width of 36 inches must be provided to
all individual units on the ground level.
         (g)   Pedestrian walkways must be of permeable/sustainable material.
         (h)   Landscape must be incorporated between the sidewalk and the base
of the building for all portions that front a public street by using one of the
following methods (refer to Figure
153.134(2)(i).
            1.   Provide pocket areas for landscaping;
            2.   Provide zig-zagged pathways to allow enough space (five feet
minimum) for trees, and the like.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6688.png]
         (i)   Projects must provide usable common open spaces with a minimum
dimension of ten feet in all directions.
         (j)   Plants must be arranged with the tallest shrubs located at base
of buildings and structures, transitioning to lower shrubs adjacent to
sidewalks and curbs. A minimum of two heights or tiers shall be provided (e.g.,
low planting at one-and-one-half to two-and-one-half feet tall at maturity
adjacent to a sidewalk and taller planting at three to four feet tall at
maturity adjacent to the wall). For landscape areas greater than ten feet wide,
provide a minimum of three tier levels (e.g., groundcover or annuals, low
planting two two-and-one-half feet and tall planting at a minimum of four feet
adjacent to the wall). Additionally, upright accent shrubs in 15 gallon size
shall be provided at an average rate of one per every 25 linear feet of
building façade. Refer to Figure
153.134(2)(l).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6686.png]
         (k)   All pedestrian crosswalks shall use one of the following: zebra/
ladder stripes, concrete with lithocrete patterned finish or another material/
finish that will withstand high traffic volume.
      (3)   Balance/building massing.
         (a)   Buildings with first floor façades that are 50 feet or longer
shall provide a break in the façade every 25 feet. Refer to Figure
153.134(3)(a). This can be achieved through one or more of the following.
            1.   Building façade offset with a minimum two-foot depth for a
minimum length of 20 feet.
            2.   Change in wall or material color.
            3.   Change in window form and/or façade composition through the
use of awnings, canopies, and/or balconies.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6684.png]
         (b)   Projecting architectural features such as bowed or bay windows,
columns, offset roof planes, and similar features should be used to create both
vertical and horizontal articulation. Offsets and recesses are to measure a
minimum of one foot.
         (c)   The massing of upper stories shall be modulated by stepping back
elements (minimum two feet from the ground floor setback, and/or structural
projections (one foot minimum)).
         (d)   Roof lines shall be vertically articulated at least every 50
feet along the street frontage, through the use of architectural elements such
as parapets, varying cornices, reveals, clerestory windows, and varying roof
height and/or form. Refer to Figure
153.134(3)(d).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6682.png]
         (e)   Corner buildings shall provide a rounded or angled façade at the
corner with a different material application and window arrangement from the
rest of the building façade. Refer to Figure
153.134(3)(e).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6680.png]
         (f)   Buildings must be designed and articulated with common details,
articulation, materials, and elements on all sides of the building.
         (g)   Façade planes exceeding 40 feet in length shall express a
vertical rhythm and pattern that reflects the size and scale of a residential
unit and/or individual rooms and spaces through meeting the following standards
(Refer to Figure
153.134(3)(g)).
            1.   A vertical recess or projection shall occur at a minimum of
one per 40 feet of linear façade length.
            2.   Vertical recess or projection shall have a minimum depth of
one foot.
            3.   Shall occur for a minimum of 60% of the residential façade
height.
         (h)   A minimum of eight plant species and varieties shall be required
for all projects with nine units or less and a minimum of 14 plant species and
varieties shall be required for all projects with ten units or greater.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6678.png]
         (i)   Each street or perimeter/buffer yard shall include a minimum of
two canopy tree species and two understory trees species. Clustering of onsite
canopy and understory trees is encouraged to create naturalistic tree stands.
         (j)   Tree canopies shall not overhang structures or required fire
access lanes at maturity. Trees shall be centered within planter areas,
maximizing distance between trunks and adjacent hardscape and structures.
      (4)   Integrity.
         (a)   Root barriers/protecting sidewalks. Root barriers shall be
provided for all trees within five feet of paving and within ten feet of city
sidewalks. Root barriers shall be a minimum 24 inches deep and for a minimum
length of 16 feet at each location, centered on the trunk and shall be placed
adjacent and parallel to hardscape.
         (b)   Edge restraints. Provide edge restraints between landscape areas
with different maintenance entities and between lawn and shrub areas.
         (c)   Plant layout and hydrozones. Plantings shall by grouped into
hydrozones with similar water use and sun/shade requirements.
      (5)   Architectural detailing.
         (a)   All windows must provide trims, sills, and a minimum two-inch
recess.
         (b)   Three exterior paint colors must be provided (base, trim,
accent). Three colors can be found in either paint or materials (e.g., wood
trim, wrought iron).
         (c)   Reflective coatings and exterior façade material which create
glare would not be allowed.
         (d)   Materials applied to any elevation shall turn the corner of the
building, ending at a logical termination point related to the roof line,
windows or building massing, or a minimum of five feet. Refer to Figure
153.134(5)(f).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6676.png]
         (e)   The following list of building materials will be allowed.
            1.   Primary walls. High-quality primary materials such as wood,
simulated wood, brick, stone, stucco, ceramics, metals, fiber-cement panels,
Trespa, composite panel systems.
            2.   Secondary/accent. Masonry, tile, stone, brick, veneer,
longboard, and/or finished metal.
         (f)   1.   The following list of building materials will be
prohibited:
            2.   Plywood, plastic (and plastic laminate), and fiberglass.
         (g)   Affordable units and market rate units within the same
development shall be constructed of the same materials and details such that
the units are not distinguishable from one another.
         (h)   Fences and walls must be constructed of materials such as
treated wood, vinyl, wrought iron, brick, and stone. Chain link is prohibited.
   (B)   Design standards. Defined as a project consistent of a mix of multi-
family residential and nonresidential uses, where at least two-thirds of the
square footage of the development is designated for residential use.
      (1)   Site design/transition.
         (a)   All structures, entries, facilities, amenities, and parking
areas must be internally connected with pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian
walkways must connect to the public sidewalk along each street frontage.
Pedestrian walkways must be separated from roads, driveways, and parking areas
by a physical barrier, such as a grade-separation, of six inches or more or a
raised planter area. Refer to Figure
153.134(2)(b).
         (b)   Paved (non-permeable) areas must not exceed 50% of the required
front or street side setback areas.
         (c)   Allowable number of driveway access points.
            1.   Interior lot. Two driveways are permitted on lots where at
least one street has a frontage more than 100 linear feet.
            2.   Corner lots. One vehicle access driveway where all street
frontages are less than 100 linear feet and two driveways are permitted on lots
where at least one street has a frontage more than 100 linear feet.
         (d)   A minimum of 50% of all uncovered parking stall areas shall be
shaded by tree canopies. Tree canopies shall be shown at maturity
(approximately 15 years’ growth). Provide a shade study, demonstrating minimum
shading requirement has been met.
         (e)   Private/individual garage doors must not face a public street(s)
but may be oriented toward an alley or a private street/driveway that is an
internal part to the project. Refer to Figure
153.134(2)(f).
         (f)   A walkway with a minimum width of 36 inches must be provided to
all individual units on the ground level.
         (g)   Pedestrian walkways must be of permeable/sustainable material.
         (h)   Landscape must be incorporated between the sidewalk and the base
of the building for visual softening and transition by using one of the
following methods (refer to Figure
153.134(2)(i)).
            1.   Provide pocket areas for landscaping;
            2.   Provide zig-zagged pathways to allow enough space (five feet
minimum) for trees, and the like.
         (i)   Projects must provide usable common open spaces with a minimum
dimension of ten feet in all directions.
         (j)   Plants must be arranged with the tallest shrubs located at base
of buildings and structures, transitioning to lower shrubs adjacent to
sidewalks and curbs. A minimum of two heights or tiers shall be provided (e.g.,
low planting at one-and-one-half to two-and-one-half feet tall at maturity
adjacent to a sidewalk and taller planting at three to four feet tall at
maturity adjacent to the wall). For landscape areas greater than ten feet wide,
provide a minimum of three tier levels (e.g., groundcover or annuals, low
planting two two-and-one-half feet and tall planting at a minimum of four feet
adjacent to the wall). Additionally, upright accent shrubs in 15 gallon size
shall be provided at an average rate of one per every 25 linear feet of
building façade. Refer to Figure
153.134(2)(l).
         (k)   All pedestrian crosswalks shall use one of the following: zebra/
ladder stripes, concrete with lithocrete patterned finish or another material/
finish that will withstand high traffic volume.
         (l)   Street-facing building façades must be designed with active
frontages which include at least two of the following.
            1.   Common open space/plaza/sitting area.
            2.   Overhangs (including awnings and cantilevers).
            3.   Balconies.
            4.   Porches/patios.
            5.   Arcade.
            6.   Primary entry.
      (2)   Balance/building massing.
         (a)   Buildings with first floor façades that are 50 feet or longer
shall provide a break in the façade every 25 feet. Refer to Figure
153.134(3)(a). This can be achieved through one or more of the following.
            1.   Building façade offset with a minimum two-foot depth for a
minimum length of 20 feet.
            2.   Change in wall or material color.
            3.   Change in window form and/or façade composition through the
use of awnings, canopies, and/or balconies.
         (b)   Projecting architectural features such as bowed or bay windows,
columns, offset roof planes, and similar features should be used to create both
vertical and horizontal articulation. Offsets and recesses are to measure a
minimum of one foot.
         (c)   The massing of upper stories shall be modulated by stepping back
elements (minimum two feet from the ground floor setback, and/or structural
projections (one foot minimum)).
         (d)   Rooflines shall be vertically articulated at least every 50 feet
along the street frontage, through the use of architectural elements such as
parapets, varying cornices, reveals, clerestory windows, and varying roof
height and/or form. Refer to Figure
153.134(3)(d).
         (e)   Corner buildings shall provide a rounded or angled façade at the
corner with a different material application and window arrangement from the
rest of the building façade. Refer to Figure
153.134(3)(e).
         (f)   A minimum of 50% of the ground floor façade shall consist of
glass doors and windows.
         (g)   Buildings must be designed and articulated with common details,
articulation, materials, and elements on all sides of the building.
         (h)   Façade planes exceeding 40 feet in length shall express a
vertical rhythm and pattern that reflects the size and scale of a residential
unit and/or individual rooms and spaces through meeting the following standards
(Refer to Figure
153.134(3)(g)).
            1.   A vertical recess or projection shall occur at a minimum of
one per 40 feet of linear façade length.
            2.   Vertical recess or projection shall have a minimum depth of
one foot.
            3.   Shall occur for a minimum of 60% of the residential façade
height.
         (i)   A minimum of eight plant species and varieties shall be required
for all projects with nine units or less and a minimum of 14 plant species and
varieties shall be required for all projects with ten units or greater.
         (j)   Each street or perimeter/buffer yard shall include two canopy
tree species and two understory trees species. Clustering of onsite canopy and
understory trees is encouraged to create naturalistic tree stands.
         (k)   Tree canopies shall not overhang structures or required fire
access lanes at maturity. Trees shall be centered within planter areas,
maximizing distance between trunks and adjacent hardscape and structures.
      (3)   Architectural detailing.
         (a)   All windows must provide trims, sills, and a minimum two-inch
recess.
         (b)   Three exterior paint colors must be provided (base, trim,
accent). Three colors can be found in either paint or materials (e.g., wood
trim, wrought iron).
         (c)   Reflective coatings and exterior façade material would not be
allowed.
         (d)   Materials applied to any elevation shall turn the corner of the
building, ending at a logical termination point related to the roof line,
windows or building massing, or a minimum of five feet. Refer to Figure
153.134(5)(f).
         (e)   The following list of building materials will be allowed.
            1.   Primary walls. High-quality primary materials such as wood,
simulated wood, stucco, brick, stone, ceramics, metals, fiber-cement panels,
Trespa, or composite panel systems.
            2.   Secondary/accent. Masonry, tile, stone, brick, veneer,
longboard, and/or finished metal.
         (f)   1.   The following list of building materials will be
prohibited.
            2.   Plywood, plastic (and plastic laminate), and fiberglass.
         (g)   Affordable units and market rate units within the same
development shall be constructed of the same materials and details such that
the units are not distinguishable from one another.
         (h)   Fences and walls must be constructed of materials such as
treated wood, vinyl, wrought iron, brick, and stone. Chain link is prohibited.
(Ord. 693, passed 12-5-23)
OPEN SPACE AND PUBLIC FACILITIES DISTRICT
§ 153.140 CREATION.
   There is hereby created an Open Space and Public Facilities District which
shall initially include the areas as depicted in Exhibit 1 of Ordinance 425-
C.S., amending the official zoning map of the city.
(Ord. 425-C.S., passed 6-7-94)
§ 153.141 INTENT.
   This zoning district applies to land for public and quasi-public facilities.
(Ord. 425-C.S., passed 6-7-94)
§ 153.142 PERMITTED USES.
   A new zoning district, Open Space and Public Facilities District, is hereby
established and designated on the official zoning map of the city. The
following primary uses shall be permitted:
   (A)   Permitted uses. Public or quasi-public uses such as parks, schools,
churches, libraries, museums, auditoriums, community facilities, child care
centers, government facilities, hospitals, congregate care facilities,
convalescent homes, residence care facilities, senior housing, community
gardens, open air markets, nurseries, and public parking lots/structures.
   (B)   Unspecified uses. Such other uses that are not specified in this
ordinance but that are determined by the Planning Commission, or on appeal, by
the City Council to be substantially similar to a specifically enumerated
permitted use. In determining whether a proposed use is substantially similar
to a permitted use, the conditional use permit process and criteria shall be
utilized.
   (C)   Prohibited uses. All uses not specifically identified herein shall be
prohibited in the Open Space and Public Facilities District.
(Ord. 425-C.S., passed 6-7-94; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14) Penalty, see
§
153.999
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES (C-1, C-3, AND M-1)
§ 153.150 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   General provisions. Two commercial and one industrial zone districts
are established to preserve and enhance areas throughout the city for a variety
of business activities that contribute to the economic well-being of the
community. These provisions are set forth to ensure the compatible and
mutually-beneficial interaction of commercial and industrial uses with
residential consumers, to encourage quality development projects, and to
accommodate the varied needs of the business community.
   (B)   Retail Commercial Zone (C-1). The Retail Commercial (C-1) Zone is
intended to provide for the continued use and development of low-scale, local
community-oriented retail sales and service uses. All permanent uses within
this district must be located within an entirely enclosed structure. Typical
uses include neighborhood-oriented retail and personal service businesses,
small professional offices, and other businesses that generate low volumes of
vehicle traffic.
   (C)   General Commercial Zone (C-3). The General Commercial (C-3) Zone is
intended to provide for the continued use and expansion and new development of
a wide variety of commercial enterprises, professional and medical offices,
entertainment uses, and similar businesses. The zone is located along major
roadway corridors to encourage uses that serve the local and regional markets.
Mixed-use, (i.e. a mix of commercial/residential uses) is allowed subject to
applicable permit requirements and light manufacturing uses associated with on-
premises retail sales are allowed under a conditional use permit (CUP).
   (D)   Light Manufacturing Zone (M-1). The Light Manufacturing (M-1) Zone is
intended to preserve and create areas where small- to moderate-sized, clean
industries may locate and operate in a manner that does not pose health or
environmental risks to surrounding land uses.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.801) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 608-C.S.,
passed 5-10-14)
§ 153.151 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The table in division (D) of this section identifies which uses are
permitted by right, permitted subject to conditional use permit review and
approval, permitted as temporary uses, and prohibited in the C-1, C-3, and M-
1 zones.
   (B)   In the event that a specific use or type of use is not listed in the
table in division (D) below, the Community Development Director shall have the
authority to determine which listed use is most similar to the proposed use and
thereby determine whether the proposed use is permitted, permitted subject to
conditional use permit review and approval, permitted as a temporary use, or
prohibited. The City Council shall be notified of the decision within seven
calendar days, and a permanent record of such decisions shall be maintained.
   (C)   The decision of the Community Development Director can be appealed to
the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Table of land use regulations.
Type of Use Commercial Light ManufacturingM-1 Notes
            C-1 C-3
                                                                        Commercial     Light
Type of Use                                                                         C- ManufacturingM- Notes
                                                                        C-1         3  1

Retail Sales and Rental of Goods, Merchandise, and Equipment
Uses involving no outdoor display or storage:
 
High-volume traffic generator (a):
 
Convenience store                                                       C           P  P
Other                                                                   C           P  P
                                                                       P           P  P               Any use involving the sale of alcoholic beverages requires a CUP (See §
Low-volume traffic generator (b):                                       P           P  P               153.162)
                                                                       C           C  C
Wholesale sales
Other
 
Groceries—retail, sales of 15,00 square feet or more in either a
freestanding store or as a component of a larger store or building (c):
Use with outdoor storage and display:
 
High-volume traffic generator (a)                                       X           P  P
                                                                       X           P  P               See
Low-volume traffic generator (b)                                        X           P  P               § 153.159 regarding outdoor storage and display
                                                                       C           C  C
Wholesale sales
 
Groceries (c):
Uses involving the sale of used or secondhand goods, including antique  C           C  X               Pawnshops are a specifically prohibited use. See
sales                                                                                                  § 153.162 for special conditions on use for secondhand stores
Office Uses
Professional office (non- medical)                                      P           P  X                
Medical office                                                          P           P  X                
Veterinarian office                                                     C           P  X                
Personal Service Uses
Barber and beauty shops                                                 P           P  X                
Laundries and drycleaning establishments:
                                                                       P           P  X
Oriented toward individuals                                             X           C  P                
 
Large-scale, industrial type
Tattoo parlors, and the like                                            X           C  X                
                                                                                                       *See
Fortune telling and the like                                            P*          X  X               Chapters 110 and
                                                                                                       118 for additional requirements
Small-scale, consumer- oriented service and repair businesses, but not  P           P  X                
including automobile repair
All other personal service uses:
                                                                       C           P  X
High-volume traffic generator (a)                                       P           P  X                
 
Low-volume traffic generator (b)
Personal care facilities                                                P           P  X               See §
                                                                                                       153.162(K)
Massage establishments, not otherwise subject to an exception under §                                 *See
122.03 of this Code                                                     C           C  X               Chapter 122 of the San Gabriel Municipal Code and §
                                                                                                       153.242 of this chapter.
Restaurants, Bars, Night Clubs
Fast food or drive-through restaurant and no dining room open between   P           P  P               Any use involving the sale of alcoholic beverages requires a CUP (See §
the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m.                                                                         153.162)
Restaurant with no alcoholic beverage sales and no dining room open     P           P  P                
between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m.
Restaurant with dining room open between the hours of 2 a.m. and 6 a.m. C           C  C                
Restaurant with alcoholic beverage sales                                C           C  C                
Bars                                                                    C           C  C                
Night clubs                                                             C           C  C               See
                                                                                                       § 153.162 regarding live entertainment
Any business offering live entertainment                                C           C  C                
VIP Room                                                                P           P  C               See §
                                                                                                       153.162(M)
Motor Vehicle-Related Sales and Service Operations
Motor vehicle sales or rental; new vehicles                             C           C  C                
Motor vehicle sales or rental; used vehicles:
 
In conjunction with new vehicle sales                                   C           C  C                
                                                                       C           C  X
 
Used vehicle sales/rental only
Parts and accessories sales with incidental installation of motor       X           C  C                
vehicle parts or accessories (e.g., tires, mufflers, etc.)
Motor vehicle repair and maintenance, not including substantial body    C           C  P                
work
Motor vehicle painting and body work                                    X           C  P                
Gasoline service station                                                C           C  X               See
                                                                                                       § 153.162(b)
Oil change; lube and tune facilities                                    C           P  X                
Car wash:
                                                                       X           C  X
Self-service                                                            X           C  X                
 
Other
Recreation, Amusement, Entertainment
Activity conducted entirely within building or substantial structure:
 
a. Bowling alleys, skating rinks, indoor tennis and squash courts,
billiard and pool halls, indoor athletic and exercise facilities and    X           C  C
similar uses                                                            X           C  X               See
                                                                       C           C  X               § 153.162 
b. Movie theaters (in a single structure)                               C           C  X
 
c. Karaoke KTV
 
d. Arcades, including “virtual reality” arcades
Activity conducted primarily outside enclosed buildings or structures:
 
a. Privately-owned golf and country clubs
                                                                       P           C  C
b. Privately-owned and operated outdoor recreational facilities such as X           C  C
athletic fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, etc.                    X           C  C                
                                                                       X           X  X
c. Golf driving ranges not accessory to golf courses, par 3 golf
courses, skateboard parks, water slides, and similar uses
 
d. Drive-in movie theaters
Adult-oriented entertainment and other businesses                       X           X  P*              *See
                                                                                                       Ch. 121
Vending machines                                                        P           P  P               See §
                                                                                                       153.162(L)
Billiard and pool halls                                                 X           C  C               See §
                                                                                                       153.162(N)
Light Industrial, Packaging, Repairing, Painting, Storage, and Assembling of Goods, Merchandise, and Equipment
Light manufacturing and production                                      X           C  P               All uses subject to performance standards requirements set forth in
                                                                                                       § 153.152
Moderate and heavy manufacturing and production                         X           X  P                
Warehouse and freight movement                                          X           X  P               All uses subject to performance standards requirements set forth in
                                                                                                       § 153.152
Wholesale sales                                                         X           C  P                
Industrial equipment servicing                                          X           C  P                
Scrap materials, recycling centers, salvage yards, and the like         X           X  C               All uses subject to performance standards requirements set forth in
                                                                                                       § 153.152
Educational, Cultural, Religious, Philanthropic, Social, Fraternal Uses
Schools (Private)
 
a. Elementary and secondary (including associated grounds and athletic
and other facilities)
                                                                       C           C  C               See special conditions set forth in
b. Trade or vocational schools, traffic schools, language schools, and  C           C  C               § 153.162
similar adult-oriented schools                                          C           C  C
 
c. Colleges, universities, community colleges (including associated
facilities such as dormitories, office buildings, athletic fields,
etc.)
Churches, synagogues, and temples (including associated residential
structures for religious personnel and associated building but not      C           C  C                
including elementary school or secondary school buildings)
Museums, art galleries, art centers, and similar uses (including        P           P  P                
associated educational and instructional activities)
Social, fraternal clubs, and lodges, union halls, and similar uses      C           C  C               Any use involving the sale of alcoholic beverages requires a CUP; see
                                                                                                       § 153.162
Institutional Residence or Care or Confinement Facilities
Hospitals, clinics, other medical (including mental health) treatment   C           C  C                
facilities in excess of 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Nursing care institutions, intermediate care institutions, handicapped  C           C  C                
or infirm institutions, child care institutions
Childcare facilities                                                    P           C  C               Childcare facilities are subject to requirements of the Cal. Health &
                                                                                                       Safety Code
Emergency shelters as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 50801     X           P  X               See §
                                                                                                       153.162(O) for locational and operational standards
Single room occupancy (SRO) developments                                X           X  C               See §
                                                                                                       153.162(P) for locational and operational standards
Parking
Automobile parking garages or parking lots located on a separate lot                                   See §§
from the principal use to which the parking is related                  C           C  C               153.170 through
                                                                                                       153.174
Residential Uses
Single-family detached units                                            X           X  X                
Multiple-family units                                                   X           X  X                
                                                                        P, unless
                                                                        any
                                                                        individual
                                                                        use or
                                                                        single                         See
Mixed-use multiple-family with retail or service commercial             component   C  X               § 153.164 for use regulations and development standards
                                                                        of the
                                                                        project
                                                                        requires a
                                                                        conditional
                                                                        use permit
Other Uses
Kennel                                                                  X           X  C                
Open air markets and horticultural sales:
 
a. Open air markets held on a recurring basis (farm and craft markets,
flea markets, produce markets, and similar use)                         C           C  C
                                                                       T           T  T
b. Single-event open air market                                         C           C  C                
                                                                       T           T  T
c. Horticultural sales with outdoor display
 
d. Seasonal sales (Christmas tree lots, pumpkin sales, and similar
uses)
Vending carts on private property in conjunction with a retail          P           P  X               See
establishment                                                                                          § 153.163
Funeral home                                                            C           C  C                
Cemetery                                                                X           X  X               Permitted only within designated cemetery district; see
                                                                       X           X  X               § 94.02
Crematory
Hotel and motel                                                         C           C  X                
Cannabis Uses
Medicinal cannabis delivery- only retailer                              X           X  C               See §§
Commercial cannabis delivery                                            X           X  X               153.515 through
Cultivation, even by qualified patients and caregivers                  X           X  X               153.523 

Legend:
C = Conditional use
P = Permitted use
X = Use not permitted
Notes and Definitions:
(a) A high volume traffic generator is one which generates 118 or more average daily weekday vehicle trips per 1,000 gross square feet of leasable area, as defined by the
latest version of the Institute of Transportation Engineers “Trip Generation” manual.
(b) A low volume traffic generator is one which generates less than 118 average daily weekday vehicle trips per 1,000 gross square feet of leasable area, as defined by the
latest version of the Institute of Transportation Engineers “Trip Generation” manual.
(c) Retail, sales areas of 15,000 square feet or more in either a freestanding store or as a component of a larger store or building.
(d) For the purpose of this section "Groceries" shall be defined as staple foodstuffs, meats, seafood, produce and dairy products.
 
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.804) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 478-C.S.,
passed 3-18-97; Am. Ord. 479-C.S., passed 4-15-97; Am. Ord. 486-C.S., passed 2-
3-98; Am. Ord. 520-C.S., passed 11-4-03; Am. Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11; Am.
Ord. 591-C.S., passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14; Am. Ord. 618-
C.S., passed 1-20-15; Am. Ord. 619-C.S., passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord. 625-C.S.,
passed 2-18- 16; Am. Ord. 631-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 632-C.S., passed
5-2-17; Am. Ord. 702, passed 3-5-24)
§ 153.152 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following performance standards shall apply to all commercial and
industrial uses located in the C-1, C-3, and M-1 zone districts.
   (B)   While the table (Land Use Regulations) in §
153.151 does not provide an exhaustive list of prohibited uses, these
performance standards clearly preclude most, if not all, intensive food
processing operations, dye and textile manufacturing and processing, animal
product processing, metal or plastic manufacturing and fabricators, or
operations generally classified as heavy industry.
      (1)   Smoke. No use may emit from a vent, stack, chimney, or combustion
process any smoke or emission, other than water vapor, that is visible to the
naked eye or that violates any standards established by the South Coast Air
Quality Management District and the California Air Resources Board.
      (2)   Noise. No use may violate the city's noise standards.
      (3)   Vibration. No use may generate any ground-transmitted vibration
that is perceptible to the human sense of touch measured at the outside
boundary of the immediate space occupied by the enterprise generating the
vibration if the enterprise is onto of several located on a lot, or the lot
line if the enterprise generating the vibration is the only enterprise located
on a lot.
      (4)   Odors. No use may generate any obnoxious or adverse odor that can
be detected beyond the boundary of the lot occupied by that use.
      (5)   Electrical disturbance or interference. No use may create any
electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operations, equipment,
appliances, communications devices, or other electrical devices other than
those of the creator of such disturbance.
      (6)   Stormwater runoff. The construction of any new building, and all
activities conducted indoors and out of doors, shall comply with stormwater
runoff regulations and National Pollution Discharge Elimination Systems (NPDES)
requirements.
('65 Code, § 9-3.808) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.153 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A valid business license, obtained pursuant to
Chapter 110 of this code, shall be required as a condition of obtaining any
permit or authority to establish a use under this title.
('65 Code, § 9-3.812) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.154 PRECISE PLAN OF DESIGN REQUIRED.
   A precise plan of design (PPD) application, as described in
§ 153.355, shall be required for any new commercial or industrial development
or any addition to existing development as follows:
   (A)   Any proposal to construct 3,000 square feet or more of new
construction shall be subject to review as required by
§ 153.355.
   (B)   Any proposal to construct less than 3,000 square feet of new
construction shall be subject to city staff-level review coordinated by the
Planning Section.
   (C)   For any proposal to construct an addition or modification of over
2,500 square feet shall be subject to review by the City Design Review
Commission.
('65 Code, § 9-3.816) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.155 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The table below identifies the development standards applicable to all
development in the C-1, C-3, and M-1 zones.
 
Development Zone District                 Notes
Standards   C-1       C-3       M-1
Minimum lot None      None      None      See
size                                      § 153.162 regarding automobile service stations and hotel/motels
Minimum lot 50 feet   50 feet   50 feet
width
            5         5         2
Maximum     stories/  stories/  stories/  An additional 10 ft. allowed to enclose elevator tower or fire
building    70 ft.,   70 ft.,   35 ft.,   stairway. See also
height      whichever whichever whichever § 153.157
            is lower  is lower  is lower
                                          a. Front setback may be required through precise plan of design
                                          review or CUP
Front yard  0 feet    0 feet    0 feet     
                                          b. See
                                          § 153.162 regarding automobile service stations
Side yard:
 
Abutting C-
1, C-3, or
M-1         0 feet    0 feet    0 feet    See
           5 feet    10 feet   10 feet   § 153.162 regarding automobile service stations
Abutting
any other
zone
district
 
 
Development      Zone District                                Notes
Standards        C-1            C-3            M-1
                                                              Structures may
                                                              locate on rear
                                                              property line
Rear yard:                                                    abutting C-1, C-
                                                             3, and M-1 where
Abutting C-1, C-                                              structure is of
3, or M-1        10 feet        10 feet        15 feet        solid masonry
                10 feet        15 feet        20 feet        construction and
Abutting any                                                  no windows,
other zone                                                    doors, or other
district                                                      openings are on
                                                              the wall located
                                                              on the property
                                                              line
                                                              FAR may be
                                                              increased for
Maximum floor    0.5            0.7            0.5            mixed-use
area ration                                                   development in C-
                                                              3 zone; see
                                                              § 153.164
Distance between As required by As required by As required by
buildings        Fire Code      Fire Code      Fire Code
 
('65 Code, § 9-3.820) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.156 PERMITTED PROJECTIONS INTO SETBACK AREAS.
   No structure shall be permitted within any required yard area except as
provided for in the table below. In any event, no projections of any kind shall
be permitted into a public right-of-way.
 
Feature                  Rear Yard                  Side Yard
Architectural adornment  Not more than 5 inches for Not more than 5 inches for
such as cornices, eaves, each 1 foot of required    each 1 foot of required
sills, etc.              yards                      yards
Balconies and stairways  Not permitted              Not permitted
(unenclosed)
Bay window or similar
feature which does not   36 inches                  36 inches
extend building
foundation
Chimneys                 4 feet                     4 feet
                         Not more than 5 inches for Not more than 5 inches for
Fire escapes             each 1 foot of required    each 1 foot of required
                         yard                       yard
 
('65 Code, § 9-3.824) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.157 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMIT.
   Through precise plan of design review, the following structures may be
authorized to be erected above the height limits established in this
subchapter:
   (A)   Antenna, provided, however, that satellite dish antenna meet the
requirements contained in
§ 153.133.
   (B)   Skylights.
   (C)   Church spires.
   (D)   Flagpoles.
   (E)   Chimneys and smokestacks.
   (F)   Similar architectural features that do not provide any usable floor
area.
('65 Code, § 9-3.828) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.158 FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit shall be required for the construction of
any fence or wall constructed or established in any commercial or industrial
zone. An application for the permit shall be filed with the Community
Development Director on forms provided by the Director. An appeal from the
decision of the Director may be made directly to the City Council in the time
and manner specified in
§ 153.004.
   (B)   Properties abutting residentially-zoned property. Wherever a C-1, C-3,
or M-1 zoned property abuts a property zoned for residential use, a six-foot
high masonry block wall shall be erected to shield the residential property
from potentially adverse impacts associated with commercial and industrial
uses. However, any portion of the required wall located within the required
front yard setback shall be limited in height to four feet.
   (C)   Height limits. All fences and walls, and all hedges serving similar
shielding functions as a fence or wall, shall be subject to the height
restrictions contained in the following table and otherwise specified in this
section.
 
Height Restrictions for Fences, Walls, and Hedges
                                            Maximum Height in Maximum Height in
         Maximum Height   Maximum Height in Side Yard -       Side Yard -
Type of  in Front Yard    Rear Yard         Interior Lot Line Street Side Lot
Lot                                                           Line
         C-1, C- M-1      C-1, C-3 M-1      C-1, C-3 M-1      C-1, C-3 M-1
         3
Interior 4 ft.   6 ft.    6 ft.    8 ft.    6 ft.    8 ft.    N/A      N/A
Corner   4 ft.;
or       see     6 ft.;                                       6 ft.;   8 ft.;
Reversed note    see note 6 ft.    8 ft.    6 ft.    8 ft.    see note see note
Corner   (a)     (a)                                          (a)      (a)
Lot
All
Other
Lots:
[See
note
(a)]
        4 ft.   6 ft.    6 ft.    8 ft.    6 ft.    8 ft.    N/A      N/A
Solid    6 ft.   6 ft.    6 ft.    8 ft.    6 ft.    8 ft.    N/A      N/A
fence or
wall
 
Entirely
open
fence
Notes:
N/A = Not applicable
 
(a) Any fence, wall, or hedge along the front or side line of a corner lot
within 35 feet of a street intersection shall be limited in height to two feet,
as measured from the elevation of the top of the adjacent curb.
 
   (D)   Permitted materials in the C-1 and C-3 zone districts. Permitted
fencing and wall materials in the C-1 and C-3 zones shall include wood,
masonry, and wrought iron. Chain link fencing shall be specifically prohibited
in all front and side yards. All fencing must be maintained damage free and in
appearance comparable to the time of original installation, subject to normal
weathering.
   (E)   Permitted materials in the M-1 zone district. Permitted fencing and
wall materials in the M-1 zone shall include wood, masonry, wrought iron, chain
link, and barbed wire, when placed atop fences six feet or greater in height.
   (F)   Clear sight distance required. Wherever a private driveway provides
access to an alley, clear sight distances shall be maintained at the point
where the driveway intersects the alley. To ensure such sight distances are
provided, no opaque fencing or wall shall be constructed, and no landscaping
materials shall be permitted to grow, higher than three feet within ten feet of
the intersection of the alley and driveway.
('65 Code, § 9-3.832) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 526-C.S.,
passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.159 OUTDOOR STORAGE AND DISPLAY.
   (A)   Purpose. The intent of this section is to provide standards for
outdoor storage and display of merchandise connected to and operated with
permanent commercial and manufacturing uses.
   (B)   Application procedure.
      (1)   Any business in a commercial or manufacturing zone seeking outdoor
storage or display of merchandise shall submit an application to the Community
Development Director for an Outdoor Storage and Display Permit. The application
shall be accompanied by a site plan, photos, and other exhibits as may be
required to properly evaluate the request along with an application fee in an
amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council. The application
shall include the days of the week, hours, and number of weeks per year for
which the application is requested.
      (2)   The Community Development Director shall approve an application for
the outdoor storage or display of merchandise if the application meets the
development standards set forth in this section. The Community Development
Director may place reasonable conditions on the issuance of the permit to
ensure conformance with the city’s development standards. In the event a permit
is denied, the Director shall supply findings in writing to the applicant
within 30 days of such denial.
      (3)   The Community Development Director shall retain jurisdiction over
the permit and may enforce its provisions as required to ensure compliance with
this section.
   (C)   Outdoor storage.
      (1)   Outdoor storage incidental to the primary use shall be allowed in
the C-1 and C-3 zones only in rear yards and in the M-1 zones only in the rear
and side yards. The outdoor storage must comply with the development standards
of this section.
      (2)   Development standards.
         (a)   Stored materials shall not occupy any part of a required parking
area;
         (b)   Stored materials shall be prohibited at all times on public
property;
         (c)   Stored materials shall not exceed six feet in height;
         (d)   Only goods and materials sold or used in the business may be
stored.
   (D)   Outdoor display.
         (1)   Outdoor display incidental to the primary use shall be allowed
in the C-1, C-3, and M-1 zones. The outdoor display must comply with the
development standards of this section, with the exception of auto dealerships
and automotive service stations.
         (2)   Development standards. Outdoor displays shall meet the following
requirements:
            (a)   Be consistent with the city’s General Plan, zoning
ordinances, specific plan and other regulations;
            (b)   Not create any condition that would be detrimental to the
appearance of the premises or to any surrounding property, including but not
limited to, being unsightly;
            (c)   Not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare;
            (d)   Not create a public nuisance;
            (e)   Maintain at least a six-foot width for clear pedestrian
passage along the public sidewalk and at least a four-foot width within private
property walkways and store entrances;
            (f)   Not create a safety hazard or block access to disabled
persons;
            (g)   Not require construction of new doorways or other significant
exterior changes to existing commercial and industrial buildings or surrounding
development;
            (h)   Not be located on public streets or within the public right-
of-way, in designated parking areas, vehicular circulation areas, or within
landscape planter areas;
            (i)   Not emit noise, odor, smoke, or other obnoxious substances;
            (j)   Complement existing storefronts through the use of materials,
finishes and color consistent with the approved architecture of the building;
            (k)   Be limited to the area immediately in front or along the
sides of the business selling the merchandise, or no more than 25 feet in
length, whichever is less. The area shall not extend laterally beyond the store
or building frontage or block access to the business or any other building/
store entrance(s);
            (l)   Merchandise may not be stacked above a height of four feet.
Merchandise which exceeds four feet in height, but is not higher than 12 feet
in height may be displayed provided that it does not cover or block more than
25% of the front or side of the business selling the merchandise. The display
of trees for sale is not subject to any height limitation.
            (m)   The items proposed for display and sale are the same as those
sold inside the store or items that would typically be sold at the business and
do not consist of unprepared, packaged merchandise. For purposes of this
section UNPREPARED, PACKAGED MERCHANDISE means items that have been sealed,
wrapped or packaged in protective materials not designed for profession
merchandise displays.
      (3)   Operational requirements. Once approved, outdoor displays shall
meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Support structures such as tables and racks used in conjunction
with the outdoor display of merchandise shall be removed at the end of each
business day; and
         (b)   Merchandise shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at
all times.
      (4)   Exceptions. No application shall be required for outdoor displays
that meet all of the following requirements:
         (a)   The displays are located more than 20 feet back from the nearest
face of curb on any public street, alley or driveway; and
         (b)   The displays are not visible from a public street, alley or
other right-of-way.
   (E)   Sidewalk and parking lots sales/special events. Special events such as
sidewalk and parking lot sales shall require a temporary use permit.
   (F)   Appeals. Any decision made pursuant to this section shall be
appealable pursuant to
§ 153.004.
   (G)   Revocation. The Community Development Director may revoke the Outdoor
Storage and Display Permit if the permittee fails to comply with the
requirements of this section or any conditions of approval. Prior to revoking
the permit, the Director shall provide the permittee a written notice of non-
compliance. The permittee shall have a right to appeal the notice of revocation
pursuant to
§ 153.004.
   (H)   The regulations set forth in this section shall supersede conflicting
conditions of any entitlement granted prior to the effective date, including
conditions which prohibit the outdoor storage and display of merchandise.
('65 Code, § 9-3.836) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 535-C.S.,
passed 1-20-04)
§ 153.160 LANDSCAPE.
   (A) A minimum of 6% of the gross lot area shall be landscaped. The landscape
shall be designed and installed such that much of the landscaping is visible
from a public street or thoroughfare. Additional site landscaping may be
required for conditionally permitted uses, as set forth in § 153.162.
   (B)   The city may require planting to be provided within a public right-of-
way.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.840) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 601-C.S.,
passed 3-4-14)
§ 153.161 RESTRICTIONS ON DIVISION OF SPACE/INDOOR SWAP MEETS.
   (A)   All planned division of office, retail, or other space within a
building shall be shown on building plans. No further division of space for
individual lease or use purposes beyond that shown on approved plans shall be
permitted without the approval of the Community Development Director. Each
lease space shall contain no less than 800 square feet of gross floor area.
   (B)   Indoor swap meets. Notwithstanding the above, indoor swap meets shall
be allowed in the C-3 zone only when a conditional use permit has been granted
in accordance with the provisions of §§
153.240 et seq. and the requirements of this section. When authorized by a
conditional use permit, the following minimum standards shall apply:
      (1)   The use shall not be located on any parcel that is within 250 feet
of a residential zone;
      (2)   The minimum building size shall be 30,000 square feet;
      (3)   Each business tenant shall conduct the sale of new or used and
goods and merchandise from a tenant enclosure;
      (4)   Each tenant enclosure shall have a minimum area of 500 square feet
with a minimum dimension of 25 feet;
      (5)   Each tenant enclosure shall be surrounded on three sides by an
eight-foot high wall, which shall be constructed out of material approved by
the Uniform Building Code;
      (6)   Each tenant enclosure shall have a wall covering of ½-inch drywall,
which shall be fire taped and painted and four-inch base molding within ¼-inch
of the finish floor of the enclosure. Other material may be used as approved by
the Director;
      (7)   Each tenant enclosure wall shall be appropriately secured to a
building wall or foundation;
      (8)   Each business tenant shall have a seller’s permit from the State
Board of Equalization;
      (9)   A building manager must be present during all business operating
hours; and
      (10) A minimum of 1,000 square feet of storage area shall be provided for
each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, or fraction thereof.
   (C)   Included with the conditional use permit application shall be a
comprehensive site master plan documenting in detail the architectural
character, screening, parking, landscape design, noise control elements,
traffic-control elements, sign program and any other elements of the proposal
relevant to ensure adequate consideration of impacts by the Planning Commission
and compliance with the requirements of this section.
('65 Code, § 9-3.844) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 535-C.S.,
passed 1-20-04)
§ 153.162 SPECIAL CONDITIONS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES.
   This section establishes special conditions which shall apply to the
following listed land uses:
   (A)   Alcoholic beverage sales.
      (1)   A conditional use permit, obtained pursuant to the provisions of §§
153.240 through
153.248, shall be required for any business that sells alcoholic beverages for
on-site or off-site consumption. This requirement shall apply to any new
business proposed to locate within the city, as well as to existing businesses
applying for a new state permit to sell alcoholic beverages.
      (2)   In approving an application for a conditional use permit to
establish a use selling alcoholic beverages, the Planning Commission may impose
conditions on the use to ensure that the use operates in a manner that provides
adequate protection of general health, safety, and community welfare.
      (3)   In determining whether to approve a conditional use application for
alcoholic beverage sales and the conditions to impose on such use, the
Commission shall consider the following:
         (a)   The nature and use of real property within 500 feet of the use,
and in particular, the location of similar nearby uses and the location of
residences, parks, schools, and churches.
         (b)   Appropriate measures to provide proper maintenance of the
building exterior, including keeping the premises free of junk, litter, and
debris.
         (c)   Lighting of exterior areas, including parking lots, to
discourage activities outside of the buildings.
         (d)   Protection of persons residing on or using adjacent properties
from noise, illegal activity, odors, and undue light and glare.
         (e)   Provision of on-site security, both inside and outside the
building, to satisfy any concerns raised by the Police Department.
         (f)   Hours of operation.
         (g)   Controls on occupancy limits inside the building and loitering
outside of the building.
   (B)   Automobile service stations. The following shall apply to the
development and operation of all automobile service stations. For specific
standards regarding construction materials and safety operations, refer to §§
153.110 through
153.115.
      (1)   Concentration. A total of no more than two automobile service
stations shall be located at the corners of street intersections.
      (2)   Lot dimensions. Each automobile service station site shall have a
minimum lot area of 15,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 125 feet.
      (3)   Setbacks. Buildings of Type IV construction, as defined by the
Uniform Building Code, shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any property
or building setback line, except as otherwise permitted by the Uniform Building
Code for building walls of two-hour fire-resistant construction.
      (4)   Pumps and islands. All gasoline pumps and pump islands shall be set
back 15 feet from any property line or building setback line.
      (5)   Canopies. Canopies over pump islands are permitted, provided such
canopies are constructed entirely of non-combustible materials, are either
attached to the building or are located no closer than 10 feet to any building
on the same property, and are located no closer than five feet to any adjacent
interior property line.
      (6)   Retail sales. The retail sale of goods is permitted, provided
parking is provided as required for retail business.
      (7)   Parking. No vehicle shall be parked on the site other than those
belonging to customers and employees, and service station vehicles. Adequate
parking shall be provided for customers and employees and service station
vehicles. Storage of vehicles is prohibited. Excess space, if any, may be
leased to nearby businesses seeking additional parking provided all the
provisions for leased parking are met. See §§
153.220 through
153.227 for additional parking requirements.
      (8)   Access and driveways. No site shall have more than two accessways
to any one street, and no driveway shall be allowed within 20 feet of a street
corner. However, the City Engineer shall have the authority to place additional
restrictions on driveways and access as necessary to enhance vehicular and
pedestrian safety in the immediate vicinity of the site.
      (9)   Lighting. All outside lighting shall be oriented and shielded to
prevent glare, reflection, or any nuisance or hazardous interference with
adjacent uses or streets.
      (10)   Landscaping.  
         (a)   Five foot wide raised planters shall be provided along the
street aide property line. All plantings shall be of a variety that will not
achieve a height of over three feet.
         (b)   Three foot wide raised planters shall be provided along any wall
erected along an interior property line.
         (c)   At street corners, 150 square feet of raised landscaped area
shall be provided.
         (d)   A minimum of 30 square feet of raised landscaped area shall be
provided along each building facade facing a street.
         (e)   All landscaped areas shall be protected by a six inch high
concrete curb;
         (f)   Permanent automatic irrigation systems shall be provided for all
landscaped areas, and all landscape material shall be maintained in a neat and
healthy condition. No landscaping shall be permitted to grow over public
rights-of-way.
         (g)   Alternate proposals for the enhancement of planter areas may be
proposed by developers and reviewed and approved by the Community Development
Department.
      (11)   Utilities. All utility services extended to the building shall be
installed underground.
      (12)   Restrooms. All restroom entrances facing or visible from a public
right-of-way shall be screened by solid decorative screening six feet high.
      (13)   Refuse. Refuse containers shall be contained within a solid block
wall enclosure of five foot minimum height. The enclosure gate shall be fully
screened.
   (C)   Automobile repair businesses.
      (1)   All site area not covered by buildings or landscaping shall be
fully paved with materials acceptable to the Community Development Director.
      (2)   All stored or parked vehicles shall be stored or parked only in
areas designated for such use.
      (3)   All repair activities shall be conducted within a fully enclosed
structure.
      (4)   All used or discarded automobile parts or equipment shall be fully
screened from public view.
      (5)   All service bays shall be designed to allow access without backing
or driving directly forward into a public right-of-way or alley.
      (6)   All on-site activities shall comply with the city's current noise
requirements.
   (D)   Churches.
      (1)   Only those uses specifically identified in and authorized by an
approved conditional use permit shall be permitted to operate in association
with the principal permitted use. For example, a day care center or private
school located at a church facility must be identified as an authorized use in
the conditional use permit for the church. Otherwise, any such additional use
shall require an amendment to the principal conditional use permit (CUP).
      (2)   The application for a church shall be granted only upon the
Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, making the findings contained
in
§ 153.246 and the following additional findings:
         (a)   That all buildings, structures, and landscaping will be
developed in a manner harmonious and compatible with development on surrounding
properties;
         (b)   That exterior parking areas will be screened with landscaping in
a manner that ensures compatibility with and an enhancement to surrounding land
uses; and
         (c)   That all exterior lighting will be designed, oriented, and
constructed to shield adjacent properties from adverse glare effects.
   (E)   Drive-through businesses.
      (1)   For fast-food restaurants, a minimum queuing distance of 150 feet
shall be provided from the forwardmost drive-up window to the entrance to the
queuing space. For all other drive-through businesses, the minimum distance
shall be 100 feet. The queuing space shall be located completely clear of any
adjacent public right-of-way and all circulation aisles provided on a site.
      (2)   Drive-through aisles shall be located to avoid interference with
and adverse impacts on on- site pedestrian circulation.
      (3)   Menu boards for drive-through restaurants shall be located to
provide adequate distance from the menu board to the entrance to the queuing
space.
   (F)   Educational facilities.
      (1)   Only those uses specifically identified in and authorized by an
approved conditional use permit shall be permitted to operate in association
with the principal permitted use. Otherwise, any such additional use shall
require an amendment to the principal conditional use permit (CUP).
      (2)   The application for an education facility shall be granted only
upon the Planning Commission, or City Council on appeal, making the findings
contained in
§ 153.246. Zoning and the following additional findings:
         (a)   That all buildings, structures, and landscaping will be
developed in a manner harmonious and compatible with development on surrounding
properties;
         (b)   That exterior parking areas will be screened with landscaping in
a manner that ensures compatibility with and an enhancement to surrounding land
uses; and
         (c)   That all exterior lighting will be designed, oriented, and
constructed to shield adjacent properties from adverse glare effects.
   (G)   Hotels and motels.
      (1)   A minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet and a minimum street
frontage of 90 feet are required for the development of any new hotel or motel.
      (2)   If the hotel or motel is to be developed as a one-story structure,
then at least 1,000 square feet of lot area shall be provided for each proposed
guest room. In all other cases, at least 800 square feet of lot area shall be
provided for each proposed guest room.
      (3)   Each guest room shall have a minimum size of 300 square feet and an
average width of not less than 12 feet.
      (4)   Not more than one manager's quarters may be provide on-site. The
minimum dwelling unit size of the R-3 zone shall apply to the manager's
quarters.
      (5)   Every hotel and motel shall have an office with a registration
desk, and the office shall be located in close proximity to the main entrance
of the facility.
      (6)   In addition to the development standards for the C-1, C-3, and M-
1 zones set forth in this title, the Planning Commission may impose specific
conditions relating, but not limited to:
         (a)   The height and area of buildings;
         (b)   Setbacks;
         (c)   Signage;
         (d)   Installation and maintenance of fences, walls, hedges,
landscaping, and drainage facilities;
         (e)   Traffic circulation;
         (f)   Security requirements;
         (g)   Installation of antenna, including satellite dish antenna.
      (7)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         HOTEL. A building or group of buildings in which there are six or more
guest rooms where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation.
A HOTEL may provide space for shops or stores within its confines as is
otherwise permitted in the zone in which the hotel is located. Dining
facilities are recognized as a normal appurtenant use in hotels in any zone in
which hotels are permitted. A HOTEL shall include one or more amenities for
guests, including but not limited to: business center; on-site dining; exercise
facilities; meeting rooms; spa; pool; lounge areas; bars; sundry/gift shops.
HOTEL shall not include jails, hospitals, asylums, sanatoriums, rest homes,
orphanages, prisons, detention homes, or similar buildings where human beings
are housed and detained under legal restraint.
         MANAGER’S QUARTERS. Any dwelling unit contained in any hotel or motel
and containing kitchen facilities.
         MOTEL. A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual
sleeping or living units where a majority of such units open individually and
are directed to the outside, and where a garage is attached or a parking space
is conveniently located to each unit, all for the temporary use by automobile
and motor lodges. An establishment shall be considered a MOTEL when it is
required by the California Health and Safety Code to obtain the name and
address of the guest, the make, year, and license number of the vehicle, and
the state in which the license was issued.
         PERSON, OCCUPANCY, TRANSIENT, RENT and OPERATOR. These terms shall
have the same meanings as set forth in §
35.056 of this code.
         UNIT. Any dwelling unit intended for or used for transient occupancy.
(‘65 Code, § 5-29.01) (Ord. 297-C.S., passed - - )
      (8)   Regulations. No person shall operate any hotel or motel within the
city unless such hotel or motel complies with the following regulations:
         (a)   No portion of any manager's quarters shall be rented for
occupancy by or occupied by any transient. Manager's quarters shall be occupied
only by the operators; the managing agents of the operator, or employees of the
operator, and the total number of occupants in any manager's quarters shall be
limited to the same extent that the number of occupants in any dwelling unit in
the R-3 Zone is limited by the Official Land Use Plan Law of the city
(contained in
Ch. 153 of the code of ordinances) or any other applicable law of the city. No
manager's quarters shall contain more than one kitchen.
         (b)   At least two parking spaces, or an internal driveway abutting an
office used for the purposes of registering transients, shall be posted with
signs indicating that such parking spaces or driveway is to be used for
registration purposes only.
         (c)   Microwave ovens and/or any other appliance capable of preparing
foods of any kind shall not be located in any unit, other than the manager's
quarters, except that appliances designed for the sole purpose of preparing
coffee or boiling water shall be permitted in any unit.
         (d)   No more than one meter shall be used or maintained for each
utility service to any hotel or motel. Utility panels for such meters shall not
be visible from any public sidewalk or street which abuts such hotel and motel.
         (e)   Coin-operated machines designed or used for the disbursement of
food, beverages, personal articles, or other commercially sold items shall not
be located inside any unit of any hotel or motel.
         (f)   Every operator of every hotel or motel within the city shall
keep a register wherein he shall require all transients to print and sign their
names upon their procuring lodging or accommodations in such hotel or motel.
The register shall also show the time when the name was printed and signed
(including the time of day, the day, and the month of the year), the room
occupied or to be occupied by such person, the address of each such person, the
make, year, and license number of the vehicle, if any, of such person, and the
state in which such vehicle is licensed. Such register shall be kept in a
conspicuous place in the office of the hotel or motel and at all times shall be
open to inspection by any police officer, the City Manager, or any designated
representative of the City Manager.
         (g)   No occupancy or registration of any unit, or any portion
thereof, other than the manager's quarters, by any person shall exceed 21
calendar days in any consecutive 90 calendar day period.
         (h)   No unit, or any portion thereof, shall be rented more than two
times in any one consecutive 24-hour period or more than one time in any one
consecutive 12-hour period.
         (i)   No hourly or monthly billing rate shall be offered, accepted, or
otherwise used by any operator or any managing agent or employee of any
operator of any hotel or motel.
         (j)   The operator of any hotel or motel shall not permit the parking
of any vehicle, whether an automobile, truck, or recreational vehicle, anywhere
other than within the painted and designated parking space which is adequate
for such parking.
         (k)   Daily room cleaning service shall be provided for each unit
which is rented.
('65 Code, § 5-29.02) (Ord. 297-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
   (H)   Karaoke KTV. The City Council shall have the authority to adopt by
resolution standard conditions to be incorporated into conditional use permits
issued for karaoke TV businesses. The conditions may be amended from time to
time as the Council deems appropriate. Further, the Planning Commission may
impose additional conditions on individual projects as it deems necessary to
carry out the provisions of this title.
   (I)   Live entertainment. Any business offering live entertainment shall
require the issuance of a conditional use permit for that business. The
Planning Commission, in consultation with the Police Department and other city
agencies, shall have the authority to impose whatever conditions it deems
necessary to protect public health, safety, and community welfare.
   (J)   Secondhand stores. The outdoor display or storage of goods shall be
prohibited at all times, notwithstanding the provisions of
§ 153.159.
   (K)   Personal care facilities.
      (1)   Applicants requesting personal care facilities with private rooms
shall complete and submit a planning application and supplemental Police
questionnaire for review and approval by the Community Development Department
and the Police Department along with the following information:
         (a)   A professionally prepared plot plan that is drawn to at least an
one-eight-inch scale, showing all property boundary lines, building location(s)
and off-street parking; and
         (b)   Floor plans that include the location of all counters,
equipment, partitions, sinks, plumbing, walls, electrical and any other
alteration or improvement necessary for the operation of the business.
      (2)   Appeal. If an applicant is dissatisfied with the decision related
to their application, they have the ability to appeal the decision to the
Council following the appropriate procedures as outlined in §
153.247 of the Municipal Code.
      (3)   Minimum requirements.
         (a)   All exterior doors (except back or rear exterior doors used only
for employee entrance to and exit from the establishment) shall remain unlocked
during business hours. Interior doors shall not have any locking mechanisms,
including but not limited to any and all interior doors which lead to, or are
located in, the following areas: customer waiting room, front reception, or
internal hallways. A door leading from any lobby area to customer areas, if
any, shall not have any locking mechanism or be capable of being locked or
blocked to prevent entry in any manner. No private rooms for public use shall
be allowed. Restrooms are excluded from this requirement.
         (b)   All exterior windows and glass doors shall not be blocked by
window tinting, opaque coverings of any kind, or by painted signs that cover
more than 25% of any windowpane. The interior of the business shall be plainly
visible from the exterior of the business by passing vehicles and pedestrians.
         (c)   Treatment rooms within personal care facilities shall meet the
following visibility standards:
            1.   There must be windows on the upper half of all interior walls
that face into common areas. The windows must have at least 75% unobstructed
visibility on the upper half of the interior wall.
            2.   Doors to treatment rooms must have an unobstructed window in
the upper half of the door covering at least 75% of the upper half of the door.
            3.   Doors cannot be capable of being locked or blocked and should
have a minimum 12-inch gap between the top of the door and doorframe and a 12-
inch gap between the bottoms of the door and floor.
            4.   In lieu of doors, curtains may be used to cover the door
opening and must have a minimum 12-inch gap between the top of the curtain and
doorframe and a 12-inch gap between the bottom of the curtain and floor.
         (d)   The applicant may use drapes with runners in place of solid
partitions.
         (e)   There shall be only one customer allowed in the facial room at
any given time and the business shall post this regulation accordingly. The
sign shall be a minimum of 12 by 14 inches and posted in a conspicuous
location.
         (f)   There shall be no buzzer alarm or intercom system.
         (g)   Adult oriented merchandise prohibited. The use or possession of
adult oriented merchandise in the establishment is strictly prohibited.
         (h)   The business shall be available for inspection by the San
Gabriel Police Department during business hours.
         (i)   The applicant shall provide the hours and days of operation to
the Police Department for review.
      (4)   Revocation. If the owner/operator is found in violation of the
requirements that owner/operator shall receive written notice and shall have
three business days to contact the Community Development Department to remedy
the violation. Failure to comply shall result in actions as prescribed in §
110.14 (Suspension or Revocation Procedure) of the City's Municipal Code.
      (5)   Applicability to existing businesses. Existing personal care
facilities with legally constructed tenant improvements and valid business
licenses issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance that do not
comply with these provisions will be subject to §
153.422 (Continuation of Non-Conforming Structures) of the city's Municipal
Code.
   (L)   Vending machines.
      (1)   Businesses shall be limited to the number of machines as follows:
         (a)   Building frontages up to 50 linear feet may have a maximum of
one machine.
         (b)   Building frontages of 51- 100 linear feet may have up to two
machines.   
         (c)   Building frontages of 101- 200 linear feet may have up to three
machines.   
         (d)   Building frontages of 201- 300 linear feet may have up to four
machines.
         (e)   Building frontages over 300 linear feet may have a maximum of
five machines.
      (2)   Vending machines located within public view shall be grouped in one
location at a business or shopping center.
      (3)   Vending machines installed within a shopping center shall maintain
a distance between groupings of machines of 100 feet.
      (4)   The vending machine shall not be placed in a location that would
reduce the width of the walkways on private property to less than three feet.
      (5)   The vending machine shall not be located within five feet of a
driveway.
      (6)   The vending machine shall not project onto or over any part of the
public right-of-way, take up required parking spaces, or interfere with
ingress/egress or other circulation patterns.
      (7)   All vending machines shall be kept in good working order, absent of
broken or missing parts, graffiti, dirt or oils.
      (8)   No advertising shall be permitted on the machine other than what is
being sold from the vending machine.
      (9)   When installed adjacent to a building, vending machines shall be
parallel to the wall of the building with a clearance between the wall and the
vending machine of not more than six inches.
      (10)   Vending machines shall be affixed to property in a way to insure
they are not upset due to earthquake or other calamity but shall not be affixed
by way of chains or other temporary methods.
      (11)   Security cages or similar devices, which fully enclose the vending
machine, are prohibited for vending machines located within public view.
   (M)   VIP rooms within restaurants. All VIP rooms shall comply with each of
the following minimum requirements to the satisfaction of the Police
Department:
      (1)   The VIP room shall be used in conjunction with meal service only.
      (2)   VIP rooms shall be available for use only during the restaurant's
posted, regular business hours. Business hours shall be posted and observed.
All non-employees shall vacate the restaurant within 15 minutes after the
restaurants posted closing time.
      (3)   The room shall be designed to accommodate normal restaurant
activities. Dining tables and chairs shall be included. No other furniture,
especially, couches, lounging furniture or other accessories not generally
associated with a restaurant shall be allowed.
      (4)   Permanent lighting shall be maintained in the VIP room at all
times.
      (5)   The door and window openings of the room shall be maintained free
and clear of all visual obstructions at all times.
      (6)   Curtains or other screening may be utilized for privacy in lieu of
a solid door.
      (7)   All public areas of the facility must allow visibility into the
room from other areas of the interior of the facility. As a rule of thumb, 75%
unobstructed visibility of the upper half of any interior walls would be
sufficient visibility.
      (8)   No tinted or "one-way" glass shall be installed in any VIP room.
      (9)   No doors other than exterior doors and restrooms shall be capable
of locking within the facility. The premises' exterior doors shall remain
unlocked during business hours.
      (10)   No equipment shall be installed other than surveillance cameras
installed and utilized per the approval of the Chief of Police, which has the
capability off recording, videotaping or monitoring the activities,
conversations, or other sounds in the VIP rooms.
      (11)   No doorbells, buzzers, warning devices, or similar devices shall
be installed at the facility.
      (12)   Any serving of alcoholic beverages must be in compliance with
alcoholic and beverage control's rules and regulations and any conditions
established by conditional use permit.
      (13)   No live entertainment, dancing or karaoke shall be provided or
allowed in the VIP room without a conditional use permit.
      (14)   Each facility shall allow for unannounced inspections at any time
and the owner/operators shall cooperate with city officials at all times.
   (N)   Pool and billiard halls. All pool and billiard halls shall meet the
following minimum conditions for a permit:
      (1)   Physical environment.
         (a)   A clear and unobstructed view of the entire interior of the pool
or billiard hall shall be visible from the entrance to such room.
         (b)   No partitions forming rooms, stalls, or other enclosures within
which the public may congregate shall be permitted within the pool or billiard
hall. However, this shall not prohibit the maintenance of washrooms, toilet
rooms or storage closets.
         (c)   No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, consumed or made available
in the pool or billiard hall.
      (2)   Conduct.
         (a)   Behavior within the pool or billiard hall shall conform to all
laws and ordinances in addition to the provisions of this chapter. Management
shall provide sufficient adult supervision to assure compliance with such laws
and ordinances. All owners, managers, and operators of the pool or billiard
hall shall be strictly responsible for the enforcement of any rules and
regulations promulgated for the operating of such room, and shall not permit
any person violating any law, ordinance, rule or regulation to remain in the
pool or billiard hall.
         (b)   No persons shall bring any form of alcoholic liquor into a pool
or billiard hall. No person in an intoxicated condition shall enter or remain
in the pool or billiard hall.
         (c)   No person having charge or control of any pool or billiard hall
shall permit any persons to enter or remain therein who has any form of
alcoholic liquor in their possession, or permit any intoxicated, boisterous or
disorderly persons to enter, be or remain in any pool or billiard hall.
   (O)   Emergency shelters. All emergency shelters shall meet the following
locational and operational standards:
      (1)   The shelter shall be located adjacent to any zone except R-1;
      (2)   The shelter shall be located within one-quarter mile of a bus stop;
      (3)   The shelter shall be located within a two-mile radius of a
hospital;
      (4)   The number of beds shall not exceed one per 130 square feet of
gross floor area;
      (5)   Off-street parking shall be provided for every staff member;
      (6)   The shelter shall have full-time on-site management;
      (7)   The shelter shall be located no closer than 300 feet to another
emergency shelter;
      (8)   The maximum length of stay of any person shall be six months;
      (9)   Exterior lighting shall be provided at building entrances and exits
and within parking areas. The lighting fixtures must be shielded to prevent
glare; and
      (10)   Security guards, as recommended by the Police Department, shall be
provided during the hours that the emergency shelter is open.
   (P)   Single room occupancy (SRO) developments. All single room occupancy
(SRO) developments shall meet the following locational and operational
standards:
      (1)   Single room occupancy developments shall be located adjacent to any
zone except R-1;
      (2)   Single room occupancy developments shall be located no closer than
300 feet to another single room occupancy development;
      (3)   Single room occupancy units shall be efficiency units that may
include a complete private bath and kitchen but do not have a separate bedroom.
The maximum size for an SRO unit shall be 500 square feet;
      (4)   A minimum lot size of 18,000 square feet and a minimum street
frontage of 90 feet are required for the development of any new single room
occupancy developments;
      (5)   Single room occupancy developments shall not exceed a density of
1,742 square feet of net lot area for each unit;
      (6)   At least one common bathroom shall be provided for every six units;
      (7)   Buildings in a single room occupancy development shall not occupy
more than 60% of the total net lot area;
      (8)   Single room occupancy developments shall not exceed a maximum
height of three stories or 45 feet;
      (9)   Each single room occupancy development shall have a common open
space area totaling a minimum of 100 square feet per unit;
      (10)   Each single room occupancy development shall have a front yard of
not less than 15 feet;
      (11)   Each single room occupancy development shall have a side yard of
not less than ten feet. On corner lots the side yard of the side street shall
be not less than ten feet;
      (12)   Each single room occupancy development shall have a rear yard of
not less than 20 feet;
      (13)   Garbage and rubbish collection areas shall be provided as required
in §
153.151 of the San Gabriel Municipal Code;
      (14)   Adequate laundry facilities shall be available on the premises,
with no fewer than one washer/dryer per six units;
      (15)   Average income of residents in the development shall be no more
than 40% of the area median income;
      (16)   The development shall be subject to a covenant recorded with the
County Assessor’s Office stating that the units shall be subject to these
income restrictions for a minimum period of 55 years;
      (17)   New construction projects for seniors shall not qualify as single
room occupancy housing;
      (18)   Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of 0.5 parking
space per unit, plus one parking space for on-site management;
      (19)   Single room occupancy developments shall have full-time on-site
management.
   (Q)   Community gardens.
      (1)   Management. Community gardens shall be managed bv a garden
coordinator and operated according to a set of rules addressing governance,
hours of operation, maintenance and security responsibilities, and the system
for assigning plots.
      (2)   Structures. Structures are limited to storage sheds, plant
cultivation structures (greenhouses, hoophouses. and cold frames), benches,
bike racks, raised planting beds, compost or waste bins, picnic tables, fences,
and rain barrel systems. Individual structures may not exceed 120 square feet
in size or 12 feet in height. The combined area of all structures shall not
exceed 15% of the garden area. All structures shall meet the setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district and §
153.126, Accessory Buildings and Structures.
      (3)   Fencing. Community gardens shall be fenced in accordance with the
development standards of the underlying zoning district.
      (4)   Signs. One sign per street frontage is permitted. Signs shall not
exceed four square feet of sign face area and shall not exceed six feet in
height. The sign shall include a contact telephone number and/or contact e-mail
address/website address for the garden coordinator and for the Community
Development Department. No advertising for garden sponsors, donors, supporters,
suppliers, etc. is permitted on site.
      (5)   Water.
         (a)   A metered water supply connection shall be provided. Water costs
shall be paid by the garden coordinator body.
         (b)   Sprinkler systems are prohibited: all watering shall be by hose
or watering can. Informational materials supplied by the garden coordinator to
plot holders shall include advice on water conservation, mulching, effective
watering techniques, etc.
      (6)   Compost. Compost materials shall be stored at least three feet from
adjacent property in a manner that is not visible from adjacent property,
controls odor, prevents infestation, and minimizes runoff into waterways and
onto adjacent properties.
      (7)   Trash. A suitably sized trash receptacle shall be placed on-site.
The garden coordinator shall be responsible for arranging for and making
payment for regular trash collection. The operating rules shall encourage
onsite composting of plant materials only and encourage gardeners to take their
trash off-site for disposal.
      (8)   Outdoor lighting. No outdoor lighting is permitted.
      (9)   Operational standards.
         (a)   Allowable uses include the cultivation of fruits, vegetables,
plants, flowers, or herbs. Plants prohibited by the State of California and/or
federal law are prohibited.
         (b)   Gardening activities shall be conducted between the hours of 7:
00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
         (c)   Mechanized tools (tillers, trimmers, etc.) or flame-producing
tools are prohibited.
         (d)   On-site sales of produce or any other items are prohibited.
         (e)   The site shall be designed and maintained so that water and
fertilizer will not drain onto adjacent property or to the public right-of-way.
         (f)   No synthetic pesticides or herbicides may be used.
         (g)   No fresh manure may be used.
         (h)   Entrance gates (if any) shall be secured with a key or
combination lock. A copy of the key or the combination code shall be provided
to the Community Development Department.
      (10)   Rules and regulations. A bulletin board (or similar) shall be
erected on the site listing the rules and regulations that apply to garden
users. The bulletin board shall not be visible from the public right of way to
minimize the risk of vandalism.
      (11)   Maintenance. Garden areas shall be maintained in good condition to
prevent overgrown plots, unmaintained common areas, accumulation of trash,
blight, and other nuisances.
   (R)   Open air markets.
      (1)   Application requirements. A temporary use permit is required for
open air markets that are one-time events. The Planning Commission shall
approve a conditional use permit for ongoing open air markets only if the
following requirements are met:
         (a)   The market operator and/or individual vendors secure all
necessary licenses, certificates and health permits, and all agricultural
products meet all pertaining health and safety standards.
         (b)   Documentation is provided to show that all standards set forth
in this section will be met.
      (2)   Management plan. A management plan shall be prepared and provided
to the Planning Commission, including the following:
         (a)   Identification of (a) market manager(s), who shall be present
during all hours of operation.
         (b)   A set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of
the market; the method of assigning booths and registering vendors; hours of
operation; maintenance; security; refuse collection; and parking.
      (3)   Parking. One vehicle parking space for each vendor stall shall be
provided. Alternative parking arrangements, including shared parking, may be
considered by the Planning Commission in determining whether sufficient parking
is provided.
      (4)   Hours of operation. Market activities shall be conducted between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Set-up and clean-up and take-down may
occur between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
      (5)   Waste disposal. Adequate composting, recycling, and trash
containers shall be provided during hours of operation, and shall be removed
from site for appropriate disposal. The site shall be cleaned at the end of
each day of operations, including the removal of all stalls and debris.
      (6)   Performances. Live musical and other performances may be approved
with appropriate permits; a temporary use permit for one-time events or a
conditional use permit for ongoing events.
   (S)   Low barrier navigation center. All low barrier navigation centers
shall meet the following locational and operational standards:
      (1)   A low barrier navigation center is a housing first low-barrier,
service-enriched shelter focused on moving homeless individuals and families
into permanent housing that provides temporary living facilities while case
managers connect individuals experiencing homelessness to income, public
benefits, health services, shelter, and housing.
      (2)   Low barrier are best practices to reduce barriers to entry, and may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The presence of partners if it is not a population-specific
site, such as for survivors of domestic violence or sexual assault, women, or
youth;
         (b)   Pets;
         (c)   The storage of possessions; and
         (d)   Privacy, such as partitions around beds in a dormitory setting
or in larger rooms containing more than two beds, or private rooms.
      (3)   The low barrier navigation center shall be located in mixed-use and
non-residential zones permitting multi-family uses.
      (4)   The low barrier navigation center shall offer services to connect
people to permanent housing through a services plan that identifies services
staffing.
      (5)   The low barrier navigation center shall be linked to a coordinated
entry system, so that staff in the interim facility or staff who collocate in
the facility may conduct assessments and provide services to connect people to
permanent housing.
      (6)   The low barrier navigation center shall comply with Chapter 6.5 of
Division 8 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
      (7)   The low barrier navigation center shall have a system for entering
information regarding client stays, client demographics, client income, and
exit destination through the local Homeless Management Information System as
defined by § 578.3 of Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations;
      (8)   An application for a low barrier navigation center shall be
submitted to the Community Development Department. The city shall notify the
applicant whether the application is complete within 30 days of receipt
pursuant to § 65943 of the Gov’t Code. The city shall act within 60 days of
receipt of a completed application.
      (9)   This section shall remain in effect until such time as Article 12
of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Cal. Gov’t Code is repealed by the
state legislature or by its own sunset provisions.
   (T)   Supportive housing.
      (1)   Supportive housing shall have the same meaning as defined in §
50675.14 of the Health and Safety Code.
      (2)   Supportive services shall have the same meaning as defined in the
Gov’t Code § 65582.
      (3)   Target population shall have the same meaning as defined in §
50675.14 of the Health and Safety Code.
      (4)   Use by right shall have the same meaning as defined in subdivision
(i) of § 65583.2 of the Government Code.
      (5)   Supportive housing shall be a use by right in zones where multi-
family and mixed uses are permitted, including nonresidential zones permitting
multi-family uses, if the proposed housing development satisfies all of the
following requirements:
         (a)   Units within the development are subject to a recorded
affordability restriction for 55 years.
         (b)   One hundred percent of the units, excluding managers' units,
within the development are restricted to lower income households and are or
will be receiving public funding to ensure affordability of the housing to
lower income. For purposes of this division, "lower income households" has the
same meaning as defined in § 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code. The rents
in the development shall be set at an amount consistent with the rent limits
stipulated by the public program providing financing for the development.
         (c)   At least 25% of the units in the development or 12 units,
whichever is greater, are restricted to residents in supportive housing who
meet criteria of the target population. If the development consists of fewer
than 12 units, then 100% of the units, excluding managers' units, in the
development shall be restricted to residents in supportive housing.
         (d)   The developer shall provide the Community Development Department
with the information required by Gov’t Code § 65652.
         (e)   Nonresidential floor area shall be used for onsite supportive
services in the following amounts:
            1.   For a development with 20 or fewer total units, at least 90
square feet shall be provided for onsite supportive services; and
            2.   For a development with more than 20 units, at least 3% of the
total nonresidential floor area shall be provided for onsite supportive
services that are limited to tenant use, including, but not limited to,
community rooms, case management offices, computer rooms, and community
kitchens.
         (f)   The developer shall replace any dwelling units on the site of
the supportive housing development in the manner provided in paragraph (3) of
subdivision (c) of Gov’t Code § 65915.
         (g)   Units within the development, excluding managers' units, shall
include at least one bathroom and a kitchen or other cooking facilities,
including, at minimum, a stovetop, a sink, and a refrigerator.
      (6)   The supportive housing development shall comply with the written,
objective development standards and policies that apply to other multi-family
developments within the same zone.
         (a)   The review of a supportive housing development to determine
whether the development complies with objective development standards,
including objective design review standards, pursuant to this subdivision shall
be conducted consistent with the requirements of subdivision (f) of Gov’t Code
§ 65589.5, and shall not constitute a "project" for purposes of Division 13
(commencing with § 21000) of the Public Resources Code.
      (7)   Any discretion exercised by the city in determining whether a
project qualifies as a use by right pursuant to this section or discretion
otherwise exercised pursuant to this section does not affect the city's
determination that a supportive housing development qualifies as a use by right
pursuant to this subdivision.
      (8)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the
contrary, the city shall, at the request of the project owner, reduce the
number of residents required to live in supportive housing if the project-based
rental assistance or operating subsidy for a supportive housing project is
terminated through no fault of the project owner, but only if all the following
conditions have been met:
         (a)   The owner demonstrates that it has made good faith efforts to
find other sources of financial support.
         (b)   Any change in the number of supportive housing units is
restricted to the minimum necessary to maintain the project's financial
feasibility.
         (c)   Any change to the occupancy of the supportive housing units is
made in a manner that minimizes tenant disruption and only upon the vacancy of
any supportive housing units.
      (9)   This section does not prohibit the city from imposing fees and
other exactions otherwise authorized by law that are essential to provide
necessary public services and facilities to housing developments. However, the
city shall not adopt any requirement, including, but not limited to, increased
fees or other exactions, that applies to a project solely or partially on the
basis that the project constitutes a permanent supportive housing development
or based on the development's eligibility to receive ministerial approval
pursuant to this article.
      (10)   A developer of supportive housing subject to this section shall
provide the Community Development Department with a plan for providing
supportive services, with documentation demonstrating that the supportive
services will be provided onsite to residents in the project, as required by
Government Code § 65651, and describing those services, which shall include all
of the following:
         (a)   The name of the proposed entity or entities that will provide
supportive services;
         (b)   The proposed funding source or sources for the provided onsite
supportive services; and
         (c)   Proposed staffing levels.
      (11)   The Community Development Department shall approve a supportive
housing development that complies with the applicable requirements of this
section.
      (12)   The Community Development Department shall notify the developer
whether the application is complete within 30 days of receipt of an application
to develop supportive housing in accordance with this section. The Community
Development Department shall complete its review of the application within 60
days after the application is complete for a project with 50 or fewer units, or
within 120 days after the application is complete for a project with more than
50 units.
      (13)   If the supportive housing development is located within one-half
mile of a public transit stop, the local government shall not impose any
minimum parking requirements for the units occupied by supportive housing
residents.
      (14)   This section shall not be construed to do either of the following:
         (a)   Preclude or limit the ability of a developer to seek a density
bonus, including any concessions, incentives, or waivers of development
standards, from the city pursuant to Gov’t Code § 65915 or any other local
program that offers additional density or other development bonuses when
affordable housing is provided.
         (b)   Expand or contract the authority of the city to adopt or amend
an ordinance, charter, general plan, specific plan, resolution, or other land
use policy or regulation that promotes the development of supportive housing.
   (U)   Transitional housing.
      (1)   Transitional housing provides temporary housing with supportive
services to individuals and families experiencing homelessness with the goal of
interim stability and support to successfully move to and maintain permanent
housing.
      (2)   Transitional housing projects can cover housing costs and
accompanying supportive services for program participants for up to 24 months.
      (3)   Participants in a transitional housing project must have a signed
lease, sublease, or occupancy agreement with the following requirements:
         (a)   An initial term of at least one month;
         (b)   Automatically renewable upon expiration, except by prior notice
by either party; and
         (c)   A maximum term of 24 months.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.848) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 520-C.S.,
passed 11-4-03; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 589 C.S., passed 2-
1-11; Am. Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14; Am.
Ord. 631-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord. 632-C.S., passed 5-2-17; Am. Ord. 709,
passed 7-2-24)
§ 153.163 VENDING CARTS.
   (A)   Stationary vending carts. Vending carts on private property associated
with an established retail or service business shall be subject to the
following regulations:
      (1)   A valid business license shall be required to operate any vending
cart on private property, even if the cart remains at a fixed location.
      (2)   If food is prepared or sold from the vending cart, the operator
shall obtain and maintain a valid County Health Department permit.
      (3)   Vending carts may be located either inside or outside of a
building, subject to the location restrictions identified in divisions (A)(5)
through (A)(7) below.
      (4)   The vendor shall not place any permanent or temporary fixtures at
the location of the vending activity, including, but not limited to chairs,
tables, signs not affixed to the cart, or storage facilities.
      (5)   The vending cart shall not be located on any landscaped area or
parking area, nor shall it impede access to any parking area.
      (6)   The vending cart shall not be placed in a manner that obstructs or
impedes pedestrian circulation.
      (7)   The vending cart shall not be located on any public right-of-way
unless otherwise authorized by the city.
      (8)   No sales shall be solicited from or made to motorists.
      (9)   A maximum of two signs, affixed to the cart, shall be permitted,
with each sign limited in size to two square feet.
      (10)   All vending carts shall be equipped with trash receptacles of
sufficient size to accommodate trash generated by the use.
   (B)   Movable vending carts. Movable vending carts operating on public
rights-of-way are permitted only with a valid business license. All such carts
must comply with health regulations of Los Angeles County and the State of
California, and any other regulations or requirements which apply to their use
and operation.
('65 Code, § 9-3.852) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.164 MIXED USE IN THE C-1 AND C-3 ZONE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purpose. These mixed-use provisions are established to provide for the
compatible and beneficial mixture of commercial, office, and residential uses
in a single structure or on a single site. Mixed-use development is designed to
achieve a convenient business/residential environment in areas where multiple
activities are considered to be desirable. Mixed-use development also serves as
a transition or buffer between residential uses and commercial uses. In
addition, mixed-use development can add to the city’s supply of affordable
housing; reduce commutes between home and work; and promote strong, stable, and
desirable pedestrian-oriented business environments.
   (B)   Permitted uses. Multi-family residential uses are only permitted on
the second and third floors above ground floor commercial or office uses
permitted in the C-1 and C-3 Zone. Ground floor multi-family residential uses
are only permitted in mixed-use developments in excess of three acres.
   (C)   Development standards. All mixed-use developments shall comply with
the provisions established for the C-1 and C-3 Zone, except as modified in this
subchapter. The following standards shall apply to all mixed-use developments.
      (1)   Parking. The number of off-street parking spaces required for
specific uses shall be in compliance with the provisions set forth in §
153.220 herein, except as modified in this subchapter. All multi-family
residential uses shall be provided with one parking space per bedroom which
shall be located in a garage or carport. However, units designated for senior
citizens (62 years of age or older) shall be provided at a rate of 0.75 spaces
per unit (covered or uncovered). Guest parking for the multi-family residential
uses shall be provided at a rate of one space for every three multi-family
residential units. Tandem parking may be used only for the spaces which are
assigned and designated for a single residential unit. Additionally, parking
for residential units shall be separate and secured.
      (2)   Multi-family density. For mixed-use development projects which abut
R-1 or R-2 zoned property or equivalently zoned properties in unincorporated
Los Angeles County, the minimum site area shall be 3,960 square feet of net lot
area for each multi-family dwelling unit. If the mixed-use development projects
abuts any other zone, the minimum site area shall be 1,452 square feet of net
lot area for each family dwelling unit. Density bonuses shall be allowed in
accordance with the provisions established in the California Government Code §
65915.
      (3)   Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio (F.A.R.) for the
entire development shall not exceed one time the total net lot area. Multi-
family residential uses shall be a minimum of 25% of the total net lot area,
but shall not exceed 50% of the total net lot area.
      (4)   Lot coverage. Buildings and all accessory buildings shall not
occupy more than 55% of the total net lot area which abuts an R-1 or R-2 Zone
or equivalently zoned properties in unincorporated Los Angeles County, or 60%
of the total net lot area which abut any other zone.
      (5)   Height limit. For mixed-use development projects which abut R-1 or
R-2 zoned properties or equivalently-zoned properties in unincorporated Los
Angeles County, the maximum building height is two stories or 35 feet. For
mixed-use development projects which abut any other zone, the maximum height is
three stories or 45 feet.
      (6)   Front yards. The following front yard setback areas shall be
provided for mixed-use development projects:
         (a)   No front yard setback shall be required for commercial use
floors, however, a front setback may be required through the Precise Plan of
Design review or Conditional Use Permit process.
         (b)   Residential use floors shall maintain a minimum five foot
setback beyond the commercial floors.
      (7)   Side yard. For mixed-use development projects which abut a
residential zone, there shall be a minimum ten foot setback. There shall not be
a required side yard for mixed-use development projects which abut any other
zone. However, on corner lots, the side yard on the street side shall be not
less that ten feet.
      (8)   Rear yards. The rear yard for a mixed-use development project shall
be not less than 15 feet.
      (9)   Storage. A minimum of one 90-cubic-foot lockable, enclosed storage
space per residential unit must be provided.
      (10)   Trash enclosures. Separate trash facilities shall be provided for
the residential and non- residential components of the development.
      (11)   Open space areas.
         (a)   Each multi-family residential use shall have an adjoining open
space area totaling a minimum of 100 square feet. Open space areas located on
the ground level shall have minimum dimension of ten feet. Open space areas
located above the ground level shall have a minimum dimension of six feet.
         (b)   For mixed-use developments in excess of three acres, a
pedestrian plaza, community garden, or other open space area shall be proved as
an aesthetic and usable passive recreation amenity. The area of the open space
shall be determined through the conditional use permit review process. All open
areas shall be unobstructed from the ground upward, unless covered by a roof or
balcony supported entirely by the building. All open space areas not landscaped
must be developed with either reflection pools, fountains, pedestrian walkways,
rest areas, or other similar improvements.
      (12)   (Reserved)
      (13)   Maximum uninterrupted building facade length. One public entrance
shall be provided per 100 feet of building facade at street level.
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.856) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 495-C.S.,
passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-
4-14; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-20-14; Am. Ord. 695, passed 12-5-23)
§ 153.165 OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the requirements contained in this subchapter, the following
additional requirements of this code shall apply to the development and use of
any property in the C-1, C-3, and M-1 zone districts:
   §
153.003   Definitions
   §§
153.220 -
153.227   Off-Street Parking
   §§
153.320 -
153.333   Signs
   §§
153.280 -
153.286   Planned Development Overlay Zone
   §§
153.380 -
153.383   Commercially-Utilized Condominiums
   §§
153.400 -
153.404   Trip Reduction and Travel Demand Measures
   §§
153.530 -
153.539   Landscape
   
Chapter 121   Adult-Oriented Businesses
   
Chapter 110   Business Licenses
   §§
116.010 -
116.029   Amusement Machines
   
Chapter 118    Fortune Telling
   §§
116.055 -
116.065   Poolrooms and Billiard Rooms
   
Chapter 122   Massage Establishments and Services
(‘65 Code, § 9-3.860) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 591-C.S.,
passed 9-20-11; Am. Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14)
§ 153.166 TRASH/RECYCLING FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   Any new development project within the city which is either commercial,
industrial, or light manufacturing or any enlargement of an existing
commercial, industrial or light manufacturing structure by more than 25% of the
existing gross floor area, shall be required to provide a trash enclosure area
for the collection and loading of recyclable materials. The dimensions and
location of said enclosure shall be established by the Community Development
Director based on trash collection needs and recyclable material generation of
the project.
(Ord. 508-C.S., passed 11-7-00)
§ 153.167 SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following supplemental standards apply to commercial and mixed-use
development in the C-l and C-3 Districts to create a pedestrian friendly
environment. The figures contained in this section are for illustrative
purposes only and do not imply that the concept illustrated be implemented
precisely as shown but rather in a manner consistent with the purpose of these
regulations.
   (A)   Orientation of primary building entrance. The primary building
entrance shall face or be oriented to the street frontage. Where a site is
located on two public streets, a primary entrance shall be oriented toward the
street with the higher classification. If a site fronts two public streets of
equal classification, the applicant may choose which frontage on which street
to meet the requirement.
   (B)   Building transparency/required openings. Exterior walls facing and
within 20 feet of a front or street side lot line shall include windows, doors,
or other openings for at least 50% of the building wall area located between
two and one-half and seven feet above the level of the sidewalk. Such walls may
run in a continuous plane for no more than 30 feet without an opening.
   FIGURE 153.167-(A): BUILDING TRANSPARENCY/ REQUIRED OPENINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6241.jpg]
 
      (1)   Design of required openings. Openings fulfilling this requirement
shall have transparent glazing and provide views into work areas, display
areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces, or into window displays
that are at least three feet deep.
      (2)   Exceptions for parking garages. Multi-level garages are not
required to meet the ground-floor transparency requirement. Instead, they must
be designed and screened, consistent with the requirements of the off-street
parking subchapter (§§
153.220 through
153.229).
      (3)   Exceptions for historic buildings. Adaptive reuse projects that
incorporate architectural preservation methods as recommended by the City
Preservation Architect are not required to meet the ground-floor transparency
requirement as an incentive for historic preservation. The final determination
shall be made by the Design Review Commission and/or the Historic Preservation
and Cultural Resource Commission.
      (4)   Reductions through design review. The building transparency
requirement may be reduced or waived if it is found that:
         (a)   The proposed use has unique operational characteristics with
which providing the required windows and openings is incompatible, such as in
the case of a cinema or theater: and
         (b)   Street-facing building walls will exhibit architectural relief
and detail, and will be enhanced with landscaping in such a way as to create
visual interest at the pedestrian level.
   (C)   Building articulation. Buildings shall provide adequate architectural
articulation and detail to avoid a bulky and “box-like” appearance and to
create a pedestrian friendly environment.
      (1)   All street-facing facades shall have relief in plane and texture.
      (2)   Building facades shall include building projections or recesses,
doorway and window trim, and other details that provide architectural
articulation and design interest.
      (3)   Each side of the building that is visible from a public right-of-
way shall be designed with a complementary level of detailing.
   (D)   Pedestrian access. A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all
buildings on a site to each other, to on-site automobile and bicycle parking
areas, and to any on-site open space areas or pedestrian amenities.
      (1)   To street network. Regular connections between on-site walkways and
the public sidewalk shall be provided. An on-site walkway shall connect the
primary building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage.
      (2)   To neighbors. Direct and convenient access shall be provided from
commercial and mixed-use projects to adjoining residential and commercial areas
to the maximum extent feasible while still providing for safety and security.
      (3)   To transit. Safe and convenient pedestrian connections shall be
provided from transit stops to building entrances.
   (E)   Limitations on location of parking. Parking shall be located behind or
to the side of buildings.
   (F)   Limitations on curb cuts. Curb cuts shall be minimized and placed in
the location least likely to impede pedestrian circulation. Curb cuts shall be
located at least ten feet from an intersection curb return or pedestrian cross
walk.
(Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14; Am. Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
AUTOMOBILE PARKING AS CONDITIONAL USE IN NON-COMMERCIAL ZONES
§ 153.170 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The automobile parking as a conditional use provisions are established
to allow required off- street parking facilities to be located in non-
commercial zone districts on a parcel of land at a location separate from the
site and use which the parking facilities are required to serve. Such parking
facilities may be established in instances where required parking cannot be
accommodated on the same site as the use(s) for which the parking facilities
are required.
   (B)   A conditional use permit shall be required for any parking facility
proposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1201) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.171 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Where the parcel(s) providing the parking facilities is under the same
ownership as the parcel developed with the use for which the parking facilities
are provided, the following uses are permitted under a conditional use permit:
      (1)   The off-street parking of vehicles of owners, operators, employees,
customers, and clients of the business or businesses for which the parking
facilities are provided.
      (2)   Incidental and accessory structures, such as guard booths, access
control gates, and the like, necessary for the safe and secure operation of the
parking facility.
   (B)   Where the parcel(s) providing the parking facilities is under separate
ownership than the parcel developed with the use for which the parking
facilities are provided, the parking facilities and incidental uses described
in (A)(1) and (A)(2) above are permitted under a conditional use permit.
However, as a condition of establishing such off-site parking facilities, the
Community Development Director shall require the applicant to enter into and
maintain a long-term lease with the owner of the property allowing the site to
be used for off-site parking purposes. The lease shall remain in effect for as
long as the use served continues to remain. Also, the lessee shall enter into
agreement with the city to maintain the parking facilities for as long as the
lease remains in effect.
   (C)   Parking structures are specifically prohibited.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1204) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.172 PRECISE PLAN OF DESIGN REQUIRED.
   A precise plan of design (staff level), obtained pursuant to
§ 153.355(A), shall be required for the development of all proposed surface
parking lots.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1208) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.173 LOCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All off-site parking facilities shall be located within 300 feet of the use
that they are intended to serve and shall be contiguous to a commercial or
industrial zone. The 300-foot distance shall be measured from lot line to lot
line.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1212) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
§ 153.174 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Setbacks. The following setback areas shall be provided:
      (1)   Front yard setback - five feet;
      (2)   Side yard setback for corner lot and lot abutting a residential
zone - six feet;
      (3)   Side yard setback for all other lots - five feet;
      (4)   Rear yard setback abutting a residential zone - ten feet;
      (5)   Rear yard setback for all other lots - zero feet.
   (B)   Masonry wall. Wherever a surface parking lot abuts a residential zone,
a solid masonry wall shall be provided. The wall height shall be constructed to
the maximum permitted height for the residential zone district which the
parking lot abuts, and shall be constructed along the entire length of the
shared lot line.
   (C)   Height limits. All guard booths and similar entry control structures
shall have a maximum height of ten feet.
   (D)   Landscaping. All required setback areas shall be fully landscaped and
provided with an automatic irrigation system. All landscaping shall be
maintained in a neat and healthy condition.
   (E)   Signage. Permitted signage shall be limited to directional signage, as
described in §§
153.320 through
153.333, and one sign, not to exceed 25 square feet in area, identifying the
businesses for which the parking is provided.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1216) (Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95)
OFF-STREET PARKING
§ 153.220 NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Required spaces. The table at the end of this section specifies the
number of off-street parking spaces required for specific uses. The requirement
for a use not specifically mentioned shall be the same as for a specified use
which has the most similar traffic and/or parking generating characteristics.
The Community Development Director shall determine what constitutes similar
traffic-generating characteristics.
   (B)   Fractional spaces. If the calculation of required parking spaces
results in a fractional number, that number shall be rounded up to the next
whole number.
   (C)   Handicapped parking. Parking for handicapped persons shall be provided
pursuant to the provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
   (D)   Compact parking. The total number of compact parking spaces provided
shall not exceed 35% of the total number of required spaces.
Use Required Number of Spaces
Use                                     Required Number of Spaces
Residential Uses
Single-family, detached and attached    See §
                                        153.049, Garage Space Required
                                        2 parking spaces in a garage per each
                                        residential unit, plus 1 guest space
Multi-family                            for every 3 dwelling units; each garage
                                        shall have an enclosed, secured storage
                                        space of 60 cubic feet.
Senior Citizen Housing                  0.75 spaces per unit (covered or
                                        uncovered)
Public Assembly and Community Uses
                                        1 space/3 fixed seats (or 54" of bench
Church, chapel, religious facility,     seating), or 1 space/ 25 SF-GFA of
cemetery, mortuary                      assembly area where there are no fixed
                                        seats, plus additional parking as
                                        required for other on-site uses
Theaters:                               1 space/5 seats, plus 7 spaces for
Movie - Multiple screen                 employees
                                        
Movie - Single screen                   1 space/5 seats, plus 5 spaces for
                                       employees
Live performance                         
                                        1 space/4 fixed seats
Union Halls, Lodges, Clubs              1 space/50 SF-GFA
Day Care, Nursery School                1 space per employee, plus 1 space/
                                        5 children based on facility capacity
                                        1.5 spaces/classroom, plus 1 space/
                                        5 fixed seats in auditorium, gymnasium
Elementary and Junior High School       or similar public assembly facility, or
                                        1 space/35 SF-GFA of assembly area
                                        where there are no fixed seats.
                                        1.5 spaces/classroom, plus 1 space/
High School                             5 students based on maximum student
                                        capacity
                                        1 space/employee, plus 1 space/
College or University                   3 students based on maximum student
                                        capacity
Museum, Art Galleries                   1 space/300 SF-GFA
Libraries                               1 space/300 SF-GFA
Convalescent or Nursing Facility        0.5 space/patient bed
Hospitals and Medical Centers           1 space/2 patient beds, plus 1 space
(providing acute care, clinical,        for each employee and staff member on
surgical, teaching, research and office the largest shift.
services)
Industrial Uses
Research and Development                1 space/400 SF-GFA
General Manufacturing and Processing    1 space/500 SF of industrial/
Uses (not including buildings used      manufacturing area, plus 1 space/250 SF
exclusively for warehouse purposes)     of office use, plus 1 space/1,000 SF of
                                        warehouse area
Warehouses used exclusively for storage 1 space/1,000 SF of warehouse area,
                                        plus 1 space/300 SF of office use
                                        1 space/2,500 SF-GFA of warehouse area,
Self-storage warehousing                plus additional spaces as required for
                                        any associates residential use
Office Uses
Medical and Dental Offices              1 space/200 SF-GFA, with a minimum of 4
                                        spaces
Veterinary Office                       1 space/250 SF-GFA, with a minimum of 4
                                        spaces
Business and Professional (except
medical offices):                       1 space/250 SF-GFA
Up to 5,000 SF-GFA                      1 space/300 SF-GFA
5,001 and over SF-GFA
Financial Services (banks, savings and  1 space/225 SF-GFA, with a minimum of 4
loans, credit unions)                   spaces
Commercial Uses - Retail and Service
Automotive Service and Repair           2 spaces, plus 3 spaces/service bay
                                        (service bays do not count as spaces)
Automotive Car Wash                     1 space per employee, with 3 spaces
                                        minimum
Self-Service Car Wash                   2 spaces/wash bay (wash bays do not
                                        count as spaces)
Automotive Sales                        1 space/2,000 SF-GFA
Dance Studio, Karate Studio and the     1 space/150 SF-GFA
like
Furniture Stores                        1 space/500 SF-GFA
                                        1 space/250 SF-GFA, with a minimum of 4
                                        spaces
                                        (If restaurant space occupies more than
                                        10% of total GFA, or if an individual
General Retail of less than 10,000 SF-  restaurant contains more than 1,000 SF,
GFA                                     then additional parking shall be
                                        provided for excess restaurant space
                                        beyond the 10% or 1,000 SF. The
                                        additional parking shall be calculated
                                        at the restaurant rate)
                                        1 space/300 SF-GFA
                                        (If restaurant space occupies more than
                                        10% of total GFA, or if an individual
                                        restaurant contains more than 1,000 SF,
General Retail of 10,000 SF or greater  then additional parking shall be
                                        provided for excess restaurant space
                                        beyond the 10% or 1,000 SF. The
                                        additional parking shall be calculated
                                        at the restaurant rate)
                                        1 space/guest room, plus 2 spaces for
                                        on-site manager residence, plus
Hotels and Motels                       additional spaces for restaurant and
                                        public assembly areas as required for
                                        those uses
Laundromat                              1 space/3 washing machines
                                        1 space/1,000 SF indoor GFA, plus 1
Plant Nurseries                         space/2,000 SF gross outdoor retail
                                        area
                                        1 space/1,000 SF gross outdoor retail
Outdoor Sales, including lumber yards,  area, plus additional parking as
salvage yards                           required for indoor sales area, service
                                        facilities, and other uses
Restaurants and Bars:                    
                                       1 space/100 SF-GFA
Full-service restaurant                  
                                       5 spaces, plus 1 space/3 seats in
Drive-through or fast food              dining area, or 1 space/100 SF-GFA,
restaurant                              whichever is greater
                                        
Bars with live entertainment            1 space/75 SF-GFA
                                        
Bars without live entertainment         1 space/150 SF-GFA
Wholesale establishments                1 space/400 SF-GFA
Recreation Uses
Arcades, Billiard Parlor                1 space/150 SF-GFA
                                        3 spaces/lane, plus auxiliary uses
Bowling Alley                           calculated separately as required by
                                        this section
                                        1 space/20 gross SF dance floor area,
Dance Halls                             plus 1 space per 3 fixed seats. Where
                                        there are no fixed seats, 1 space/20 SF
                                        of seating area
Driving Ranges                          1 space/tee, plus other uses calculated
                                        separately as required by this section
Golf Course - Regulation and Pitch and  4 spaces/hole, plus other uses
Putt                                    calculated separately as required by
                                        this section
Gym, Spa, Health Club                   1 space/200 SF of exercise area
                                        1.5/spaces/hole, plus other uses
Miniature Golf                          calculated separately as required by
                                        this section
                                        1 space/100 SF of rink, plus other uses
Skating Rink - Ice or Roller            calculated separately as required by
                                        this section
Use                                     Required Number of Spaces
Handball/Racquetball - Commercial       3 spaces/court, plus other uses
Facility                                calculated separately as required by
                                        this section
Tennis Courts - Commercial Facility or  3 spaces/court, plus other uses
associated with private club            calculated separately as required by
                                        this section
Temporary Christmas tree, pumpkin, and  As required by temporary use permit for
other seasonal sales                    each individual use
Temporary Residential Home or Lot Sales 1 space/200 SF office sales area, with
                                        a minimum of 4 spaces
Abbreviations:
SF = Square Feet
GFA = Gross Floor Area
GLA = Gross Land Area
 
   (E)   Small commercial uses exempt. In any district where they are
permitted, general commercial uses which require one space/250 square feet of
gross floor area or lower parking ratio are not required to provide on-site
parking when they contain less than 1,500 square feet of floor area. However,
when more than four such establishments are located on a single lot, their
floor areas shall be aggregated with all other establishments located on the
lot in order to determine required parking. This exemption does not apply to
restaurants, bars, night clubs, or other uses that have a more intensive
parking requirement.
   (F)   Reconstruction, expansion and change in use of existing non-
residential buildings. When a change in use, expansion of a use, or expansion
of floor area creates an increase of 10% or more in the number of required on-
site parking or loading spaces, additional on-site parking and loading shall be
provided only for the incremental increase in required parking and loading
spaces created by such addition, enlargement, or change in use. The existing
parking shall be maintained.
      (1)   If a building or site has existing legal parking spaces in greater
number than the prescribed minimum requirements for such use, the number of
spaces exceeding the prescribed minimum may be counted toward meeting the
parking requirements for the addition, enlargement, or change in use.
      (2)   If a building or site has existing legal parking spaces lesser in
number than the prescribed minimum requirements for such use, the number of
parking spaces required by the existing use may be credited to a new use.
      (3)   A change in occupancy is not considered a change in use unless the
new occupant is a different use type, as defined by the latest adopted edition
of the California Building Code, than the former occupant.
      (4)   Additional parking spaces are not required for the reconstruction
of an existing building when there is no increase in floor area.
   (G)   Tandem parking and valet parking.
      (1)   Tandem parking. Tandem parking may be permitted to satisfy the off-
street parking requirement in accordance with the following:
         (a)   No more than two vehicles shall be placed one behind the other.
         (b)   Both spaces shall be assigned to a single dwelling unit or
nonresidential establishment.
         (c)   Tandem parking to meet required parking for non-residential uses
shall not exceed 50% of the total number of spaces required for non-residential
uses. Tandem parking will only be allowed for non-residential uses if valet
parking is used.
         (d)   Tandem parking to meet required parking for residential multi-
unit development shall be located within an enclosed structure; the maximum
number of tandem parking spaces shall not exceed 50% of the total number of
spaces required for residential uses.
         (e)   Tandem parking shall not be used to meet the guest parking
requirement.
      (2)   Valet parking. Valet parking permitted according to the conditions
of §
153.228 may be used to satisfy up to 100% of the total amount of required
commercial parking. Valet parked vehicles must be stored in a private parking
area and not on public right-of-way.
   (H)   Parking reduction. The number of on-site parking spaces required by
this section may be reduced as follows, subject to Planning Commission approval
of a conditional use permit.
      (1)   Transportation demand and trip reduction measures. The number of
required parking spaces for any project that incorporates transportation demand
and trip reduction measures as provided in §
153.402 may be reduced by 20% of the normally required number of spaces.
      (2)   Transportation management association. The number of required
parking spaces for any project that is located on a property belonging to a
transportation management association may be reduced by 20% of the normally
required number of spaces. A TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION shall mean a
public-private partnership created to cooperatively provide transportation
demand management programs, trip reduction programs, and/or transportation
services in a defined geographic area.
      (3)   Transit accessibility. For any land use except residential single-
unit and duplex development, if any portion of the lot is located within one-
quarter mile of a transit stop with regular, scheduled service during the
weekday hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m.. the number
of required parking spaces may be reduced by 20% of the normally required
number of spaces.
      (4)   Motorcycle or bicycle parking. Motorcycle or bicycle parking may
substitute for up to 5% of required automobile parking. Each motorcycle space
must be at least four feet wide and seven feet deep. Bicycle parking spaces
shall comply with §
153.229.
      (5)   Shared parking. Where a shared parking facility serving more than
one use will be provided, the total number of required parking spaces may be
reduced up to 40% with Planning Commission approval of a conditional use
permit, if the Commission finds that:
         (a)   The peak hours of use will not overlap or coincide to the degree
that peak demand for parking spaces from all uses will be greater than the
total supply of spaces:
         (b)   The proposed shared parking provided will be adequate to serve
each use;
         (c)   A parking demand study prepared by an independent traffic
engineering professional and approved by the city supports the proposed
reduction; and
         (d)   In the case of a shared parking facility that serves more than
one property, a legally acceptable covenant is executed and recorded to
guarantee the maintenance of the required spaces.
      (6)   Parking reductions allowed by division (H)(1) through (H)(5) above
may not be combined.
      (7)   Required findings. The Planning Commission may only approve a
conditional use permit for reduced parking allowed by division (H)(1) through
(H)(5) above if it finds that:
         (a)   Special conditions—including, but not limited to, the nature of
the proposed operation; proximity to frequent transit service; transportation
characteristics of persons residing, working, or visiting the site; or because
the applicant has undertaken a transportation demand management program—exist
that will reduce parking demand at the site;
         (b)   The use will adequately be served by the proposed on-site
parking;
         (c)   Parking demand generated by the project will not exceed the
capacity of or have a detrimental impact on the supply of on-street parking in
the surrounding area.
         (d)   In order to evaluate a proposed project’s compliance with the
above criteria, the Director may require submittal of a parking demand study
that substantiates the basis for granting a reduced number of spaces.
(Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02; Am. Ord.
589 C.S., passed 2-1-11; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-20-14)
§ 153.221 ACCESS REQUIREMENTS; RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Single-Family Residence Zone (R-1), Limited Two-Family Residence Zone
(R-1A), and Low Density Multiple-Family Residence Zone (R-2).
      (1)   In the R-1 and R-1A Zones each parking space shall be easily
accessible from a street or alley by means of a driveway of ten feet minimum
width. Such driveway or access shall be totally unobstructed.
      (2)   A back-up space equal to 25 feet minus one-half the width of the
garage door.
   (B)   Low Density Multiple-Family Residence Zone (R-2).
      (1)   If a driveway serves more than two units, the minimum width shall
be 12 feet.
      (2)   If a driveway serves more than six units, the minimum width shall
be 20 feet.
      (3)   All driveways ten feet or more in width shall be totally
unobstructed at all points vertically above the required driveway, except that
air-conditioners, bay windows, and architectural features not providing
additional floor area may project over the driveway not more than one foot, and
eaves 14 feet or more in height above the driveway may extend not more than
three feet into the driveway area.
   (C)   Multiple-Family Residence Zone (R-3). In the R-3 Zone each parking
space shall be easily accessible from a street or alley as follows:
      (1)   The minimum width of a driveway under any circumstance shall be ten
feet.
      (2)   If a driveway serves more than six dwelling units, it shall be at
least 20 feet wide.
         (a)   A fence or wall located at the property line may occupy not more
than eight inches of such width.
         (b)   Utility poles and supporting anchors located at the property
line may extend a maximum of 18 inches into the required driveway width.
      (3)   If the distance from the street to the parking facility is more
than 200 feet, there shall be at least two 12-foot driveways from the street to
the parking facility. One driveway 20 feet wide may be used in lieu of two 12-
foot wide driveways.
         (a)   A fence or wall located at the property line may occupy not more
than eight inches of the required width of either the two 12-foot driveways or
the 20-foot driveway.
         (b)   Utility poles and supporting anchors located at the property
line may extend a maximum of 18 inches into only one of either of the two 12-
foot driveways or a maximum of 18 inches into the 20-foot driveway.
      (4)   All driveways ten feet or more in width shall be totally
unobstructed at all points vertically above the required driveway, except that
air-conditioners, bay windows, and architectural features not providing
additional floor area may project over the driveway not more than one foot, and
eaves 14 feet or more in height above the driveway may extend not more than
three feet into the driveway area.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1605) (Ord. 956, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 80-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 245-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 589 C.S., passed 2-1-11)  Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.222 ACCESS REQUIREMENTS; COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL.
   In the Retail Commercial Zone (C-1), Commercial and Limited Manufacturing
Zone (C-3), and Light Manufacturing Zone (M-1) each parking space shall be
easily accessible from a street or alley by means of a driveway having a
minimum width of ten feet.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1606) (Ord. 956, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 248-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.223 DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   A plan of the required parking spaces and driveway requirements shall
be submitted to the Community Development Director at the time of the
application for any building permit. Such plan shall be fully dimensioned,
showing the required number of parking spaces and the required ingress and
egress.
   (B)   Where two driveways, when permitted, are provided, each shall be
clearly marked as to the direction of ingress and egress.
   (C)   Any structure or open parking area containing space for five or more
automobiles shall be provided with suitable maneuvering room to permit all
vehicles contained therein to enter the abutting street in a forward direction.
   (D)   The required front yard in any residential zone shall not be hard-
surfaced or utilized for access or maneuvering purposes to any garage, carport,
or parking space, other than for the required driveway as provided in
§ 153.221.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1607) (Ord. 956, passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.224 DEVELOPMENT SPECIFICATIONS.
   All off-street parking areas, whether or not required by this title, and all
automobile, boat, truck, and trailer sales areas, shall be improved as follows:
   (A)   Surfacing. All off-street parking areas and driveways shall be
improved with surfacing materials as specified by the Community Development
Director, and shall be maintained in good condition. Parking lot paving should
be a balance of permeable and impermeable materials. Asphalt or concrete
(impermeable) paving should be used in high volume or drive aisle traffic areas
whereas permeable paving may be used in parking stalls. To best take advantage
of the permeable paving, parking lots should slope to drain to the perimeter
permeable paving. Bioswales or infiltration planters should be located adjacent
to the permeable parking stalls to capture and filter runoff that is not
infiltrated into the permeable paving. Curb alternatives allow for water to
access the swales and planters beyond.
   (B)   Drainage. All off-street parking areas shall have adequate grading and
drainage consistent with the Los Angeles County National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit and subject to the approval of the Community
Development Director.
   (C)   Dimensions.
      (1)   Standard space. Each standard parking space shall have minimum
dimensions of nine feet wide by 20 feet long.
      (2)   Compact space. Each compact car parking space shall have minimum
dimensions of eight feet wide by 15 feet long.
Each parking space shall be clearly marked by paint or some other easily
distinguishable material, and shall be maintained at all times.
   (D)   Screening. Through the review of development applications, the
Community Development Director or Planning Commission may require that a solid
masonry wall be provided along lot lines abutting parking areas to protect
adjacent properties and uses from adverse noise, light and glare, and similar
effects.
   (E)   Lighting. Parking area lighting shall be arranged to reflect away from
adjoining uses and to avoid creating nuisance effects on adjacent roadways.
(Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14) Penalty,
see §
153.999
§ 153.225 NONRESIDENTIAL PARKING SPACES; LOCATION.
   Required parking spaces for other than residential buildings and uses shall
be provided as follows:
   (A)   On the same lot with the building being served; or
   (B)   On a contiguous lot, or a lot within 500 feet of the building or use
being served, if a legally acceptable covenant is executed and recorded to
guarantee the maintenance of the required spaces. The 500-foot distance shall
be measured from the primary entrance of the use leasing the parking to the
edge of the parking lot being leased.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1609) (Ord. 956, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-
95; Am. Ord. 589 C.S., passed 2-1-11)  Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.226 PARKING LOT LANDSCAPE AND SCREENING.
   Landscaping of outdoor surface parking areas consisting of five or more
stalls shall be provided and maintained according to the general standards of
this section. The figures contained in this section are for illustrative
purposes only and do not imply that the concept illustrated be implemented
precisely as shown but rather in a manner consistent with the purpose of these
regulations.
   (A)   Landscape area required. A minimum of 8% of any parking lot area shall
be landscaped.
   (B)   Minimum planter dimension. No landscape planter that is to be counted
toward the required landscape area shall be less than five feet in any
horizontal dimension. The horizontal dimension is measured to the edge of the
landscaped area and does not include curbing.
   (C)   Layout. Landscaped areas shall be well-distributed throughout the
parking lot area. Parking lot should drain to the landscaped areas. Parking lot
landscaping may be provided in any combination of:
      (1)   Landscaped planting strips at least five feet wide between rows of
parking stalls;
      (2)   Landscaped planting strips between parking areas and adjacent
buildings or internal pedestrian walkways;
      (3)   A landscaped island at least five feet in all interior dimensions
and containing at least one 15-gallon-size or larger tree shall be provided at
each end of each interior row of parking stalls and between every six
consecutive parking stalls;
      (4)   On-site landscaping at the parking lot perimeter; and
      (5)   Curb cuts in landscape areas to allow for stormwater infiltration
into the planter area.
   FIGURE 153.226-(C): PARKING LOT, LANDSCAPE LAYOUT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6046.jpg]
 
   (D)   Landscaped buffer for open parking adjacent to right-of-way. A
landscaped area at least five feet wide shall be provided between any surface
parking area containing five or more stalls and any property line adjacent to a
public street, unless a different dimension is specified in the base district
standards applicable to a site. Landscape buffer shall contain at least one
tree per 25 lineal feet. Parking lot shall drain to landscaped buffer. Curb
cuts at the landscape buffer will allow for stormwater infiltration into the
planted buffer.
   (E)   Landscaped buffer for open parking abutting interior lot line.
      (1)   Adjacent to residential districts. A landscaped area at least ten
feet wide shall be provided between any surface parking area and any adjacent
lot in a residential zoning district for the length of the parking area. The
landscape buffer shall contain at least one tree per 25 lineal feet. Parking
lot shall drain to landscaped buffer. Curb cuts at the landscape buffer will
allow for stormwater infiltration into the planted buffer.
      (2)   Adjacent to nonresidential districts. A landscaped area at least
five feet wide shall be provided between any surface parking area and any
adjacent lot in a nonresidential zoning district for the length of the parking
area. The landscape buffer shall contain at least one tree per 25 lineal feet.
Parking lot shall drain to landscaped buffer. Curb cuts at the landscape buffer
will allow for stormwater infiltration into the planted buffer.
   FIGURE 153.226 (E): PARKING LANDSCAPE BUFFER
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6048.jpg]
 
   (F)   Landscaped buffer for parking structures. A parking structure that
does not incorporate ground-floor nonresidential or residential use or is not
otherwise screened or concealed at street frontages on the ground level must
provide a landscaped area at least ten feet wide between the parking structure
and a public street. Runoff from parking structure roof is to be directed to a
vegetated swale or arroyo for treatment and infiltration.
   (G)   Parking structure rooftop planting. Uncovered parking on the top level
of a parking structure shall have rooftop planters with a minimum dimension of
24 inches around the entire perimeter of the top floor. The landscaping plan
for the project shall include an irrigation plan for the rooftop planting.
   (H)   Trees. Trees shall be provided in surface parking lots in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   Number required. One for each six parking spaces.
      (2)   Distribution. Trees shall be distributed relatively evenly
throughout the parking area.
      (3)   Species. Tree species shall be selected from a list maintained by
the Planning Division. A minimum of 50% of trees shall be of an evergreen type.
      (4)   Size. All trees shall be a minimum 15-gallon size with a one-inch
diameter at 48 inches above natural grade.
      (5)   Minimum planter size. Any planting area for a tree must have a
minimum interior horizontal dimension of five feet. Additional space may be
required for some tree species.
   (I)   Protection of vegetation.
      (1)   Clearance from vehicles. All required landscaped areas shall be
designed so that plant materials, at maturity, are protected from vehicle
damage by providing a minimum two-foot clearance of low-growing plants where a
vehicle overhang is permitted, or by wheel stops set a minimum of two feet from
the back of the curb.
      (2)   Planters. All required parking lot landscaping shall be within
planters bounded by a concrete curb at least six inches wide and six inches
high. Curbs separating landscaped areas from parking areas shall be designed to
allow stormwater runoff to pass through.
   FIGURE 153.226-(I): PROTECTION OF VEGETATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6050.jpg]
 
   (J)   Visibility and clearance. Landscaping in planters at the end of
parking aisles shall not obstruct driver’s vision of vehicular and pedestrian
cross-traffic. Mature trees shall have a foliage clearance maintained at eight
feet from the surface of the parking area. Other plant materials located in the
interior of a parking lot shall not exceed 30 inches in height.
   (K)   Screening. Parking areas shall be screened from view from public
streets according to any one of the following standards:
      (1)   Walls. Low-profile decorative masonry walls between 24 inches and
30 inches in height placed approximately in the center of the planting area
parallel to the street.
      (2)   Planting. Plant materials consisting of compact evergreen plants
that form a three foot high opaque screen. Such plant materials must achieve a
minimum height of two feet within 18 months after initial installation.
      (3)   Berms. Berms with a height of three to four feet planted with low-
growing plant materials.
   FIGURE 153.226-(K): PARKING AREA SCREENING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6052.jpg]
 
   (L)   Stormwater management.
      (1)   For all parking lots subject to this section, site drainage should
be directed toward landscaped areas to the greatest extent feasible. This
should be facilitated by breaks in required curbing and other methods to allow
stormwater runoff to enter landscaped areas. Landscaped islands and landscaped
buffers as described above may be designed to capture stormwater runoff. Other
site landscaping may also be designed to capture stormwater from paved areas,
and landscaped filter strips may be incorporated into paving solutions, as
described in §
153.224. The landscape areas shall allow water to percolate or otherwise drain.
      (2)   Parking lots with 5,000 square feet or more of surface area or with
25 or more parking spaces are subject to the NPDES permit, and are required to
incorporate stormwater management best practices as directed in §
153.132.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1610) (Ord. 142-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 248-C.S., passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14)
Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.227 SPECIAL PARKING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The City Council shall have the authority to establish special parking
districts, whereby such districts have unique parking requirements and
development standards, in locations where the Council deems such special
districts are necessary and appropriate to preserve the character of an area,
to provide for adequate vehicular and pedestrian circulation, to further the
goals of the general plan, and to respond to unique circumstances which make
the parking requirements of this subchapter difficult to apply.
   (B)   Such special districts shall be established by ordinance.
   (C)   In-lieu fees. If a parking assessment district has been established, a
fee may be paid to the city in lieu of providing required parking within the
district.
      (1)   In-lieu fee amount. The amount of the in-lieu fee shall be
calculated and paid as set forth in a resolution of the City Council.
      (2)   Use of funds. In-lieu fees shall be used for programs to reduce
parking impacts including, but not limited to, the costs of any of the
following:
         (a)   Off-street parking facilities, including acquisition,
development, and maintenance of parking facilities located in the parking
assessment district;
         (b)   Mass transit equipment, including stock and attendant facilities
serving the area in which the buildings for which the payments are made are
located;
         (c)   Transit or paratransit passes, coupons, and tickets to be made
available at a discount to employees and customers and to promote and support
incentives for employee ride-sharing and transit use; and
         (d)   Transportation system management projects.
(Ord. 455-C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14)
§ 153.228 VALET PARKING.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      VALET PARKING. The process by which a patron’s vehicle is stored in a
private parking area for storage and subsequent retrieval upon the patron’s
demand. No use of the public right-of-way for vehicle storage or staging is
permitted.
   (B)   Permits. The City Engineer shall issue permits for valet loading zones
on private or public property. The Engineer shall review information provided
by the applicant on forms designed by the city. The applicant shall provide
such information as may be required to make a determination that the design of
the loading zone is safe for patrons and does not impede the customary use of
the parking lot.
   (C)   Appeals. Appeals from the determination of the City Engineer may be
made in writing to the Community Development Director.
(Ord. 589 C.S., passed 2-1-11)
§ 153.229 BICYCLE PARKING.
   The standards of this section apply to all new development and changes in
use, expansion of a use, or expansion of floor area which create an increase of
10% or more in the number of required parking spaces. The figures contained in
this section are for illustrative purposes only and do not imply that the
concept illustrated be implemented precisely as shown but rather in a manner
consistent with the purpose of these regulations.
   (A)   Short-term bicycle parking. Short-term bicycle parking shall be
provided in order to serve shoppers, customers, messengers, guests and other
visitors to a site who generally stay for a short time.
      (1)   Parking spaces required. For the following uses, the number of
short-term bicycle parking spaces shall be at least 10% of the number of
required automobile parking spaces, with a minimum of four parking spaces
provided per establishment.
         (a)   Multi-family residential.
         (b)   All uses listed under the Public Assembly and Community Uses
classification in the parking requirement table in §
153.220 except cemeteries.
         (c)   All uses in the Commercial Uses - Retail and Service
classification.
      (2)   Location. Short-term bicycle parking must be located outside of the
public right of way and pedestrian walkways and within 50 feet of a main
entrance to the building it serves.
         (a)   Exceptions. Bicycle parking may be located more than 50 feet
from the main entrance or within the public right-of-way subject to the review
and approval of the Community Development Director. Where bicycle parking is
provided within the public right-of-way, an unobstructed sidewalk clearance of
six feet shall be maintained for pedestrians at all times.
      (3)   Anchoring and security. For each short-term bicycle parking space
required, a stationary, securely anchored object shall be provided to which a
bicycle frame and one wheel can be secured with a high-security U-shaped
shackle lock if both wheels are left on the bicycle. One such object may serve
multiple bicycle parking spaces.
      (4)   Size and accessibility. Each short-term bicycle parking space shall
be a minimum of two feet in width and six feet in length and shall be
accessible without moving another bicycle. Two feet of clearance shall be
provided between bicycle parking spaces and adjacent walls, poles, landscaping,
street furniture, drive aisles, and pedestrian ways, at least five feet from
vehicle parking spaces, and at least six feet from the public right of way.
   FIGURE 153.229-(A): SHORT-TERM BICYCLE PARKING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6054.jpg]
 
   (B)   Long-term bicycle parking. Long-term bicycle parking shall be provided
in order to serve employees, students, residents, commuters, and others who
generally stay at a site for four hours or longer.
      (1)   Parking spaces required.
         (a)   Residential uses. A minimum of one long-term bicycle parking
space shall be provided for every four units for multi-unit residential and
group residential projects.
         (b)   Other uses. Any project or development with over 3,000 square
feet of gross floor area shall provide long-term bicycle parking at a minimum
ratio of one space per 20 vehicle spaces.
         (c)   Parking structures. Long-term bicycle parking shall be provided
at a minimum ratio of one space per 50 vehicle spaces.
      (2)   Location. Long-term bicycle parking must be located on the same lot
as the use it serves. In parking garages, long-term bicycle parking must be
located near an entrance to the parking garage.
      (3)   Covered spaces. At least 50% of required long-term bicycle parking
must be covered. Covered parking can be provided inside buildings, under roof
overhangs or awnings, in bicycle lockers, or within or under other structures.
      (4)   Security. Long-term bicycle parking must be in:
         (a)   An enclosed bicycle locker;
         (b)   A fenced, covered, locked or guarded bicycle storage area;
         (c)   A rack or stand inside a building that is within view of an
attendant or security guard or visible from employee work areas; or
         (d)   Other secure area approved by the Director.
      (5)   Size and accessibility. Each bicycle parking space shall be a
minimum of two feet in width and six feet in length and shall be accessible
without moving another bicycle. Two feet of clearance shall be provided between
bicycle parking spaces and adjacent walls, poles, landscaping, street
furniture, drive aisles, and pedestrian ways and at least five feet from
vehicle parking spaces.
(Ord. 608-C.S., passed 5-10-14)
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
§ 153.240 AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses, and all matters
directly related thereto, are hereby declared to be conditionally permitted use
in all zones except the C-1, C-3, and M-1 zones. With respect to the C-1, C-3,
and M-1 zones, §§
153.151 and
153.162 shall govern conditionally permitted uses in these zones.
      (1)   Churches;
      (2)   Mortuaries;
      (3)   Heliports;
      (4)   Establishments or enterprises involving large assemblages of people
or automobiles, including open-air theaters;
      (5)   Educational uses and their necessary facilities;
      (6)   Civic and social clubs, libraries, museums, and other similar or
semipublic institutions, including hospitals, but not including mental or
communicable disease or veterinary hospitals;
      (7)   Licensed family care homes, foster homes, or group homes serving
mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and neglected
children where authorized pursuant to Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 5116; and
      (8)   Game arcades;
   (B)   General zone uses. Conditional uses may be permitted by the Council in
zones from which they are prohibited by the provisions of this chapter where
such uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or
welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or objectives of the
comprehensive General Plan of land use.
   (C)   R-1 Zone dwellings. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, where a lot in the R-1 Zone has an area of 13,000 square feet or more
with adequate provisions for ingress and egress, a conditional use permit may
be granted by the Commission for the construction of additional one-family
dwellings and allowable accessory buildings; provided, however, the minimum
site area shall be 6,500 square feet of lot area for each one-family dwelling.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1701) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 236-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 265-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 297-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 455-
C.S., passed 11-21-95; Am. Ord. 709, passed 7-2-24) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.241 APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   Applications required. No conditional use shall be permitted without
the issuance of a conditional use permit following the submission of an
application therefor in accordance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Form. Applications for conditional use permits shall be made in
writing to the Community Development Director in such form as is approved by
the Department. The city shall develop a Development Application Checklist
which shall specify all information required to be provided by the applicant in
order for such application to be considered complete.
   (C)   City files. Conditional use permit applications shall be numbered
consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the
permanent official records of the city, and copies of all notices and actions
pertaining to the application shall be attached thereto.
   (D)   Fees. A fee shall be paid to the city upon the filing of each
application for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the
proceedings set forth in this subchapter in an amount established by the City
Council, from time to time, by resolution.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1702) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 250-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 265-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-
C.S., passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.242 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the other requirements pertaining to conditional use permits,
the following provisions shall apply to applications for a massage
establishment:
   (A)   The application shall include a detailed floor plan drawn to scale
showing: entrances; exits; windows; interior doors; restrooms; all other
separately enclosed rooms with dimensions, including but not limited to
closets, storerooms, break rooms, and changing rooms; and location of massage
tables and chairs. The floor plan shall be in feet and inches and be labeled in
English.
   (B)   Unless a massage establishment has a valid conditional use permit
prior to April 18, 2017, no massage establishment shall be located:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of another massage establishment; or
      (2)   Within 150 feet of the following zones: Single-Family Residence
Zones (R-1), Limited Two-Family Residence Zones (R-1A); Low Density Multiple-
Family Residence Zones (R-2), Multiple-Family Residence Zones (R-3),
Residential Neighborhood Conservation Zones (RN/C), Villa Residential (R-1V),
Grapevine Residential (R-2G), and Arroyo Residential (R-3A).
      (3)   The distance requirements set forth in divisions (B)(1) and (2)
above shall not apply to a massage establishment located within a hotel or to
any massage business that is subject to a complete or partial exception
pursuant to §
122.03 of this code.
   (C)   An application for a conditional use permit shall not be deemed
complete until the owners and any identified manager(s) have obtained an
operator permit.
(Ord. 619-C.S., passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord. 631-C.S., passed 4-18-17; Am. Ord.
632-C.S., passed 5-2-17)
§ 153.243 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   Following the receipt in proper form of any such application, the
Secretary of the Commission shall fix the time and place for the public hearing
thereon. The Secretary shall provide public notice of the public gearing in the
manner required by Cal Gov't Code § 65091.
   (B)   The failure on the part of any person, or any addressee of any such
postal notices, to give due and careful consideration to any such notice as
provided for in this section shall in no way affect the validity of such
proceedings provided such publication and mailing shall have been done in good
faith.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1704) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 615, passed - - )
§ 153.244 APPLICATION INVESTIGATION.
   The Commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or a member of its
staff, such investigations of the facts bearing on such application as will
serve to provide all the necessary information to assure that the action on
each such application is consistent with the intent and purposes of this
chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1705) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.245 PUBLIC HEARING.
   The public hearings provided for in this subchapter shall be held before the
Commission at any time or place for which public notice has been given as
required by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65905 and 65091. The Commission may establish
its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. A summary of all pertinent
testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of
all persons testifying, shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent
files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued provided the Commissioner
presiding at such hearing, prior to the adjournment or recess thereof,
announces the time and place to which such hearing will be continued.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1706) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.246 GRANTING OR DENIAL OF PERMIT - FINDINGS.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing provided for
in this subchapter, the Commission shall render its decision for the granting,
either with or without conditions, or the denial of the application by
resolution, which shall recite the findings of fact upon which the decision was
based.
   (B)   The Commission may approve an application for a conditional use permit
either with or without conditions, if it finds all of the following:
      (1)   That the proposed use is consistent with the General Plan;
      (2)   That the site is adequate in size, shape, topography, and location
to accommodate the proposed use;
      (3)   That there will be adequate street access to and from the site for
the proposed use, and the proposed use will not create hazardous traffic
conditions;
      (4)   That the proposed use is compatible with surrounding properties and
uses; and
      (5)   That the proposed use is not detrimental to the public health,
safety, or general welfare.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1707) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 265-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.247 APPEAL OF DECISION.
   Decisions of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council as
specified in
§ 153.004 of this code. The City Council shall use the same criteria as set
forth in
§ 153.246 in rendering its decision.
(Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.248 ASSIGNMENT; PROSECUTION OF WORK; VOIDING.
   Conditional use permits, which may be assigned, shall become null and void
and of no effect if the applicant does not proceed with the actual construction
work in accordance with the approved plans within six months after the date the
permit is granted, unless an extension therefor has been granted by the
Commission, or by the Council if the permit was granted by the Council after
denial by the Commission, upon the written petition of the applicant for such
extension filed before the expiration of such six months period. A fee shall be
paid to the city upon the filing of each petition for an extension in an amount
established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution, for the
purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings set forth
in this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1709) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 681, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 730, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - - )
VARIANCES
§ 153.260 AUTHORIZATION.
   When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent
with the general purposes of this chapter occur through a strict interpretation
of the provisions of this chapter, or upon the verified application of any
property owner or contract purchaser in escrow, shall, in specific cases,
initiate proceedings for the granting of a variance from the provisions of this
chapter under such conditions as may be deemed necessary to assure that the
spirit and purposes of this chapter will be observed, public safety and welfare
secured, and substantial justice done. All acts of the Commission pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter shall be construed as administrative acts
performed for the purpose of assuring that the intent and purposes of this
chapter shall apply in special cases, as provided in this subchapter, and shall
not be construed as amendments to the provisions of this chapter or to the map
adopted by the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1801) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.261 FINDINGS.
   Before a variance may be granted, the following findings must be made:
   (A)   That because of special circumstances applicable to the property,
including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict
application of the zoning ordinance would deprive such property of privileges
enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under an identical zoning
classification;
   (B)   That any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will
assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of
special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in
the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated;
   (C)   That the granting of a variance will not result in material damage or
prejudice to other property nor be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to persons in the vicinity thereof;
   (D)   That the granting of such variance is consistent with the General Plan
of the City;
   (E)   That the variance will not authorize a use or activity which is not
otherwise expressly authorized by the zoning for the property for which the
variance is sought.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1802) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-
02)
§ 153.262 APPLICATION; FEES.
   (A)   Form. Applications for variances shall be made in writing to the
Community Development Department in such form as is approved by the Department.
The city shall develop a Development Application Checklist which shall specify
all information required to be provided by the applicant in order for such
application to be considered complete. Such applications shall be numbered
consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the
permanent official records of the city, and copies of all notices and actions
pertaining to the application shall be attached thereto.
   (B)   Criteria. The application or motion for a variance shall set forth in
detail such facts as, in the opinion of the applicant or Commission, pertain to
§ 153.261.
   (C)   Fee. A fee shall be paid to the city upon the filing of each
application for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the
proceedings set forth in this subchapter in an amount established by the City
Council, from time to time, by resolution.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1803) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 250-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-
C.S., passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.263 SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION.
   The application required by the provisions of this subchapter shall be
accompanied by a statement of the provisions of this chapter from which such
property is sought to be excepted.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1804) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-
02)
§ 153.264 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   Following the receipt in proper form of any such application, the
Secretary of the Commission shall fix the time and place for the public hearing
thereon. The Secretary shall provide public notice of the public gearing in the
manner required by Cal Gov't Code § 65091.
   (B)   The failure on the part of any person, or any addressee of any such
postal notices, to give due and careful consideration to any such notice as
provided for in this section shall in no way affect the validity of such
proceedings provided such publication and mailing shall have been done in good
faith.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1805) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 615, passed - - )
§ 153.265 APPLICATION INVESTIGATION.
   The Commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or a member of its
staff, such investigations of the facts bearing on such application as will
serve to provide all the necessary information to assure that the action on
each such application is consistent with the intent and purposes of this
chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1806) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.266 PUBLIC HEARING.
   The public hearings provided for in this subchapter shall be held before the
Commission at any time or place for which public notice has been given as
required by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65905 and 65091. The Commission may establish
its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. A summary of all pertinent
testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of
all persons testifying, shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent
files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued provided the Commissioner
presiding at such hearing, prior to the adjournment or recess thereof,
announces the time and place to which such hearing will be continued.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1807) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.267 GRANTING OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing provided for in
this subchapter, the Commission shall render its decision for the granting,
either with or without conditions, or the denial of the application by
resolution, which shall recite the finding of fact upon which the decision was
based.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1808) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-
02)
§ 153.268 APPEAL OF DECISION.
   Decisions of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council in
the time and manner specified in
§ 153.004 of this Code. The City Council shall use the same criteria as set
forth in
§ 153.261 in rendering its decision.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1809) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 730, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 800, passed -- ; Am. Ord. 910, passed - -; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-
02)
§ 153.269 ASSIGNMENT; PROSECUTION OF WORK; VOIDING.
   Variances, which may be assigned, shall become null and void and of no
effect if the applicant does not proceed with the actual construction work in
accordance with the approved plans within six months from the date the variance
is granted unless an extension therefor has been granted by the Commission, or
by the Council if the variance was granted by the Council after denial by the
Commission, upon the written petition of the applicant for such extension filed
before the expiration of the said six months period. A fee shall be paid to the
city upon the filing of each petition for an extension in an amount established
by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution, for the purpose of
defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings set forth in this
subchapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1810) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 681, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 730, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - - )
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE (P-D)
§ 153.280 CREATED; DESIGNATED.
   A Planned Development Overlay Zone (P-D) shall be created in the same manner
as property is reclassified from one zone to another within the city as set
forth in §§ 153.470 through 153.475. When a Planned Development Overlay Zone
has been so created, it shall be designated upon the zoning map of the city as
an overlay zone by adding the parenthetically enclosed letters “P-D” after the
zoning symbol, indicating the zone in which the subject property is included.
('65 Code, §9-3.2301) (Ord. 247-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-
15-06)
§ 153.281 AREA.
   The minimum area for a Planned Development provisional plan, which does not
fully comply with the development standards of the underlying zone, shall be
one acre. Projects of less than one acre shall be subject to the procedures
contained in this subchapter, but shall not be eligible for consideration of
relief from the underlying development standards except by variance
application.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2302) (Ord. 247-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 358-C.S., passed -
- ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.282 PURPOSE.
   A Planned Development Zone may be established where:
   (A)   A proposal for a large-scale development (one acre or larger) makes it
desirable to apply regulations more flexible than those applicable to other
zones in this chapter;
   (B)   It has been determined that specific corridors within the city should
be designated as Planned Development Overlay Zones so as to insure the orderly
and compatible development of those identified corridors.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2303) (Ord. 247-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 358-C.S., passed -
- )
§ 153.283 USE PERMITTED.
   Any use permitted in any R, C, or M Zone may be permitted in a Planned
Development Overlay Zone (P-D) subject to the regulations set forth in this
subchapter. No person shall construct or maintain any building or structure for
use on any lot in a Planned Development Overlay Zone unless:
   (A)   Such building, structure, or use is constructed or maintained pursuant
to the regulations applicable to such lot by reason of its underlying zone
classification; or
   (B)   Compliance is had with the provisions of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2304) (Ord. 247-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.284 PROVISIONAL PLANS.
   (A)   Where the city desires to specify corridors of the city for inclusion
as Planned Development Overlay Zones, such designation may be placed on the
properties after compliance with the procedure set forth in §§ 153.470 through
153.475 . In such cases of city-initiated zone changes to specify Planned
Development Overlay Zones, a precise plan shall be submitted by the applicant
at the time permission to build or remodel structures on property included in a
Planned Development Overlay Zone is sought. In city-initiated zone change cases
a provisional plan is not required.
   (B)   For large scale projects of over one acre in size, an application for
a change of classification to a Planned Development Overlay Zone (P-D) shall be
accompanied by a provisional plan showing the site purposed for the
development, the character and use of adjoining property, the general size,
location, and use of all proposed buildings and structures to be placed on the
site, and the location and dimensions of streets, parking areas, open areas,
and other public and private facilities and uses.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2305) (Ord. 247-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 358-C.S., passed -
-; Am. Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06  ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.285 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The change of classification shall be determined pursuant to the
procedure set forth in §§ 153.470 through 153.475, and the provisional plan,
where applicable, shall be merged with the Planned Development Overlay Zone (P-
D) for the particular property so classified. A provisional plan which does not
conform to the standard of development for the R, C, or M zones may be approved
for projects of one acre or larger when such plan fulfills the purposes of a
Planned Development Overlay Zone. A change in the provisional plan enacted with
a Planned Development Overlay Zone shall constitute a reclassification of the
property, and such change shall be determined pursuant to the procedure for
zoning amendments.
   (B)   No development of the subject site shall begin and no building permit
shall be issued for any property located in a Planned Development Overlay Zone
until a precise plan of development has been approved by the Planning
Commission and/or City Council as set forth in this subchapter. The precise
plan shall substantially conform to any provisional plan required by this
chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2306) (Ord. 247-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 358-C.S., passed -
-; Am. Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06  )
§ 153.286 PRECISE PLAN.
   (A)   Application; filing, form and fees. The application for the approval
of a precise plan shall be filed with the Community Development Department on a
form furnished by the city and shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount set
by resolution of the Council. The City shall develop a Development Application
Checklist which shall specify all information required to be provided by the
applicant in order for such application to be considered complete.
   (B)   Hearing; notice. The provisions of §§
153.241 through
153.243 shall apply to applications filed pursuant to division (A) of this
section. ('65 Code, § 9-3.2308)
   (C)   Hearing. The provisions of
§ 153.245 shall apply to applications filed pursuant to division (A) of this
section. ('65 Code, § 9-3.2309)
   (D)   Decision. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing
provided for in this subchapter, the Commission shall render its decision for
the granting, either with or without conditions, or the denial of the
application by resolution, which shall recite the finding of fact upon which
the decision was based.
   (E)   Appeal. Decisions of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the
City Council in the time and manner specified in
§ 153.004 of this code.
   (F)   Approval; revocation.
      (1)   Upon a recommendation by the Community Development Director, the
body which granted the final approval of a precise plan shall conduct a noticed
public hearing to determine whether such precise plan approval should be
revoked. If the granting body finds any one of the following facts to be
present, it shall revoke the approval:
         (a)   That the approval was obtained by fraud; or
         (b)   That the precise plan is being implemented contrary to any
condition imposed upon the approval of the plan or in violation of any law.
      (2)   If the revocation hearing is conducted by the Commission, its
decision shall be subject to review on appeal, taken in the time and manner set
forth in
§ 153.247. ('65 Code, § 9-3.2312)
   (G)   Expiration. Any precise plan approval permit shall be null and void if
it is not exercised within the time specified in the resolution approving such
precise plan, or, if no time is specified, if the permit is not exercised
within one year after the date the approval becomes final; provided, however,
if litigation is filed prior to the exercise of such rights attacking the
validity of such approval, the time for exercising such rights shall be
automatically extended pending a final determination of such litigation. The
granting body, upon good cause shown by the applicant, may extend the time
limitations imposed, once, for a period of not to exceed one year without a
public hearing. ('65 Code, § 9-3.2313)
   (H)   Modifications. Any condition imposed upon the approval of a precise
plan may be modified or eliminated, or new conditions may be added, provided
the granting body shall first conduct a public hearing thereon in the same
manner as is required for the granting of the same. No such modification shall
be made unless the granting body finds that such modification is necessary to
protect the public peace, health, and safety, or, in the event of the deletion
of such a condition, that such action is necessary to permit reasonable
development under the precise plan as approved. If the modification hearing is
conducted by the Commission, its decision shall be subject to review on appeal,
taken in the time and manner set forth in
§ 153.247. ('65 Code, § 9-3.2301)
(Ord. 247-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
VALLEY BOULEVARD SPECIFIC PLAN
§ 153.290 VALLEY BOULEVARD SPECIFIC PLAN CREATED.
   Under the authority granted by Section 65450 et seq. of the California
Government Code, a specific plan is hereby created for the Valley Boulevard
Neighborhoods, as defined and described in the Valley Boulevard Specific Plan,
as amended on December 18, 2012, the contents of which are incorporated by
reference as though fully set forth within this code. The plan shall be
designated on the zoning map as “Valley Boulevard Specific Plan.”
(Ord. No. 562-C.S., passed 12-19-06; Am. Ord. 597-C.S., passed 1-15-13; Am.
Ord. 615-C.S., passed 1-6-15; Am. Ord. 619-C.S., passed 4-21-15; Am. Ord. 710,
passed 10-15-24)
MISSION DISTRICT SPECIFIC PLAN
§ 153.300 MISSION DISTRICT SPECIFIC PLAN CREATED.
   Under the authority granted by Section 65450 et seq. of the California
Government Code, a specific plan is hereby created for the San Gabriel Mission
District, as defined and described in the Mission District Specific Plan, the
contents of which are incorporated by reference as though fully set forth
within this Code. The plan shall be designated on the zoning map as “Mission
District Specific Plan.” (Ord. 546-C.S., passed 8-17-04)
MEDICAL FACILITIES ZONE (MF)
§ 153.310 MEDICAL FACILITIES ZONE CREATED.
   A Medical Facilities Zone is hereby established and designated on the
Official Zoning Map of the City (hereinafter the MF zone) which shall include
the following area as depicted on Exhibit "All attached hereto and incorporated
by this reference:
   (A)   Those existing Single Family Residence (R-1) zoned parcels commonly
known as 516-531 Padilla Street and 121 South Santa Anita Street.
   (B)   Those existing Multiple Family Residence (R-3) zoned parcels commonly
known as 114-116 De Anza Street and 324 West Las Tunas Drive and 537 West Live
Oak.
   (C)   Those existing Retail Commercial (C-1) zoned parcels commonly known as
330-510 West Las Tunas Drive (south side only), 207-245 South Santa Anita
Street and 511-521 West Live Oak.
   (D)   That existing Multiple Family Residence (R-3) /Retail Commercial (C-1)
zoned parcel commonly known as 218 South Santa Anita Street.
(Ord. 491-C.S., passed 10-6-98)
§ 153.311 NONCONFORMING USES.
   A use or structure that becomes nonconforming due to the inclusion by a Zone
Change to Medical Facilities Zone of the parcel upon which it is located,
shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 153.421 and 153.422 of this
Title, retain all of the rights, including the rights to remodel and rebuild,
and be subject to all of the restrictions applicable to the zone in effect for
the use or structure immediately prior to the Zone Change, as said rights and
restrictions then exist or may thereafter be amended, until such time as the
use is converted to a conforming use or the structure is altered to a
conforming structure. Upon such conversion or alteration, the rights and
restrictions of the Medical Facilities Zone shall thereafter apply to all
structures or uses on the parcel.
(Ord. 491-C.S., passed 10-6-98)
§ 153.312 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted in the Medical Facilities Zone:
      1. Hospitals and convalescent facilities.
      2. Medical clinics, medical laboratories and pharmacies.
      3. Medical and dental offices and related professional services.
      4. Restaurants and retail stores whose merchandise is supplemental to
medical care, only when located in a medical office or clinic structure or
related parking structure having two or more stories.
      5. Parking structures.
      6. Nursery schools and daycare centers.
      7. Accessory buildings and facilities necessary for the successful
functioning of the hospital such as maintenance shops, power plants, etc.
(Ord. 491-C.S., passed 10-6-98)
§ 153.313 HEIGHT LIMIT.
   Buildings in the Medical Facilities Zone shall not be more than seventy
(701) feet in height, measured from the average level of the highest and lowest
point of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point
of the structure.
   Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways,
tanks, ventilating fans, and similar equipment required to operate and maintain
the buildings, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles, chimneys,
smokestacks, wireless masts, and similar structures may be erected up to ten
feet (101) above the height limits set forth in this section, but no penthouse
or roof structure or any space above the height limit shall be permitted for
the purpose of providing additional floor space.
(Ord. 491-C.S., passed 10-6-98)
§ 153.314 SITE AREA.
   The minimum building site area in the Medical Facilities Zone shall be
30,000 square feet.
(Ord. 491-C.S., passed 10-6-98)
§ 153.315 BUILDING AREA.
   The gross floor area in all buildings shall not exceed three (3) times the
gross area of the building site.
(Ord. 491-C.S., passed 10-6-98)
§ 153.316 SETBACK DISTANCES.
   In the Medical Facilities Zone, the setback distance from Las Tunas Drive
shall be zero (0') feet. The setback distance from all other streets in the
zone shall be five (51) feet. The minimum setback distance from any interior
side or rear property line when adjoining R-1 zones shall be ten (101) feet,
plus five (51) feet for each ten (101) feet or fraction thereof, of gross
building height in excess of thirty (301) feet. The minimum setback distance
from any interior side or rear property line when adjoining R-3 zones shall be
ten (101) feet, plus two (21) feet for each ten (101) feet or fraction thereof,
of gross building height in excess of thirty (301) feet. The minimum setback
distance from any interior or rear property line when adjoining Medical
Facilities or C-1 zones shall be zero (01) feet.
   Additionally, buildings with a gross building height in excess of forty
(401) feet when adjoining R-1 zones, shall be stepped back from the setback
distance required above as follows:
Any portion of the building between
         41' - 50' in height 10'
         51' - 60' in height 20'
         61' - 70' in height 30'
(Ord. 491-C.S., passed 10-6-98)
§ 153.317 AUTOMOBILE PARKING SPACES AND GARAGES.
   In the Medical Facilities Zone, there shall be provided automobile parking
space for at least four (4) automobiles for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area within the building, in conformance with the City of San Gabriel
parking standards.
   Exception: Hospital parking will be provided on the basis of 1.75 spaces per
licensed bed.
   Required parking may be provided off-site, within the zone.
(Ord. 491-C.S., passed 10-6-98)
§ 153.318 OPEN SPACE.
   In the Medical Facilities Zone, six (60%) percent of the gross area of the
building site shall be used for landscape areas, of which not more than twenty-
five (25%) percent may be used for landscape areas. When abutting an R-1 zone,
a landscaped area not less than two (2%) percent of the gross area of the
building site shall be provided between any structure and the abutting R-
1 property. This two (2%) percent may be included in the six (6%) percent of
the overall site landscape requirement.
(Ord. 491-C.S., passed 10-6-98)
SIGNS
§ 153.320 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is as follows:
   (A)   To provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property, and
public welfare by controlling the design, quality of materials, construction,
illumination, size, location and maintenance of signs and sign structures;
   (B)   To encourage signs that are of a quality design, pleasing in
appearance, and are appropriate in size, materials and illumination to the type
of activity to which they pertain;
   (C)   To encourage signs that are compatible with the architectural style,
characteristics and scale of the buildings to which they may be attached and to
encourage signs that are compatible with adjacent buildings and businesses;
   (D)   To enhance overall property values and the visual environment in the
city by discouraging signs which contribute to the visual clutter of the
streetscape, such as off-site signs, oversized signs, and excessive temporary
signage;
   (E)   To ensure that commercial signs are designed for the purpose of
identifying a business in an attractive and functional manner;
   (F)   To discourage signs which cause a traffic hazard or interfere with
ingress/egress; and
   (G)   To implement the goals and policies of the General Plan and Municipal
Code by enforcement of the regulations contained in this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2401) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95)
§ 153.321 GENERAL POLICIES.
   The city has, therefore, adopted the following policies regarding signage in
the city:
   (A)   Signs shall be limited to the identification of the business and/or
product or service being sold or leased on the premises. Logos for national or
regional businesses shall be addressed as a special consideration in reviewing
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Signage shall be no larger or higher than necessary for adequate
identification of the business or building.
   (C)   Signs shall be designed with minimum copy and crowding.
   (D)   Signs shall identify a business without interfering with the ability
of adjoining businesses to properly identify themselves.
   (E)   Signs located on the same lot or parcel shall be designed to be
harmonious and visually related to other signs on the same lot or parcel as
well as the building on rich they are located. This shall be accomplished and
enforced by the requirement of a Master Sign Plan for such lots or parcels with
multiple businesses and signs.
   (F)   Signs in residential zones shall be designed and located so as to
minimize the visual impact on adjoining residential properties.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2402) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95)
§ 153.322 DEFINITIONS.
   The words and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the
following meanings:
   ABANDONED ADVERTISING DISPLAY. Any display remaining in place or not
maintained for a period of 120 days which no longer advertises or identifies an
ongoing business, product, or service available on the business premises where
the display is located.
   ABANDONED ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. Any legal or legal nonconforming structure
remaining in place or not maintained for a period of 120 days, which no
longer.supports an advertising display which advertises or identifies an
ongoing business, product, or service available on the business premises where
the structure is located.
   ABATEMENT. The process by which the city requires removal or conformance of
signs relating to inoperative or no longer existing businesses, signs that do
not conform to the provisions of this subchapter, and illegal signs.
   ADVERTISING DISPLAY. All parts of a sign which are not a part of the
advertising structure.
   ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. Any structure, housing, sign device, figure,
statuary, painting, display, message placard, or other contrivance, or any part
thereof, which has been designed, constructed, created, engineered, intended or
used to advertise, or to provide data or information in the nature of
advertising.
   ALTERATION. Any change in copy, color, size or shape, which changes the
appearance of a sign or a change in position, height, location, construction or
supporting structure of a sign, except that a copy change on a changeable copy
sign is not an alteration.
   ANIMATED SIGN. Any sign which has any visible moving part, flashing lights,
visible mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent visible
movement achieved by any means.
   ATTACHED SIGN. Any sign which is permanently affixed to a building, except a
painted sign.
   AWNING. A shelter projecting from the exterior wall of a building and
constructed of nonrigid materials except for the supporting framework.
   BALLOON SIGN. A lighter-than-air or gas-filled balloon tethered to a fixed
location.
   BANNER SIGN. A nonpermanent sign composed of fabric, pliable plastic, paper,
or other non- metallic light material not enclosed in a rigid frame.
   BUILDING FACADE. All windows, doors, and wall areas of a building in one
plane or elevation.
   BUILDING FRONTAGE. The linear frontage of the width of a building facing on
a principal street. Where a building faces two or more streets, the frontage,
containing the principal street address shall be designated as the building
frontage.
   BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign on which copy is limited to the name
and address of a building or institution.
   BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  An on-site sign which serves to identify only
the name and lawful use of individual businesses and sets forth no other
advertisement.
   CAN SIGN. A sign with advertising copy within a rigid frame, whether
illuminated or not.
   CANOPY. A fixed shelter of any material and of any length, projecting from
and connected to a building and/or columns and/or posts from the ground, or
supported by a frame extending from the ground.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign in which at least 50% of the sign area is
designed to be used with removable graphics to allow the changing of copy.
§ 153.322   Zoning Code   
§ 153.322
   CHANNEL LETTERS. Three dimensional individual letters or figures,
illuminated or non- illuminated, which are fixed to a building or freestanding
sign structure.
   CIVIC EVENT SIGN. A sign posted to advertise, identify or provide direction
to a civic or charitable event sponsored by the city, a school, church, civic-
fraternal organization or similar noncommercial organization.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign which identifies the future occupant,
purpose for which the building is proposed, and the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of those individuals' or businesses directly participating in
construction on the property on which the sign is located.
   CONVENIENCE SIGN. A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of
goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, e.g., a credit card
sign or a sign indicating hours of business.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian and/or
vehicular traffic and which is non-advertising in nature.
   DIRECTORY SIGN. A single sign that identifies two or more businesses on a
site.
   DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. A sign which has two identical display surfaces back-to-
back or against the same background, and in which one face is designed to be
seen from one direction and the other from the opposite direction. A double-
faced sign shall be considered as one sign for the purposes of this subchapter.
   ELECTION SIGN. A sign which advertises a candidate for public office, a
proposition or other issue to be voted on by the electorate.
   ELECTRICAL SIGN. A sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring,
connections or fixtures are used.
   EMITTING SIGN. A sign which emits sound, color, or visible matter, such as
smoke or steam.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The public employee or officer designated by the City
Council to perform the enforcement duties imposed by this subchapter and by
Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§§ 5499.1 et seq.
   EXPOSED NEON SIGN. A gas-filled tubing where the tubing is visible.
   FLAG SIGN. A sign generally made of flexible material, usually cloth or
plastic, of two dimensions that is suspended from a building facade from a
pole, supporting rod or wire.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign which is permanently affixed in or upon the ground
on a base and is not attached to nor a part of a building.
   GENERIC ADVERTISING. The name of brand goods, products or services which by
nature of the name indicates the type of use or businesses connected with the
advertising.
   GRADE. The ground level directly below a sign or immediately adjacent to its
base or support. Where the ground level has been artificially raised for
landscaping or other purposes, grade shall be measured from the level of the
nearest curb of a public street.
   GRAPHIC. A painted area which does not advertise any business, goods or
service and which covers all or a major portion of a wall, building facade or
structure, and shall be considered as an architectural embellishment and/or
mural.
   GRAPHIC SIGN. An illustration which is intended to portray a business or
service without the use of words.
   HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the grade to the top of the sign's
highest element, including any structural element.
   HOLIDAY DECORATION SIGN. A sign or display, including lighting, which is a
nonpermanent installation celebrating national, state and/or local holidays or
holiday seasons.
   ILLEGAL ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING DISPLAY. An on-premises advertising display
and connecting advertising structure which:
      (1)   Was erected without first complying with all ordinances and
regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or use; or
      (2)   Was legally erected, but the use of which has ceased, or the
structure upon which the display is placed has been abandoned by its owner, is
substantially deteriorated, or not used to identify or advertise an ongoing
business for a period of not less than 120 days; or
      (3)   Was legally erected, but which later became nonconforming as a
result of the adoption of an ordinance, the amortization period for the display
provided by the ordinance rendering the display nonconforming has expired, and
conformance has not been accomplished; or
      (4)   Is a danger to the public or is unsafe; or
      (5)   Is a traffic hazard.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign for which an artificial source of light is used in
order to make the sign's message readable, including internally and externally
lighted signs and reflectorized, glowing or radiating signs.
   LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign which was legally installed under laws or
ordinances in effect at the time of its installation, but which is in conflict
with the later enacted provisions of an ordinance.
   LOGO. A trademark or company name or symbol identifying the business or
service provided and which may be all or part of a sign.
   MARQUEE. A permanent, projecting roof structure attached to and supported by
a building wall, which may project over a public right-of-way.
   MARQUEE SIGN. A sign painted on or attached to or supported by a marquee.
   MASTER SIGN PLAN. A coordinated program of signage for multiple
establishments.
   MONUMENT SIGN. A low-profile freestanding sign with a solid base on the
ground of approximately the same dimension as the height of the sign, and which
is designed to incorporate design and building materials which complement the
architectural theme of the buildings on the premises.
   MURAL. A picture on an exterior surface of a structure that does not pertain
to any business, product or service.
   NAMEPLATE. A nonelectric, on-premises identification sign which contains
only the name and address of an occupant or group of occupants of a property.
   NEON SIGN. A sign with tubing that is internally illuminated by neon or
other electrically charged gas.
   OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING DISPLAY. Any advertising display used or intended
to advertise any establishment, product, business, goods or service not
available on the premises where the display is located.
   ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING DISPLAY. An advertising display for any of the
following purposes:
      (1)   To designate, identify, or indicate the name or business of the
owner or occupant of the premises upon which the advertising display is
located; or
      (2)   To advertise the business conducted, services available or
rendered, or the goods produced, sold, or available for sale upon the property
where the advertising display has been lawfully erected.
   PAINTED SIGN. A sign which is painted directly onto a building or structure.
   PENNANT. A device generally made of flexible materials, such as cloth, paper
or plastic, which may not contain copy and which is primarily intended to draw
attention.
   POLE SIGN. A sign which is elevated from the ground by a pole or other
narrow structure and not supported or attached to any building or structure.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A sign advocating any political idea or measure which is to
be voted on by the electorate.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign which is capable of being carried or readily moved
from one location to another and which is not permanent in nature. Such signs
include, but are not limited to: A-frame signs, sandwich board signs, signs on
wheels, and signs which lean onto a stationary object, building or structure.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, excluding roof signs, attached to, supported by, or
suspended from any part of a building or structure and projecting more than 12
inches therefrom.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign which advertises the sale, lease, rental,
or other disposition of the property upon which it is located.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected upon a roof or above the parapet wall of a
building and which is wholly or partially supported by said building.
   SIGN. Any object or device which is designed, intended, used or located so
as to be visible by the public from outdoors for the purpose of advertising the
property, establishment or enterprise, including goods and services, upon which
the sign is located. This definition shall include all parts, portions, frame,
background, structure, support and anchorage thereof.
   SIGN AREA. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of
a square or a rectangle which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising
message, announcement, display, logo, picture or any figure of a similar
nature, together with any frame, background area of sign, structural trim, or
other material, color, or condition which forms an integral part of the
display, excluding the necessary supports, architectural accouterments, or
uprights on which sign is placed.
   SIGN COPY. Any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic
representation incorporated into a sign.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. A structure of any kind or character erected or maintained
for advertising purposes on which any sign, billboard, poster, bill, printing,
painting, or other advertisement of any kind may be placed.
   SITE. All of the contiguous ground area which has been legally assembled
into one development location.
   STREET FRONTAGE. The linear dimension of a lot or parcel of land along or
fronting upon a street or streets.
   SPECIAL EVENT SIGN. Any temporary or nonpermanent sign which advertises or
pertains to any civic, patriotic or special event of general public interest.
   SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A freestanding or wall sign which is
permanent and identifies a recognized subdivision, condominium complex or
residential development.
   SUBDUED LIGHTING. A light intensity, whether from internal or external
illumination, of not greater than 75 foot lambert when measured with a standard
light meter perpendicular to the face of the sign from a distance equal to the
narrowest dimension of the sign.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign which is nonpermanent and is intended to be displayed
for a period of time not to exceed 90 days.
   TOTAL SIGN AREA. The combined permitted and permanent sign areas of all
signs on any one lot, site, building, structure or other premises, excluding
the area of signs specifically exempted from the provisions of this subchapter.
   TRIM. Any molding, battens, capping, matting strips, latticing, or platforms
which may be attached to a sign or sign structure.
   UNDER CANOPY SIGN. A sign which is suspended beneath a canopy, marquee,
ceiling, roof or eave.
   VEHICLE. A sign placed on a vehicle or trailer which is parked or located
for the primary purpose of displaying said sign. This does not apply to
portable signs or signs or lettering on buses, taxis or vehicles operating
during the normal course of business.
   WALL SIGN. A single-faced sign attached to and parallel to the building
facade.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign installed inside or on a window and intended to be
viewed from the outside.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2403) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95)
§ 153.323 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Sign permit required. A sign permit shall be obtained prior to the
painting, erecting, constructing, reconstructing, relocating or altering of any
sign or sign copy, for all signs other than, those prohibited and those
specifically exempt. Building permits and/or electrical permits shall also be
obtained in accordance with the Building and/or Electrical Code.
   (B)   Permit application.  Unless otherwise provided for in this subchapter,
application for a sign permit shall be made to the Community Development
Department on forms provided and shall be accompanied by three complete sets of
the following material:
      (1)   Site plan. Dimensioned, scaled site plan at a scale of not less
than " = 1', indicating the location of existing signs to be retained and all
new signs; and
      (2)   Building elevations. Scaled drawing at a scale of not less than " =
1", indicating locations of all existing signs to be retained or removed and
locations of proposed signs;
      (3)   Sign illustration. Scaled drawing at a scale of not less than " =
1', indicating dimensions, colors, material, copy, illumination, and exterior
structural features of each sign on the site;
      (4)   Color photographs. Color photographs of the building facade(s) of
the building or unit where the sign(s) are proposed to be located, except in
any new construction. Photographs shall also be submitted after the sign(s)
have been installed and before the permit is finalized.
      (5)   Change of sign copy. For a change of sign copy, only a sign
illustration shall be required.
      (6)   Other information. Such other information as the Community
Development Director may require to determine compliance with this subchapter.
   (C)   Review of and action on sign permit applications. The Community
Development Director shall review sign permit applications for compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter and the General Plan and shall approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the sign permit application. Approval of the
sign permit application does not imply approval by the Building Division of a
building permit for the sign(s). For any development project requiring a
variance, conditional use permit, precise plan of design, or other
discretionary approval by the Design Review Committee, the Planning Commission
or the City Council, the sign permit application, if appropriate, shall be
reviewed and approved, conditionally approved or disapproved by such body in
conjunction with such consideration.
   (D) Appeals. Any decision of the Community Development Director, staff or
the Design Review Commission made pursuant to this subchapter on signs may be
appealed directly to the City Council within the time and in the manner as set
forth in
§ 153.004 of this Code.
   (E)   Time for exercising sign permit.  A sign permit shall expire and
become null and void if the work authorized by such sign permit has not
commenced within 180 days of the date of issuance of the sign permit.
   (F)   Building permit required. In addition to a sign permit issued by the
Community Development Department, a building permit shall be obtained when
required under the Building Code.
   (G)   Fees. City Council may adopt fees by resolution for permit
applications.
   (H)   Revocation. The Community Development Director may revoke any sign
permit issued pursuant to §§
153.320 through
153.334 if the permittee fails to comply with the requirements of these
sections or with any conditions of approval. Prior to revoking the permit, the
Director shall provide the permittee a written notice of non-compliance. The
permittee shall have a right to appeal the notice of revocation to the City
Council pursuant to
§ 153.004.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2404) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95; Am. Ord. 526-C.S.,
passed 7-16-02; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
§ 153.324 SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   The following signs shall be permitted in the R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-3 Zones:
   (A)   In the R-1 and R-1A Zones, the following signs shall be permitted:
      (1)   One identification sign per dwelling, not exceeding two square feet
in area, containing the name and/or address of the occupant of the premises. No
sign permit shall be required. Such identification sign shall not include the
name or nature of any home occupation licensed in the dwelling.
      (2)   One unlighted detached real estate sign per lot. Said sign shall
not exceed six square feet in area or six feet in height. “Open house” signage
may be placed, provided that: such sign's area does not exceed six square feet;
such sign's height does not exceed four feet from grade; such sign remains
placed only during those hours when the house advertised thereon is open for
inspection without an appointment; and a maximum of one such sign is placed on
two major arterial streets, and maximum of one such sign is placed on two local
streets, for a maximum of four such signs. No sign permit shall be required for
any real estate sign.
      (3)   A church, synagogue or other religious institution, or an
educational institution, may locate one monument sign for each street frontage
of at least 75 linear feet, provided that sign's area does not exceed 25 square
feet or the sign's height does not exceed six feet, and complies with
§ 153.325(B). Other signs allowed by this subchapter may be permitted upon
review and approval by the Design Review Committee, provided that a conditional
use permit has been granted to the institution by the Planning Commission.
Changeable copy shall be permitted on said monument or other approved signs.
      (4)   Freestanding flag poles exceeding 15 feet in height from adjoining
grade in the front yard of single family residential units shall be prohibited.
   (B)   In the R-2 and R-3 Zones, the following signs shall be permitted:
      (1)   One multi-family complex identification sign shall be permitted.
Such sign shall be placed flat against the building wall, mounted on the face
of a perimeter wall, or shall be a monument sign not to exceed six feet in
height, shall be architecturally compatible with the building, and approved
under a precise plan of design. Any illumination shall be limited to subdued
external lighting;
      (2)   One unlighted sign made of solid materials and attached to the
front of the building, not to exceed six square feet in area, pertaining to the
sale, lease or rental of the building, property or premises upon which it is
displayed. Temporary banners advertising the sale or lease of multi-residential
units shall be permitted on buildings or developments with five or more units,
provided the banner shall not be permitted for more than four months following
the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the city. Extensions may be
permitted by application to the Community Development Director, providing that
the total time, including any extensions, shall not exceed one calendar year;
      (3)   In conjunction with a permitted church, synagogue, hospital, group
dwelling, educational or similar institutional facility, two signs for each
street frontage, including not more than one monument sign for each street
frontage of at least 75 linear feet, are permitted. The total sign area for
each frontage shall be limited to 25 square feet, with monument signs limited
to six feet in height and shall comply with
§ 153.325(B). Signs, other than monument signs, allowed by this subchapter may
be permitted upon review and approval by the Design Review Committee, provided
that a conditional use permit has been granted to the institution by the
Planning Commission. Changeable copy shall be permitted on monument or other
approved signs with approval by the Design Review Committee.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2405) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95)
§ 153.325 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE C-1, C-3, AND M-1 ZONES.
   The following signs shall be permitted in the C-1, C-3, and M-1 Zones,
subject to the standards specified herein:
   (A)   Building wall signs.  Building wall signs, including attached can
signs and channel letters and other permitted signs, shall comply with the
following standards:
      (1)   Number. One wall sign for each tenant, separate use or occupancy of
a building, unless:
         (a)   The tenant, separate use, or occupancy has frontage on more
street, in which case one additional wall sign fronting on the side street will
be permitted.
         (b)   The tenant, separate use, or occupancy has its principal
entrance facing on a parking lot, in which case it is permitted to have a wall
sign on the side of the building facing on the parking lot, provided the total
area of all signs is within the maximum permitted in division (A)(2) of this
section.
         (c)   The tenant, separate use, or occupancy has an entrance not
facing on a parking lot or public thoroughfare, in which case one non-
illuminated sign not to exceed three square feet in area shall be permitted,
provided the total area of all signs is within the maximum permitted in
division (A)(2) of this section.
         (d)   The single tenant, use, or occupancy has more than 50 linear
feet of frontage on a street or parking lot, in which case a second wall sign
may be permitted upon approval of the Design Review Committee, provided all
other provisions of this subchapter are complied with.
      (2)   Area. Maximum of 1½ square feet of sign area per linear foot of
building frontage. Only frontage facing on a major or secondary thoroughfare
shall be considered in calculating permitted area.
      (3)   Location. Wall signs shall not exceed the height of the building
roofline or parapet wall and shall not exceed 70% of the width of the building
frontage.
      (4)   Projection. Maximum projection of an attached wall sign shall be 12
inches.
      (5)   Lighting. If illuminated, such illumination shall not exceed 300
foot lambert.
      (6)   Painted wall signs. Painted wall signs shall be permitted upon
review and approval of the Design Review Committee. All applications for a
painted wall sign shall include a rendering by a graphic or other professional
artist. Application of a painted wall sign shall be by direct transfer from a
1:1 scale rendering of the approved advertising display copy.
      (7)   Can sign. Can signs shall be architecturally compatible with the
building.
   (B)   Monument signs. Monument signs shall comply with the following
standards:
      (1)   Number.  
         (a)   One monument sign for each site with a minimum of 75 feet of
frontage on a street, unless the property has such frontage on more than one
street, in which case one additional monument sign fronting on said side street
shall be permitted.
         (b)   For any site with less than 75 feet of frontage on a street, a
monument sign may be permitted by the Planning Commission with a sign variance
on recommendation of the Design Review Committee, when the configuration of the
site or the location of the building or complex on the site does not allow
adequate identification through the use of wall signs or other permitted signs.
The maximum area for such monument sign shall be calculated together with all
other permitted signs on the site, and the total area shall not exceed the
total allowable area for the buildings or complex on the entire site.
      (2)   Area.  
         (a)   The maximum square footage for a monument sign, including the
base and support, is as follows:
 
Maximum Square Footage for Monument Sign
Street Frontage    Sign Area
75 - 84 ft.        30 sq. ft.
85 - 99 ft.        40 sq. ft.
100 ft. or greater 50 sq. ft.
 
         (b)   Street address number attached to the advertising structure
shall not be considered a part of the sign area.
      (3)   Height. Maximum of six feet.
      (4)   Location.  
         (a)   All monument signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from
interior side lot lines for parcels with up to 100 feet of street frontage, and
at least 15 feet from interior side lot lines for parcels with more than 100
feet of street frontage. Criteria for determining the precise location of
monument signs shall include, but not be limited to, visibility from the
street, proximity to other signs and buildings, frontage and configuration of
the site. When located on a corner lot, a monument sign shall not be placed so
that it obstructs the view of oncoming traffic from any direction.
         (b)   All monument signs shall be located within a protective planter,
the precise location of which shall be subject to approval of the Community
Development Director. Planter areas shall be adjacent to and proportionally
surround the base of the monument sign. The planter areas shall be a minimum of
four times the area of the sign base or 25 square feet, whichever is greater.
      (5)    Street address. All monument signs shall contain a street address.
Street address numbers, proportional in size to other copy, shall not be
considered a part of the advertising display for purposes of calculating copy
area.
      (6)   Design guidelines.  The exterior finish of a monument sign shall be
architecturally compatible with the building design and materials. The
advertising display area of all monument signs shall be surrounded with a
decorative feature, e.g., molding, which is architecturally compatible with the
sign and building design.
      (7)   Lighting. Illumination shall not exceed 300 foot lambert. If
external floodlights are used, they shall be shielded so as to prevent
excessive glare;
   (C)   Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs, other than monument signs,
shall comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Number. One freestanding sign for each site with a minimum of 75
feet of frontage on a principal street, unless the property has more than 200
feet of street frontage, in which case an additional freestanding sign shall be
permitted for each additional 100 feet of street frontage over the initial 100
feet.
      (2)   Area. The maximum square footage for sign area on a freestanding
sign, excluding the supports, is as follows:
 
Maximum Square Footage for Freestanding Sign
Street Frontage         Sign Area
75 - 99 ft.             75 sq. ft.
100 ft. or greater      120 sq. ft.
Each additional 100 ft. 80 sq. ft.
 
      (3)   Height. Maximum of 15 feet or the height of the tallest building on
the site where it is located, whichever is less;
      (4)   Location. Freestanding signs shall be located a minimum of 15 feet
from interior side lot lines, and in a landscaped planter with a minimum of 60
square feet of area in addition to other required landscape areas. Criteria for
determining the precise location of freestanding signs shall include, but not
be limited to, visibility from the street, proximity to other signs and
buildings, frontage and configuration of the site. The minimum separation
between freestanding signs on adjoining properties shall be 30 feet.
      (5)   Street address. All freestanding signs shall contain a street
address. Street address numbers, proportional in size to other copy, shall not
be considered a part of the advertising display for purposes of calculating
copy area.
      (6)   Lighting. Illumination shall be internal and shall not exceed 300
foot lambert.
      (7)   Design review. The architectural features of all freestanding signs
shall be reviewed by the Design Review Committee prior to final approval.
   (D)   Pole signs. Pole signs shall comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Number. One pole sign for each site with a minimum of 75 feet of
frontage on a principal street.
      (2)   Area. The maximum square footage for sign area on a pole sign shall
be 50 square feet per side.
      (3)   Height. Maximum of 20 feet or the height of the building, whichever
is less.
      (4)   Location. Pole signs shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from
interior side lot lines. Criteria for determining the precise location of pole
signs shall include, but not be limited to, visibility from the street,
proximity to other signs and buildings, frontage and configuration of the site.
Each pole sign shall have a minimum of 60 square feet of landscaped planter
area proportionally surrounding the sign pole, which shall be in addition to
any other required landscape areas.
      (5)   Street address. All pole signs shall contain a street address.
Street address numbers, proportional in size to other copy, shall not be
considered a part of the advertising display for purposes of calculating copy
area.
      (6)   Design guidelines. Signs permitted per this section shall comply
with any sign design guidelines that may be adopted by the City Council or the
Design Review Commission.
      (7)   Lighting. Illumination shall be internal and shall not exceed 300
foot lambert.
      (8)   Design review. All pole signs shall be reviewed and approved or
conditionally approved by the Design Review Commission. Factors that the
Commission will consider include but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   That the sign does not interfere with the ability of adjoining
properties or uses to have visible signage;
         (b)   That the sign does not detract from the architectural features
of the building; and
         (c)   That the sign does not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
movement or with visibility for vehicular or pedestrian movements.
   (E)   Window signs.  Window signs shall comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Number. Three window signs shall be permitted for each occupancy
which directly faces a dedicated street or alley, mall, or parking lot area.
Information pertaining to hours of operation and credit cards shall be exempt
from this provision;
      (2)   Area. A maximum of 25% of the total frontage glass area, whether on
the ground or second level, may be covered. Doors consisting of glass shall be
included in the computation of maximum sign area. A single sign indicating if a
business is “Open” or “Closed” shall be exempt from the maximum area provision,
provided the sign shall not exceed dimensions of 18 inches by 24 inches.
      (3)   Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs shall be permitted
provided that they are within the maximum sign area provided for in division
(E)(2) above.
   (F)   Awning signs.  The following standards shall apply to awning signs:
      (1)   Number. One awning sign is permitted for each ground floor
occupancy. If a single occupancy has more than one awning, the total allowable
signage may be divided among more than one awning. More than one awning sign
may be permitted on the side of building if the adjoining grade deviates
substantially along the length of the side of the building.
      (2)   Area. Signage on the awning shall be limited to ½ square feet for
each linear foot of building frontage if the awning sign is the only signage on
the building; otherwise signage shall be limited to ½ square foot for each
linear foot of building frontage;
      (3)   Projection. Maximum of ½ the street parkway width;
      (4)   Height. Minimum of eight feet above ground level.
      (5)   Lighting. Lighting of awning signs may be internal or external, and
shall not exceed 300 foot lambert.
      (6)    Approval. All awnings shall be reviewed and approved by the
Community Development Department according to the standards contained in
divisions (F)(1) through (F)(5) above, regardless of whether such awnings have
signage.
   (G)   Under canopy signs.  The following standards shall apply to signs
attached or suspended below a canopy:
      (1)   Number. One per public entrance.
      (2)   Area. Maximum of six square feet.
      (3)   Height. The height of the sign face shall not exceed two feet and
the minimum vertical clearance shall be eight feet above adjoining grade.
   (H)   Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs shall be permitted for
facilities used primarily for the presentation of theatrical, cultural,
religious, educational or athletic events. Such sign may be either a monument
or wall-mounted sign and shall comply with all applicable requirements of this
subchapter.
   (I)   Banners.  
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided for in this subchapter, a banner shall
only be permitted pursuant to the issuance of a banner permit. Banners issued
under a permit may be displayed for a period of either 30 or 60 consecutive
calendar days, with a maximum display period of 180 calendar days per calendar
year. Multiple display periods are permitted on a banner permit, provided that
the total amount of display days shall not exceed 180 per calendar year. Only
one banner sign shall be allowed to be displayed at any given time per
business, except where a single business occupies a building located at the
intersection of two major streets, in which case one banner sign may be
displayed on each side of the building facing on the major street. Banners
shall be flame retardant, securely fastened and shall pose no public safety
hazard.
      (2)   A minimum of 30 calendar days shall transpire between each banner
display. Failure to comply with the requirements herein shall be a basis on
which to deny additional banner permits within the calendar year of the
violation.
   (J)   Open for business sign. A temporary sign may be issued for a business
when first open to the public at its location. The temporary sign shall be no
greater in area than that permitted for a wall sign under
§ 153.325(A)(2). A permit for a temporary “open for business” sign may be
approved by the Community Development Director for a period of not more than 60
consecutive days from the time an occupancy permit has first been approved by
the city. The permit period may be extended at the discretion of the Community
Development Director.
   (K)   Total sign area permitted. Total sign area, including all signs listed
above (i.e., wall signs, monument signs, freestanding signs, window signs,
awning signs, under canopy signs, and changeable copy signs) for each site or
occupancy shall not exceed 2½ square feet per linear foot for the first 50
linear feet of building frontage and two square feet per linear foot for each
linear foot of building frontage thereafter. The sign area shall be calculated
as the area within a single square or rectangular box enclosing the extreme
exterior of the advertising display, including any generic advertising, logos
or other designations. If a sign is curved, the area shall be calculated as if
the sign were in a straight line.
   (L)   Limitations on sign types.  A maximum of three different types of
signs (i.e., wall signs, monument signs, freestanding signs, window signs,
awning signs, under canopy signs, and changeable copy signs) as listed above
may be permitted for each business or separate occupancy with a minimum of 75
feet of frontage on a street. A maximum of two different types of signs as
listed above may be permitted for each business or separate occupancy with less
than 75 feet of frontage on a street.
   (M)   Master sign plan. All master sign plans for new commercial or
industrial centers, complexes or parks which contain two or more individual
establishments on a single parcel or group of parcels with a single common
development or under single ownership or a single tax parcel; or for existing
commercial industrial centers, complexes or parks as of November 9, 1993 which
contain six or more individual establishments on a single parcel or group of
parcels with a single common development or under single ownership or a single
tax parcel shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for
review and approval according to the following application and review
processes:
      (1)   Approving body.
         (a)   The master sign plan shall be approved by the Community
Development Director for developments over which the director has approval for
the Precise Plan of Design pursuant to
§ 153.354(A) of this Code.
         (b)    The master sign plan shall be approved by the Design Review
Commission for developments over which the Commission has approval for the
Precise Plan of Design pursuant to
§ 153.354(B) of this Code.
      (2)   Criteria. The following criteria shall be applied in determining
whether the master sign plan should be approved:
         (a)   Compatibility with the design motif of buildings in the complex,
center, park, lot or parcel;
         (b)   Incorporation of common design elements such as type of sign,
materials, letter style, colors, illumination, size location and/or shape;
         (c)   Promotion of unity and continuity and prevention of unsightly
clutter and disarray within the complex, center, park, lot or parcel;
         (d)   Compliance with the requirements of the Zoning Code and the
General Plan; and
         (e)   Consideration of whether the plan constitutes a hazard to the
public health and safety and a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian circulation.
      (3)   Applications for master sign plans shall contain the information
set forth below. No master sign plan application shall be accepted as complete
until all of the application contents are filed with the Community Development
Department.
         (a)   Detailed, scaled drawings of all of the proposed signs for the
lot or parcel, including elevations. At least one set of the drawings shall be
in full color, depicting the actual colors to be utilized.
         (b)   Specification of the materials, colors, letter height and style,
illumination and method of attachment for each sign which shall be accompanied
by a board containing examples of the materials and colors to be utilized.
         (c)   A color photograph of the existing building facade shall also
accompany applications for existing buildings.
   (N)   Service station signs.  In addition to signage allowed in previous
applicable sections of this subchapter, the following signage shall be allowed
for service stations:
      (1)   One permanently affixed price sign or changeable copy sign (or
combination thereof), not exceeding an area of 18 square feet shall be allowed
on each street frontage, provided said sign shall not be less than two feet in
height. Said signs shall comply with all requirements set forth by the state,
and shall be visible from all public rights-of-way.
      (2)   Small signs comprised of convenience signs, bank and credit card
signs, tire signs and/or price signs, with the size and location of such signs
to be approved by the Community Development Director, provided the aggregate
area of such signs does not exceed 24 square feet.
   (O)   Signs for factory franchised new motor vehicle dealers. In addition to
signage allowed in previously applicable sections of this subchapter, factory
franchised new motor vehicle dealers shall be allowed to have one pole sign for
each major franchise with a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a street, unless
the property has such frontage on more than one street, in which case one
additional pole sign fronting on said side street shall be allowed. Such pole
signs may be used in lieu of monument signs which are permitted by division (B)
of this section. Such pole signs shall be subject to the following standards:
      (1)   Height. Maximum of 50 feet;
      (2)   Area. The minimum square footage for a pole sign shall be as
follows:
 
Maximum Square Footage for a Pole Sign
Height of Sign Area per Side
8 - 15 ft.     50 sq. ft.
16 - 30 ft.    100 sq. ft.
31 - 40 ft.    150 sq. ft.
41 - 50 ft.    200 sq. ft.
 
      (3)   Minimum clearance. Eight feet from the bottom of the sign to grade;
      (4)   Projection. No part of a pole sign shall project over public
property;
      (5)   Copy. Copy shall not exceed 75% of the sign's area;
      (6)   Lighting. If illuminated, such illumination shall be internal and
shall not exceed 300 foot lambert;
      (7)   Architectural compatibility. Such signs, including the pole, shall
be architecturally compatible with the building(s) on the site;
      (8)   Design review. All pole signs shall be reviewed by the Design
Review Committee for its recommendation prior to final approval.
   (P)   Balloon signs for factory franchised new motor vehicle dealers. In
addition to the signage allowed in previously applicable sections of this
subchapter, a factory franchised new motor vehicle dealer shall be permitted
one balloon sign to be installed on the property, provided that balloon signs
shall not be used for more than 120 calendar days per calendar year, and that a
minimum of 30 calendar days intervene between any two balloon sign
installations.
   (Q)   Signs for major appliance/electronic retailers. In addition to the
signage allowed in previous applicable sections of this subchapter, major
appliance/electronic retailers having more than 25,000 square feet of gross
retail floor area, and 150 feet of street frontage on a major thoroughfare in
the city may be permitted the following signage upon approval of a master sign
plan:
      (1)   One and one-half square feet of signage for each linear foot of
frontage on a street.
      (2)   One wall sign for each 25 feet of street frontage to be used
exclusively to advertise brand product names.
   (R)   Architectural lighting.  
      (1)   Up to two parallel gas-filled lighting tubes around the upper
perimeter of a parapet roof, and architecturally compatible with the building
and neighboring buildings, may be approved by the Community Development
Director and shall not be considered a part of a building's signage, provided
the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The elevation of the building on which the lighting is to be
placed is a minimum of 50 feet from any residential zoned property; and
         (b)   For a stand-alone building, the building elevation is a minimum
of 50 feet in length; and
         (c)   For contiguous buildings, the building elevation is a minimum of
75 feet in length, and further provided that all contiguous buildings shall
concurrently install identical architectural lighting regardless of separate
ownership or leasehold interest; and
         (d)   No reflectorized materials are used behind the exposed tubes.
      (2)   Any additional gas-filled lighting tubes or any string of lights
shall require review and approval by the Design Review Committee.
   (S)   Portable signs. Each business in the commercial zone shall be allowed
to display one portable sidewalk sign in compliance with the standards set
forth in this section. Portable signs shall not count toward the limitations
set forth in subsections (K) and (L) above.
      (1)   Signs in the public right-of-way/permit required. A sign permit
shall be obtained before any sign is placed in the public right-of-way.
Notwithstanding
§ 153.323(B), the applicant shall only be required to provide: a scaled drawing
of the proposed sign showing colors, materials and proposed finishes of the
proposed portable sign; and color photographs of the building where the sign is
proposed to be located. As part of the permit application, the applicant shall
submit to the city and maintain a public liability insurance policy from a
company authorized to do business in the State of California and having a
rating approved by the city which names the City of San Gabriel and its
officers, agents, employees and volunteers as additional insured prior to the
issuance of a sign permit for a portable sign. When a permit application is
approved, an official city tag shall be placed on the sign showing permit
approval. No portable sign may be considered compliant with the requirements of
subsection (S) without said tag.
      (2)   Sign size. Signs may not exceed a width of 2' 6". Sign height shall
be limited to four feet as measured perpendicular from the sidewalk surface to
the highest point of the sign.
      (3)   Sign placement. Unless a permit has been obtained pursuant to
subsection (1) above, portable sidewalk signs shall be placed only within the
boundaries of the applicable business’ street frontage and shall be positioned
so that it will not:
         (a)   Reduce the sidewalk clearance below a width of 36 inches;
         (b)   Impede any line of sight for motorists at vehicular public
right-of-way intersections, as determined by the City Engineer; or
         (c)   Interfere with persons entering or exiting parked cars.
      (4)   Portable signs may not be displayed from vehicles parked in front
of or adjacent to the businesses, whether on public or private property. For
purposes pf this subsection, PORTABLE SIGNS specifically includes banners
affixed to a vehicle.
      (5)   Stabilization. The sign shall be stabilized so as to withstand wind
gusts or shall be removed during windy conditions.
      (6)   Sign elements. Signs shall be designed to incorporate the colors,
textures, and features of the building in front of which they are to be placed.
Signs made of plywood, pressboard, or paper products shall not be permitted;
signs made of metal, burnished wood, or other materials having a natural
appearance shall be permitted. Finishes shall be of high quality and durable.
      (7)   Removal. Portable signs shall be removed from the sidewalk at the
close of each business day.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2406) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95; Am. Ord. 468-C.S.,
passed 8-20-96; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-
20-04)
§ 153.326 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS.
   In addition to the foregoing, the following provisions shall apply generally
to all signs:
   (A)   Exposed gas-filled lighting tubes, strings of lights, exposed bulbs or
other exposed lighting outlining a window, door or advertising display copy, or
any portion thereof, shall be considered a part of the sign copy and shall be
subject to the conditions and area limitations contained in this subchapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of public safety, the name of the business shall be
indicated in the English language or English alphabet on at least one location
on each business.
   (C)   On corner lots, the amount of sign area permitted for one street
frontage is not transferable to another.
   (D)   The rear of any sign face or cabinet visible to the public shall be
provided with a flat surface covered to obscure structural members or elements
from public view.
   (E)   “Angle Iron” or “I-Beams” as visible structural supports shall not be
used unless covered with decorative material and approved by the Community
Development Director as an architectural or decorative feature. The use of
exposed or visible guy wire supports shall be prohibited.
   (F)   Each separate occupancy in the C-1, C-2, C-3, and M-1 Zones shall be
provided with a legible address in Arabic numerals or, where applicable, in
English alphabet, at least six inches in height. Such address shall be located
on the street front building facade and, if public access is available, on the
rear of the building. When more than one occupancy is served by one or more
common entries to a single building, the addresses may be provided by a range
of addresses inclusive of those for all such occupancies, which method shall be
deemed to comply with this subsection. Buildings with more than one occupancy
having a common entry shall have a street address on the top of the facade of
the building visible from the street.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2407) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95)
§ 153.327 EXEMPT SIGNS.
   The following signs shall be allowed without a permit, subject to the
specific zoning limitations contained herein:
   (A)   Election signs. Election signs placed on one site shall not exceed 32
square feet in area per sign. Such sign shall not be erected more than one
month prior to the election to which the signs relate and such signs shall be
removed within 48 hours following such election.
   (B) Special events window signs. Special events window signs shall not
exceed 20% of the total frontage glass area, whether on the ground or second
level. Doors consisting of glass shall be included in the computation of
maximum sign area. No more than 50% of the area of one window pane shall be
covered with signs. The permitted frequency of a special events window sign at
any single occupancy shall be limited in the same manner as a banner sign
pursuant to
§ 153.325(I). Special events window signs that are permitted under this section
shall be limited to a duration of 30 calendar days.
   (C)   Real estate signs. One six square foot sign not to exceed six feet in
height shall be permitted on lots or parcels used for residential purposes to
advertise the sale or lease of the property on which the sign is located. Real
estate signs advertising the sale or lease of commercial or industrial lots or
parcels shall not exceed 24 square feet in area, and, if freestanding, six feet
in height. All real estate signs shall be removed within 30 days following the
sale, lease or disposition of the real property. The placement of said signs
shall not interfere with the traffic or circulation on the site or on adjacent
sites.
   (D)   Construction signs. On-site construction signs advertising the
architect, builder, financing and similar information shall be permitted
provided such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in area and not more than six
feet in height above grade. Such signs shall be limited to one sign for each
street frontage and shall be removed upon the completion of construction. The
placement of said signs shall not interfere with the traffic or circulation on
the site or on adjacent sites.
   (E)   Flags. The flags, emblems, or insignias of any nation or political
subdivision utilized for noncommercial use.
   (F)   Holiday decorations.  Holiday displays not to exceed a total of 10
weeks of display during any calendar year.
   (G)   Residential identification signs. One identification sign per
dwelling, not to exceed two square feet in area, containing the name and/or
address of the occupant of the premises.
   (H)   Tablets and plaques. Tablets, memorial signs and plaques, installed by
a recognized historical agency for the purpose of identification, provided such
signs do not exceed two feet in any dimension.
   (I)   Political signs. Total signs on one site shall not exceed 32 square
feet in area.
   (J)   Temporary civic event signs.  Such signs, when placed in conjunction
with a civic event, shall be displayed for a period not to exceed 30 calendar
days.
   (K)   Directional signs. Such signs shall be a maximum of four square feet
in area per sign. The number and location of said signs shall be subject to the
approval of the Community Development Director.
   (L)   Government signs. Signs pertaining to government buildings and
government sponsored events.
   (M)   Off-site real estate open house signs. Off-site real estate open house
signs subject to the following standards:
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions in this code to the contrary,
real estate open house signs may be placed upon the public parkway provided
that all of the following restrictions are met:
         (a)   Real estate professionals placing open house signage permitted
by this section shall obtain the permission of the adjacent property owner or
tenant before placing any such signage, whenever possible.
         (b)   Signage shall be limited to one sign per corner, four signs per
intersection.
         (c)   In no event shall an open house sign be placed in a center
median strip.
         (d)   Open house signs shall only be posted on the same day of the
open house.
         (e)   Signage display hours shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. to dusk, or
7:00 p.m., whichever is earlier.
         (f)   Open houses signs shall contain the following information:
            1.   Directional arrow(s) to, or the address of, the subject
property; and
            2.   The real estate professional's name and phone number, for
identification purposes only. A business card taped to the sign will satisfy
this requirement.
         (g)   The message content on the sign shall only relate to an activity
actually in progress during the allowable display period.
         (h)   No sign shall obstruct the safe and convenient use by the public
of adjoining sidewalk, curbside parkway, or roadway area. No sign shall be
placed closer than 15 feet from a driveway approach.
         (i)   No sign shall exceed three feet in height as measured from the
ground to the top of the sign.
         (j)   No flag, pennant, streamer, banner, or balloon shall be
displayed with or attached to an open house sign permitted by this section.
         (k)   The real estate professional placing a sign or signs permitted
by this section shall assume all liability associated with the placement of
such sign and shall hold the City of San Gabriel free and harmless from all
liability and defense costs in the event of litigation regarding injuries or
property damage caused by the placement of the sign(s).
         (l)   Each posted sign, as permitted by this section, shall be
maintained in a neat, clean, and safe condition.
         (m)   No posted sign may be chained to or otherwise locked to a fixed
object in the public right-of-way.
         (n)   Signs posted in violation of any of these requirements shall
subject the person placing the sign(s) to infraction penalties for violation of
the San Gabriel Municipal Code.
         (o)   No more than five signs total shall be posted for a single open
house event.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2408) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95; Am. Ord. 482-C.S.,
passed 2-17-98; Am. Ord. 510-C.S., passed 12-5-00; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-
16-02)
§ 153.328 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts within the
city, except as otherwise provided for in this subchapter:
   (A)   Animated signs, with exemption for time and temperature;
   (B)   Balloon signs, except as otherwise provided for in this subchapter;
   (C)   Emitting signs;
   (D)   Temporary paper, cloth or plastic types of nonpermanent signs,
including pennants, flags, festoons and banners that are not approved as part
of a special events permit;
   (E)   Off-premise advertising display, other than such display which is
otherwise permitted or legally established billboards.
   (F)   Projecting signs;
   (G)   Roof signs;
   (H)   Pole signs, except as otherwise provided for in this subchapter;
   (I)   Vehicle mounted signs;
   (J)   Signs which simulate or imitate in size, color, lettering or design,
any traffic control sign or signal;
   (K)   Light bulb strings when used as part of the advertising display,
except for holiday decorations;
   (L)   Signs pertaining to a home business occupation;
   (M)   All exposed gas-filled lighting tubes, strings of lights, exposed
bulbs or other exposed lighting not specifically permitted by this subchapter
or not identified as requiring Design Review Committee action;
   (N)   Signs on public property, or on any street lamp post, tree, shrub,
tree stake or guard, electric light or power or telegraph or telephone pole, or
wire appurtenance thereof, except civic event signs with prior approval
pursuant to
§ 150.184. Any sign found posted, or otherwise affixed upon any public property
contrary to the provisions of this subsection may be immediately removed by the
city.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2409) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95; Am. Ord. 535-C.S.,
passed 1-20-04)
§ 153.329 MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.
   All signs and sign signatures, including their supports, braces, guys and
anchors, shall be kept in repair and in proper state of preservation. The
display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all
times. The Building Official shall have the authority to remove signs which
constitute a hazard to health, safety or public welfare by reason of inadequate
maintenance or dilapidation, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 98
of this code.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2410) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95)
§ 153.330 ABATEMENT OF PRE-EXISTING ILLEGAL AND/OR ABANDONED SIGNS.
   (A)   The city shall commence with an inventory and identification of
illegal and/or abandoned advertising displays. Within 60 days after said six
month period, the city shall commence abatement of the identified pre-existing
illegal and/or abandoned advertising displays. The illegal and/or abandoned
advertising displays shall be declared a public nuisance by resolution of the
City Council and the procedure for abatement shall be pursuant to Cal. Bus. &
Prof. Code
§§ 5499.1 et seq.
   (B)   The city may impose a reasonable fee upon all owners or lessees of on-
premises business advertising displays for the purpose of covering the actual
cost of inventory and identification of such displays. The actual cost may be
fixed upon a determination of the total estimated reasonable cost and the
amount of such fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2411) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95)
2004 S-12
§ 153.331 ABATEMENT OF SIGNS IN GENERAL.
   (A)   Deactivation of animated signs.  Any animated signs, except for time
and temperature, even if legally erected prior to the adoption of this
subchapter, shall be deactivated within 60 days from the effective date of this
subchapter, without compensation. Chasing lights used as part of a holiday
decoration shall not be affected by this division.
   (B)   Illegal and/or abandoned signs. Any illegal or abandoned advertising
display or advertising structure shall be abated, without compensation,
pursuant to the procedure set forth in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§§ 5499.1 et seq.
   (C)   Legal nonconforming signs.  Any legal nonconforming sign shall be
removed, without compensation, if the sign meets any of the following criteria:
      (1)   Any advertising display which has been more than 50% destroyed, and
the destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and the display is not
repaired within 30 days of the date of its destruction;
      (2)   Any advertising display whose owner, outside of a change of copy,
requests permission to remodel, and remodels that advertising display; or
expands or enlarges the building or intensifies land use upon which the
advertising display is located, and the display is affected by the
construction, enlargement, or remodeling, or the cost of construction,
enlargement, or remodeling of the advertising display exceeds 50% of the cost
of reconstruction of the building;
      (3)   Any advertising display whose owner seeks relocation thereof and
relocates the advertising display;
      (4)   Any advertising display which is temporary;
      (5)   Any advertising display for which there has been an agreement
between the advertising display owner and the city, for its removal as of any
given date;
      (6)   Any advertising display which is or may become a danger to the
public or is unsafe.
      (7)   All other nonconforming signs, except for abandoned signs, which
are made nonconforming by the initial adoption of this subchapter shall be
removed or made to conform within 15 years of June 1, 1989.
   (D)   Removal of nonconforming signs. All other nonconforming signs, first
made nonconforming by the adoption of this amended subchapter (October, 1994)
shall be removed or made to conform within 15 years from the effective date of
this amended subchapter.
   (E)   Extension of time. Any sign owner, whether a sign user or a sign
lessor or lessee, may seek an extension of time from the otherwise applicable
amortization schedule pursuant to the provisions of
§ 153.332.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2412) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95)
§ 153.332 EXTENSION OF TIME FROM AMORTIZATION PERIOD.
   (A)   After conducting a public hearing on an application for extension of
time under
§ 153.331(C)(7), the Planning Commission may, by resolution, deny said
application or grant such extension when, after hearing the testimony, or other
evidence, it concludes that strict application of the nonconforming sign
provisions would be unreasonable as to a particular sign; strict application of
the nonconforming sign provisions would create a hardship upon the applicant
which was not brought about by an act of the applicant; and the hardship
resulting from strict application of the nonconforming sign provisions
outweighs any detriment to the public caused by granting an extension of time.
   (B)   In making a determination as to granting or denying extensions of
time, the Planning Commission shall consider evidence presented as to the
following matters, but not limited thereto:
      (1)   Age, condition and physical characteristics of the sign;
      (2)   Location;
      (3)   Remaining economic life;
      (4)   Depreciation treatment for income tax purposes;
      (5)   Investment in sign;
      (6)   Monopoly or advantage resulting from fact that similar new signs
are prohibited;
      (7)   Cost to remove sign and salvage value;
      (8)   Extent of nonconformity.
   (C)   The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless an
appeal is made to the City Council in the time and manner specified in
§ 153.004 of this code.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2413) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95; Am. Ord. 526-C.S.,
passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.333 SIGNS OF SPECIAL SIGNIFICANCE.
   (A)   Application to be designated a sign of special significance shall be
filed with the Community Development Department. Upon application by the owner,
any sign may be considered by the Design Review Committee and Planning
Commission for designation as a special significance sign for its architectural
or historic significance, whether local, state or national.
   (B)   Signs meeting the following criteria may be designated signs of
special significance:
      (1)   Signs having some special significance, either historically or
architecturally;
      (2)   Signs which directly contribute to the distinctive character of the
city.
      (3)   Signs whose design, material(s) and color(s) are consistent with
the architectural styles and building types identified in the urban design
element of the city's General Plan;
      (4)   Signs which are integral to a building and/or storefront, whose
design, material(s) and color(s) have not been compromised, to the point that
the integrity of the original sign/building/ storefront relationship no longer
exists;
      (5)   Signs which have been properly maintained and repaired, if
necessary, by the original owner; or faithfully restored, if there is a new
owner; and
      (6)   The sign will not have a significant adverse impact on the purposes
of the sign ordinance.
   (C)   Designated signs of special significance shall not be removed or
abated as provided in
§ 153.331(C)(7). Such signs which are approved by the Planning Commission may
be subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The basic sign copy may not be changed;
      (2)   The existing signs shall not be modified;
      (3)   No new signs shall be added;
      (4)   Review of such signs by the Planning Commission every five years
from the date of approval.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2414) (Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95)
§ 153.334 CITY COUNCIL PERMIT FOR PUBLIC STREET BANNERS.
   (A)   Permits required. No person shall hang or suspend any banner, flag,
pennant, or other street decoration over and above any street or other public
thoroughfare, or cause the same to be done, unless permission to do so has
first been obtained as an agenda item by the City Council. Such permission
shall not be granted for commercial advertising and shall be confined to the
advertising of patriotic or seasonal celebrations, fiestas, conventions, public
or civic events, or other activities not of a commercial nature.
   (B)   Bonds/insurance. The Council may require a reasonable bond and/or
policy of public liability insurance to protect the city and its officers and
employees from liability connected with the display of the banner and to ensure
its timely removal.
   (C)   Time permitted to be displayed. Such banner, pennant, flag or other
street decoration shall not be displayed more than 30 days prior to the
commencement of the event or activity for which it is displayed and shall be
removed within 45 days after the date of initial display.
   (D)   Height. Such banner, flag, pennant, or other street decoration shall
be safely suspended not less than 16 feet above a street or public
thoroughfare.
   (E)   Recurring events. Proposed banners, advertising recurring community
events, that have been previously approved by the City Council may be re-
authorized by staff so long as the event and proposed posting are substantially
similar to that authorized previously by the City Council.
   (F)   These requirements shall not apply to official banners of the city and
its departments.
(Ord. 482-C.S., passed 2-17-98)
DESIGN REVIEW
§ 153.350 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this subchapter are as follows:
   (A)   To ensure the implementation of urban design policies and principles
consistent with the city's General Plan;
   (B) To maintain and protect property values and financial investments;
   (C)   To ensure the development of safe and adequate circulation and
parking;
   (D)   To promote the highest quality of architectural design for the public
benefit and the improvement of the city's community environment; and
   (E)   To, within the dictates of the Zoning Code, balance the rights of
adjoining property owners regarding privacy, noise, light and air.
   (F)   To ensure fair, equitable and consistent application of design
standards in a timely manner.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2501) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 512-C.S., passed
3-20-01)
§ 153.351 DESIGN REVIEW COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The Design Review Commission shall consist of five members appointed
by the City Council on the basis of their qualifications. The members shall
include qualified design professionals, including but not limited to the fields
of architecture, urban and regional planning, urban design, graphic design,
engineering and the visual arts. It is desirable, but not required, that at
least one architect and one landscape architect shall serve on the Commission.
Absence or vacancy in any position shall not prevent the Commission from
conducting business, provided that a quorum of three members is maintained.
Members shall serve two-year terms and may be appointed for additional two-year
terms. Members shall be required to participate in orientation training before
and continuing education during their term of service in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (B)   The Design Review Commission shall choose a Chair and a Vice-Chair
from among their membership. Meetings shall be held on a time and date
established by written resolution of the City Council. The Design Review
Commission shall take action by majority vote of those present and constituting
a quorum. The proceedings of the Design Review Commission shall be memorialized
by the minute clerk. The minute clerk shall tape record the proceedings as an
aid to preparation of the minutes. In addition, the staff shall prepare and
submit proposed minutes of the Commission meetings for adoption at the next
regularly scheduled meeting.
   (C)   The City Manager, through the Community Development Director, shall
assign such staff support to the Design Review Commission as may be required
for the Commission to fulfill its obligations. The staff shall have the duty to
advise, but not the right to vote.
   (D)   The Design Review Commission shall establish written policies to
ensure efficient organization and management of its affairs, consistent
application of design standards, and identification of issues for future
consideration by the Planning Commission and City Council.
   (E)   Every member of the Design Review Commission appointed by the Mayor
shall be interviewed and selected on the basis of experience and
qualifications, and shall be required to participate in no fewer than eight
hours of orientation and training before participating in the review of
projects. Design Review Commission members shall participate in at least one
annual training program in the areas of design practice, meeting management,
ethics, planning and design law, or related topics.
   (F)   The Community Development Director or designee may secure consulting
professional design assistance as necessary to ensure expedient and effective
reviews of incoming projects.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2502) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 512-C.S., passed
3-20-01; Am. Ord. 513-C.S., passed 4-17-01; Am. Ord. 518-C.S., passed 1-15-02;
Am. Ord. 602-C.S., passed 7-2-13; Am. Ord. 643-C.S., passed 4-3-18; Am. Ord.
650, passed 2-5-19)
§ 153.352 APPLICABILITY.
   No building permit or any other type of construction permit shall be issued
until a precise plan of design or site plan review covering the parcel or
parcels to be used is approved as provided herein. Building permits and other
construction permits may be issued only in accordance with such an approved
precise plan of design or site plan review, including the terms and conditions
thereof.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2503) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 552-C.S., passed
11-21-06; Am. Ord. 629-C.S., passed 10-4-16)
§ 153.353 APPLICATION FOR PRECISE PLAN OF DESIGN OR SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Filing requirements. An application for a precise plan of design or
site plan review shall be filed with the Community Development Department. The
application shall contain the information required in the operating guidelines
for design review issued by the Community Development Director.
   (B)   Plan preparation. Plans and landscape plans for projects that are
larger than one acre shall be prepared by a registered architect and a licensed
landscape architect respectively. The Community Development Director may waive
the requirement of professional plan preparation in the case of minor
remodeling or where the facts and circumstances of the proposed plan
demonstrate that professional plan preparation would not substantially benefit
the project.
   (C)   Minimum application submittal. The Community Development Director
shall establish a list of minimum filing requirements for all applications
consistent with division (D) below. Nothing shall require the Community
Development Director, however, to require exhibits that do not have a direct
bearing on the matter proposed, nor shall the Community Development Director be
prohibited from requiring additional materials necessary to make an informed
determination.
   (D)   Filing requirements for design review. The following specifies typical
filing requirements for design review applications. The Community Development
Director shall maintain a checklist of filing requirements which shall be
reviewed and amended from time to time.
      (1)   Checklist. A completed checklist for applications containing the
information as specified by the Community Development Director or designee.
Such checklist may include, but is not limited to, the items in division (D)(2)
through (8).
      (2)   Site plan. Copies of a fully dimensioned site plan, drawn to scale
and showing:
         (a)   Location of existing and proposed structures, including signs,
showing dimensions from property line;
         (b)   Location, size and species of existing trees or natural
attributes;
         (c)   Location of off-street parking. The number of parking spaces
(specifying handicapped, compact and regular spaces), type of paving, direction
of traffic flow, parking stall dimensions, and areas for turning and
maneuvering vehicles;
         (d)   Location and dimension of drive approaches, off-street loading
areas, street and highway dedications;
         (e)   Refuse disposal and recycling;
         (f)   Location, height, and material of existing and/or proposed
fences and walls;
         (g)   Means of screening all vents, pipes, antennas and machinery
placed on roofs;
         (h)   Location, height and specifications of all existing and/or
proposed exterior lighting;
         (i)   Location of all utility pipes, valves, vaults and similar
appurtenances; and
         (j)   Location of structures on abutting lots showing dimensions to
property line.
      (3)   Neighborhood analysis. Written and/or visual analysis for a 300-
foot radius around the project site, showing the architectural styles in the
vicinity as well as the number of one-story and two-story homes. This submittal
requirement is applicable for projects located within the R-1 Zone that are
subject to review by the Design Review Commission.
      (4)   Elevation drawings. Dimensioned and fully illustrating all sides of
the proposed structures. These drawings shall include:
         (a)   Location of signs and size, height, color, material and type of
illumination of all signs. A master sign plan shall be submitted when the
development includes two units or more;
         (b)   Location, size and style of architectural features, such as
awnings, doors, windows and other wall openings;
         (c)   All exterior surfacing materials and their colors.
      (5)   Landscape plan. A preliminary landscape plan showing the location
and design of the following listed items:
         (a)   Existing trees (by species and size) proposed to be retained,
removed or relocated on the site;
         (b)   Landscaped areas and the numbers, varieties and sizes of plant
materials to be planted therein and all other landscape features;
         (c)   Softscape, hardscape (walkways, paving, textured concrete) and
lighting.
      (6)   Colors and materials. A materials and colors board showing all
colors and materials, with color chips and textures keyed to the principal plan
elements where those components are found.
      (7)   Floor plans. Floor plans.
      (8)   Photo board. Showing subject site, two adjacent properties on
either side, and three properties directly across the street(s).
      (9)   Rendering/illustration. One set of color elevation drawings or a
color rendering. The City Planner may require, at his or her discretion, a
computer model where such is necessary to evaluate scale, massing and
architectural treatment.
      (10)   Curb cut applications for vacant property. To the extent not
already covered by division (D)(2) through (6) above, applications submitted
pursuant to §
100.030(B)(2) and (C)(1) shall contain relevant information relating to
lighting design, gateway design, queuing distance, security gates, adjoining
right-of-way improvements, street trees, improvements on abutting properties;
trash collection access and screening; vertical grade differentials and
transitions.
   (E)   Review and approval protocol. Application processes shall be governed
by the procedure shown in Figure 153.353(A):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6243.jpg]
 
('65 Code, § 9-3.2504) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 513-C.S., passed
3-20-01; Am. Ord. 552-C.S., passed 11-21-06; Am. Ord. 629-C.S., passed 10-4-16;
Am. Ord. 639-C.S., passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord. 638-C.S., passed 10-17-17)
§ 153.354 ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   (A)   Action by Community Development Director.
      (1)   Any precise plan of design applications for multi-family
residential projects of four or fewer dwelling units, for single family
projects not in the R-1 Zone, or for commercial, office, institutional or
industrial projects equal to or less than 3,000 square feet of gross floor area
shall be considered by the Community Development Director within 30 days after
the filing of a complete application. The Community Development Director shall
approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions, the application.
      (2)   Any site plan review applications for projects within the R-1 Zone,
proposing additions to the rear of the property that do not propose significant
impacts from the public right-of-way shall be considered by the Community
Development Director within 30 days after filing of a complete application. The
Community Development Director shall approve, disapprove, or approve with
conditions, the application.
      (3)   Any site plan review application for projects within the R-1 Zone
proposing wholesale façade changes or additions that create significant visual
impacts from the public right-of-way shall be reviewed by the City Architect
prior to consideration by the Community Development Director within 30 days
after the filing of a complete application. The Community Development Director
shall approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions, the application.
      (4)   The Community Development Director may refer any application not
otherwise required for review by the City Architect or for Design Review
Commission review and recommendation, if the Director determines that the
controversial nature or the complexity of the application requires such
referral. In such case, the 30-day time limit shall not apply, but the matter
shall be timely scheduled for hearing before the Design Review Commission.
   (B)   Action by Design Review Commission.
      (1)   Any site plan review applications for projects within the R-1 zone,
proposing construction of new homes (including any residential remodel which
involves the demolition of at least 50% of the existing residential building)
and new second stories shall be considered by the Design Review Commission.
      (2)   Any precise plan of design applications for residential projects of
five or more dwelling units, applications for commercial, office, institutional
or industrial projects in excess of 3,000 square feet of gross floor area shall
be considered by the Design Review Commission. The Design Review Commission
shall also consider additions to commercial, office or manufacturing buildings
that add more than 2,500 square feet to gross floor area to the existing
structure(s).
      (3)   The Community Development Director shall place a completed
application, submitted with all of the required supplementary information
required herein, on the next available Design Review Commission agenda. No
application shall be placed on the Design Review Commission agenda for
consideration until all of the required information has been submitted in
sufficient time for staff analysis and review prior to the Design Review
Commission meeting. After a completed application is placed upon the Design
Review Commission agenda, the Commission shall, within a reasonable time
thereafter, make a decision of approval, disapproval, or approval with
conditions. The Design Review Commission shall utilize the evaluation criteria
herein in making its recommendation.
   (C)   Appeal to City Council. Any decision of the Community Development
Director or the Design Review Commission may be appealed to the City Council
within the time and manner specified by §
153.004 of this code. The City Council may approve, deny or modify, in whole or
in part, the action of the Community Development Director or the Design Review
Commission. The City Council shall utilize the evaluation criteria herein in
making its decision.
   (D)   Action by City Council. The City Council shall consider any appeal of
a Design Review Commission action within 30 days of the filing of said appeal.
The City Council may approve, deny or modify, in whole or in part, the action
of the Design Review Commission. The City Council shall utilize the evaluation
criteria herein in making its decision.
   (E)   Decisions to be in writing. All decisions of the Community Development
Director, Design Review Commission and City Council shall be in writing and
shall include findings supporting the decision.
   (F)   Changes after approval. After a site plan review or a precise plan of
design has been approved by the Design Review Commission, the Chairman and City
Architect may make minor modifications to the approved plans, including changes
to color, roofing materials and colors, types of finishes or textures for items
such as stucco or wood, and other material changes. Such modifications must be
approved and documented and approved by both the Chairman and the City
Architect. Nothing herein shall obligate the Chairman and City Architect to
approve any requested changes.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2505) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 512-C.S., passed
3-20-01; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02; Am. Ord. 544-C.S., passed 8-17-04;
Am. Ord. 552-C.S., passed 11-21-06; Am. Ord. 629-C.S., passed 10-4-16; Am. Ord.
639-C.S., passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord. 638-C.S., passed 10-17-17)
§ 153.355 EVALUATION CRITERIA.
   (A)   In approving a precise plan of design or site plan review, the
Director, Design Review Commission or City Council, on appeal, must find in
writing that the site plan, architecture and landscape design:
      (1)   Are consistent with the policies of the general plan, zoning
ordinance, design guidelines, and other city ordinances and policies governing
the quality and character of development.
      (2)   Are architecturally harmonious, consistent with the scale and
impact of similarly sited properties in the same neighborhood and zoning
classification, and carry out the intent of the city's design guidelines. Each
building shall include full architectural character on all building elevations
demonstrating a quality of craftsmanship and design quality consistent with the
city's guidelines.
      (3)   Provide a degree of amenity characterized by generous landscaping
of the open spaces and parking lots consistent with city design guidelines;
provision of pedestrian connections; provision of landscape transition zones
between parcels; and preservation of native, historic, and specimen trees and
vegetation on the site.
      (4)   Provide proper transition between the subject parcels and adjoining
properties, including proper streetscape, architectural scale, massing,
proportion and harmony; landscape palette, sound and vibration control,
buffering, privacy protections; public improvements, and sign controls
necessary to improve the quality of the streetscape.
      (5)   Include, to the extent possible, passive solar design
opportunities, new and sustainable technologies, water-efficient landscape
techniques, elimination of nonconforming signs, and other building practices
consistent with the provisions of state law and city design guidelines.
      (6)   Protect the character-defining features of historic streetscapes,
building exteriors, and cultural landscapes consistent with Secretary of the
Interior Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties.
      (7)   In addition to the above, when considering a precise plan of design
for a curb cut for vacant property, the following findings must also be made:
         (a)   That access to the vacant property will not create an attractive
nuisance;
         (b)   That access to the vacant property will not create a standalone
parking lot or storage yard;
         (c)   That access to the vacant property is consistent with future
development plans of the vacant property; and
         (d)   That access to the property will not create an unsafe situation
for individuals or surrounding properties.
   (B)   The Design Review Commission shall not consider the internal space
arrangements and amenities of a structure except to the extent required for
compliance with applicable building codes, zoning density requirements, zoning
code requirements, design development standards, evaluation criteria and the
purpose of this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2506) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 512-C.S., passed
3-20-01; Am. Ord. 552-C.S., passed 11-21-06; Am. Ord. 629-C.S., passed 10-4-16)
§ 153.356 TIME LIMIT
   The precise plan of design or site plan review shall be valid for one year
from the approval date. Construction must be commenced within one year from the
approval date. If construction has not commenced within one year from the
approval date, but the applicant has diligently pursued the project plan review
process, the Community Development Director may extend the precise plan of
design or site plan review for up to one additional year. If construction has
not commenced within this additional one-year period, the precise plan of
design or site plan review shall expire and no longer be valid. The Design
Review Commission may, upon application and with good cause shown, extend the
time limit in the case of unavoidable delay.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2507) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 629-C.S., passed
10-4-16)
§ 153.357 MINOR REVISION.
   Subsequent to the approval of a precise plan of design or site plan review,
the Community Development Director may approve minor changes in the precise
plan, site plan review, or the conditions thereof, if he or she finds that
there are practical reasons for such changes, that such changes do not
substantially vary from the previously approved precise plan or site plan
review, and applicable city codes, and that such changes do not involve
deviations from the design’s intent and from established written policies of
the Design Review Commission or Planning Commission. Any time the Community
Development Director takes action to approve or disapprove a requested minor
modification, he or she shall notify the approving body in writing. The action
of the Community Development Director shall be final unless appealed to the
approving body within 10 calendar days of the decision.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2508) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 629-C.S., passed
10-4-16)
§ 153.358 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   Following the receipt in proper form of any such application, the
Secretary of the Commission shall fix the time and place for the public hearing
thereon. The Secretary shall provide public notice of the public hearing in the
manner required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65091.
   (B)   The failure on the part of any person, or any addressee of any such
postal notices, to give due and careful consideration to any such notice as
provided for in this section shall in no way affect the validity of such
proceedings provided such publication and mailing shall have been done in good
faith.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord. 638-C.S., passed 10-17-17)
APPLICATION REVIEW
§ 153.365 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this subchapter are:
   (A)   To provide the Design Review Commission, Planning Commission, and City
Council with full and complete information so that consideration of projects
will not be delayed while information that should have been included in the
initial application is provided;
   (B)   To help applicants understand the nature of the city's approval
process and the information necessary to complete their applications;
   (C) To screen applications that will require close environmental scrutiny;
   (D)   To verify that proposed projects are in compliance with all city
zoning, building, fire, health and police regulations; and
   (E)   To assist the Community Development Department in preparing
recommended conditions of approval or reasons for recommended denial for
projects set for consideration before the City Council, Planning Commission or
Design Review Commission.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2801) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed
1-20-04)
§ 153.366 APPLICATION REVIEW.
   (A)   The Community Development Director shall meet with such city staff as
he deems necessary to review proposed discretionary projects and make
recommendations.
   (B)   The Application Review process, from original submittal of an
application to the initial report of the Committee, shall be completed within
30 days.
   (C)   The City Council, Planning Commission and Design Review Commission
shall be advised, in staff reports, as to the results of the Application Review
recommendations for a project.
   (D)   Recommendations resulting from the Application Review process shall
not impair the jurisdiction of the Design Review Commission, Planning
Commission and City Council in their review of projects requiring discretionary
approval.
(Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
§ 153.367 PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent a developer from requesting pre-
application review on a proposed project if so desired. A fee for such review
may be established by resolution of the City Council.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2802) (Ord. 449-C.S., passed 6-6-95; Am. Ord. 512-C.S., passed
3-20-01; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04)
COMMERCIALLY UTILIZED CONDOMINIUMS
§ 153.380 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL CONDOMINIUM. Any commercially zoned or commercially utilized
portion of a “common interest development” as that term is used in Cal. Civil
Code §§ 1351 et seq.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2701) (Ord. 368-C.S., passed - - )
§ 153.381 REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS.
   In addition to the state Subdivision Map Act and the code provisions
relating to subdivisions, the following requirements must be satisfied at the
time of application for subdivision map approval. Failure to provide
documentation as to how the following requirements will be met shall be grounds
to deem an application incomplete.
   (A)   Minimum size of individual units. No individual unit offered for sale
shall contain less than 1,200 square feet of useable floor area. Also, a
minimum of 10% of the units shall individually contain at least 2,000 square
feet of usable floor area.
   (B)   Copy of governing documents to be submitted. A copy of the proposed
conditions, covenants and restrictions, bylaws, and articles of incorporation
(if applicable) and all the documents, including the condominium plan, map,
declaration and any amendments thereto as required by the provisions of Cal.
Civil Code § 1352 shall be submitted at the time of application. The applicant
shall also submit the written disclosures required by Cal. Civil Code § 1363.1,
if available at the time the application is submitted.
   (C)   Mandatory provisions in governing documents. The proposed conditions,
covenants and restrictions shall include the substance of the following
provisions, subject to the approval of the City Attorney:
      (1)   Local jurisdiction. The governmental entity with primary
jurisdiction over this project is the city, in the County of Los Angeles. The
Association shall abide by codes and/or ordinances of the primary jurisdiction
above stated, and the State of California. No alterations to the interior of
individual units or common area shall be commenced without the appropriate
approvals and permits from the city.
      (2)   Fire lanes. The common drive shall be posted and maintained as a
fire lane/no parking area. The city shall have the ability to cite violations
of parking restrictions.
      (3)   Parking spaces/permitted uses. Parking for the project shall be
approved based upon the developer's representations regarding proposed uses of
the individual units. Certain uses, such as restaurants, require much more
parking than other uses. The owner and occupant of each unit should be aware
that the overall number of parking spaces available in the project may limit
the utilization of individual units. The parking spaces in the project are for
the intermittent uses of owners and their patrons and no parking of an extended
duration shall be permitted. The Property Owner Association shall adopt
regulations consistent with the provisions of this subchapter, including this
division, regarding the use of parking spaces in the project.
      (4)   Authority of city to enforce common area maintenance. The city
shall have the right and power to enforce the common area use and maintenance
covenants of the Association, provided however that no duty to enforce said use
and maintenance covenants shall be deemed to arise by virtue of this provision
or any other action of the city. Any provisions of this subchapter
notwithstanding, the city may, by an action at law or in equity, enforce all
provisions relating to the proper maintenance, repair and use of the common
area.
      (5)   Approval of local jurisdiction. Any amendments which would defeat
the obligation of the Board, acting on behalf of the Association, or the
Association, to provide management and maintenance of the common area,
including any private driveways or private streets thereto, in a first-class
condition and in a good state of repair, or which would defeat the assessment
procedure established or contemplated in this subchapter to insure said
management and maintenance, must be approved by the Planning Commission of the
city.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2702) (Ord. 368-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 455-C.S., passed
11-21-95)) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.382 APPLICATION FEE.
   An application fee, in an amount set by resolution of the City Council,
shall be paid in addition to the fees applicable to the subdivision map fees.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2703) (Ord. 368-C.S., passed - - )
§ 153.383 PROCESSING PROCEDURE.
   Compliance with these provisions shall be ascertained as part of the public
hearing process regarding the subdivision map. No subdivision map for
commercial condominium purposes shall be approved unless the granting body
makes a specific finding that the project is in compliance with these
regulations.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2704) (Ord. 368-C.S., passed - - )
TRIP REDUCTION AND TRAVEL DEMAND MEASURES
§ 153.400 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION. The use of modes of transportation other than
the single passenger motor vehicle, but not limited to carpools, vanpools,
buspools, public transit, walking and bicycles.
   APPLICABLE DEVELOPMENT. Any development project that is determined to meet
or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in this subchapter.
   BUSPOOL. A vehicle carrying 16 or more passengers commuting on a regular
basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule.
   THE CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA). A statute that requires all
jurisdictions in the State of California to evaluate the extent of
environmental impact posed by proposed development.
   CARPOOL. A vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and
from work on a regular basis.
   DEVELOPER. The builder who is responsible for the planning, design and
construction of an applicable development project. A DEVELOPER may be
responsible for implementing the provisions of this subchapter as determined by
the property owner.
   DEVELOPMENT. The construction or addition of new building square footage.
Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance
codified in this subchapter and which exceed the thresholds defined in this
subchapter shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added
cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be
exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square
footage.
   EMPLOYEE PARKING AREA. The portion of total required parking at a
development used by on-site employees. Unless direct evidence to the contrary
is provided by the developer, employee parking shall be calculated as follows:
 
Type of Use              Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees
Commercial/restaurant    30%
Office/professional      85%
Industrial/manufacturing 90%
 
   PREFERENTIAL PARKING. Parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of
a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying
commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided a location more
convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single
occupant vehicles.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to
a tenant. The PROPERTY OWNER shall be responsible for complying with the
provisions of this subchapter either directly or by delegating such
responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent.
   SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (SCAQMD). The regional authority
appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and
otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the non-desert
portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties).
   TENANT. The lessee of facility space at an applicable development project.
   TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM). The alteration of travel behavior,
usually on the part of commuters, through programs of incentives, services, and
policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as
carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of
the peak period or eliminate them altogether.
   TRIP REDUCTION. Reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single
occupant vehicles.
   VANPOOL. A vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and
from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement
designed to carry seven to 15 adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription
basis.
   VEHICLE. Any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to
automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2801) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed - - )
§ 153.401 REVIEW OF TRANSIT IMPACTS.
   (A)   Prior to approval of any development project for which an
Environmental Impact Report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the requirements
of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on a local
determination, regional and municipal fixed-router transit operators providing
service to the project shall be identified and consulted with. Projects for
which a Notice of Preparation (NOP) for a draft EIR has been circulated
pursuant to the provisions of CEQA prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this subchapter shall be exempted from its provisions. The “Transit
Impact Review Worksheet” provided in the Los Angeles County Congestion
Management Program Manual, or similar worksheets, shall be used in assessing
impacts. Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, transit operators shall be sent a
NOP for all contemplated EIRs and shall, as part of the NOP process, be given
an opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify reasonable
recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be required as a
direct result of the project, and to recommend reasonable mitigation measures
minimizing automobile trips on the CMP network. It shall be the responsibility
of the transit operators to show the direct relation of the impacts to the
project and to show the reasonableness of proposed mitigation. Impacts and
recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be
evaluated in the Draft Environmental Impact Report prepared for the project.
Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation
monitoring requirements of CEQA.
   (B)   Phased development projects, development projects subject to a
development agreement, or development projects requiring subsequent approvals,
need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to the
project. It shall remain the discretion of the lead agency to determine when a
project is substantially the same and therefore covered by a previously
certified EIR.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2802) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed - - )
§ 153.402 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND AND TRIP REDUCTION MEASURES.
   (A)   Applicability of requirements.
      (1)   Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall
make provisions for, as a minimum, all of the following applicable
transportation demand management and trip reduction measures.
      (2)   This subchapter shall not apply to projects for which a development
application has been deemed “complete” by the city pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code
§ 65943, or for which a Notice of Preparation for a DEIR has been circulated,
or for which an application for a building permit has been received, prior to
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subchapter.
      (3)   All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required
shall be maintained in a state of good repair.
   (B)   Development standards.
      (1)   Non-residential development of 25,000 square feet or more shall
provide the following to the satisfaction of the city: A bulletin board,
display case or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the
greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area
shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes
serving the site;
         (b)   Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information,
including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit
operators;
         (c)   Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented
organizations;
         (d)   Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local
bicycle maps and bicycle safety information;
         (e)   A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers,
bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.
      (2)   Nonresidential development of 50,000 square feet or more shall
comply with division (B)(1) of this section and shall provide all of the
following measures to the satisfaction of the city:
         (a)   Not less than 10% of employee parking area shall be located as
close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for
use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and
customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be
identified on the site plan upon application for building permits, to the
satisfaction of the city. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces
for employees are available and a description of the methods for obtaining such
spaces must be included on the required transportation information board.
Spaces will be signed/striped as demand warrants; provided that at all times at
least one space for projects of 50,000 square feet to 100,000 square feet, and
two spaces for projects over 100,000 square feet will be signed/striped for
carpool/vanpool vehicles.
         (b)   Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be
accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a
minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches shall be provided
for these spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning
radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking
areas.
         (c)   Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided
to accommodate four bicycles per the first 50,000 square feet of nonresidential
development and one bicycle per each additional 50,000 square feet of
nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or
higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking
facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the
owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement
weather. Specific facilities and location (for example, provisions of racks,
lockers, or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the city.
      (3)   Nonresidential development of 100,000 square feet or more shall
comply with divisions (B)(1) and (2) of this section and shall provide all of
the following measures to the satisfaction of the city:
         (a)   A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles
may deliver and board their passengers;
         (b)   Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe
routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the
development;
         (c)   If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project
impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult with the
local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When
locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be
designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops;
         (d)   Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system
to bicycle parking facilities on site.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2803) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.403 MONITORING.
   (A)   No project requiring an Environmental Impact Report (EIR), or a
focused environmental review of traffic issues, shall be submitted for
consideration unless a CMP transportation impact analysis has been completed as
part of the environmental review.
   (B)   No project requiring development improvements pursuant to
§ 153.402(B) shall be submitted for plan check unless all required improvements
are indicated on the proposed development plans to the satisfaction of the
city.
   (C)   No project requiring development improvements pursuant to
§ 153.402(B) shall be issued a certificate of occupancy unless all required
improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of this city.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2804) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed - - )
§ 153.404 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement of this subchapter shall be pursuant to the provisions of §§
153.480 through
153.483.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2805) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed - - )
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
§ 153.420 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANY SUBSEQUENTLY ADOPTED ORDINANCE OR REGULATION. Any ordinance or
regulation changing the development standards of this chapter adopted
subsequent to the adoption of this subchapter.
   INVOLUNTARY DESTRUCTION. The partial or total destruction of a structure as
a result of natural disaster, war, civil disturbance or fire not caused by nor
resulting from the action of the structure's owner or agents.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. Any lot which was lawfully created but, by reason of any
subsequently adopted ordinance or regulation, does not conform to the
provisions of this code applicable to the zone in which the lot is situated.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any building or structure, or any portion thereof,
which was lawfully constructed but, by reason of any subsequently adopted
ordinance or regulation, does not conform to the provisions of this chapter
applicable to the zone in which the structure is situated.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any use which was lawful at the time it was established
but, by reason of any subsequently adopted ordinance or regulation, does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the zone in which the
use is situated.
   NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES. The following zones: Retail Commercial Zone (C-1);
Commercial and Light Manufacturing Zone (C-3); Light Manufacturing Zone (M-1);
Automobile Parking Zone (P-1); Architectural Design Zone (D); and any future
zone created by ordinance permitting any commercial, manufacturing or parking
use.
   TERMINATION. The cessation of the right to maintain the existing
nonconforming use, structure or lot; including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The alteration to a conforming structure or the complete removal of
any nonconforming structure; and
      (2)   The discontinuance of a nonconforming use or conversion to a
conforming use.
(Ord. 393-C.S., passed 5-18-93)
§ 153.421 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   The following shall apply to all nonconforming uses existing at the
effective date of this subchapter or at the effective date of any subsequently
adopted ordinance or regulation, unless said ordinance or regulation expressly
provides otherwise.
   (A)   Any nonconforming use housed in a conforming structure may be
continued and maintained except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, and
further provided:
      (1)   There is no enlargement, alteration, addition or expansion of any
portion of the structure in which the nonconforming use is situated, except for
such repair as may be necessary for structural integrity or safety, or such
alteration as may be required by law, the applicability of which shall be
determined by the Community Development Director.
      (2)   There is no addition to, nor intensification of, the nonconforming
use.
      (3)   There is no addition to, nor change to, any other nonconforming
use.
      (4)   The nonconforming use is maintained in compliance with the health
and safety codes and other titles of the city code and ordinances.
      (5)   The right to maintain a nonconforming use shall terminate if such
use is discontinued for a period of 120 consecutive days or more.
      (6)   A nonconforming use may be changed to another use if the proposed
use is permitted in the zone in which the existing nonconforming use is
situated and all requirements of this code in effect at the time of the
proposed change in use, including parking requirements, are satisfied. Once
changed, said nonconforming use may not be reestablished.
      (7)   If the structure in which the nonconforming use is housed is
involuntarily destroyed, in whole or in part, causing the involuntary
discontinuance of the nonconforming use, the nonconforming use shall terminate
if it has not been reestablished within 120 days of completion of repair or
reconstruction of the structure in which it was housed.
   (B)   Any nonconforming use housed in a nonconforming structure may be
continued and maintained, so long as it complies with the provisions of
division (A) of this section, and as otherwise provided in this subchapter, and
further provided:
      (1)   If the nonconforming structure in which the nonconforming use is
housed is involuntarily destroyed, in whole or in part, causing the involuntary
discontinuance of the nonconforming use, the nonconforming use shall terminate
if it has not been reestablished within 120 days of completion of repair or
reconstruction of the structure in which it was housed.
      (2)   (a)   A nonconforming use housed in a nonconforming structure may
be changed to another use if:
            1.   The proposed use is permitted in the zone in which the
existing use is situated;
            2.   The proposed use will not require any enlargement nor
alteration of the structure occupied by the proposed use; and
            3.   The parking requirements in effect at the time of the change
for the proposed use are satisfied.
         (b)   Once changed, said nonconforming use may not be reestablished.
      (3)   The change of a nonconforming use housed in a nonconforming
structure to a conforming use shall not extend the termination date of the
nonconforming structure as provided in this subchapter, nor in any subsequently
adopted ordinance or regulation.
      (4)   The right to maintain a nonconforming use shall terminate if such
use is discontinued for a period of 120 consecutive days or more.
(Ord. 393-C.S., passed 5-18-93; Am. Ord. 687, passed 3-7-23)
§ 153.422 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   The following shall apply to all nonconforming structures existing at the
effective date of this subchapter, or at the effective date of any subsequently
adopted ordinance or regulation unless said ordinance or regulation expressly
provides otherwise.
   (A)   Any nonconforming residential structure in any residential zone may be
continued and maintained, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter,
provided there is no physical change in the structure except for such repairs
and maintenance as may be necessary for the structural integrity and safety of
the structure, or as may be required by law, the applicability of which shall
be determined by the Community Development Director, and which do not enlarge
the structure, and further provided:
      (1)   In the event of involuntary destruction of a nonconforming
residential structure in a residential zone, the cost of reconstruction at the
time of the involuntary destruction does not exceed 50% of the cost of
replacing the entire structure, as determined by division (D)(6) of this
section, except as provided in divisions (A)(2) and (3) below.
      (2)   In the event of involuntary destruction of a nonconforming
residential structure as set out in division (A)(1) above, the structure may be
rebuilt if the owner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Community
Development Director the following:
         (a)   Rebuilding will not enlarge the size of the structure nor
increase the extent of non- conformance;
         (b)   The rebuilt structure will be appropriate to the site and be
compatible with existing structures in the neighborhood; and
         (c)   The structure was properly maintained, as required by health,
safety and building codes and other titles of this code and ordinances,
immediately prior to the destruction.
      (3)   Nonconforming residential structures located in the R-1 and R-1A
Zones involuntarily destroyed in whole or in part shall be exempt from the
provisions of this subchapter, except that reconstruction or repair shall not
increase the size nor alter the configuration of the nonconforming structure,
nor increase the extent of any nonconformity.
      (4)   In no case shall a nonconforming residential structure located in
the R-1 or R-1A Zones involuntarily destroyed in whole or in part be required
to comply with the requirements of
§§ 153.035 et seq.
      (5)   In no case shall the passage of time, in and of itself, cause the
termination of any nonconforming residential structure in any multi-residential
zone including, but not limited to, R-2 and R-3 Zones, unless the City Council
shall make a subsequent determination to the contrary.
      (6)   Any part of a structure housing a nonconforming use which is
changed to or replaced by a conforming use shall not thereafter be used nor
occupied by any nonconforming use.
   (B)   Nonconforming nonresidential structures in any residential zone may be
continued and maintained, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, and
provided there is no physical change to the structure except for such repair
and maintenance as may be required for the structural integrity of the
structure, or as may be required by law as determined by the Community
Development Director, and which do not enlarge the structure; and further
provided:
      (1)   The entire structure does not remain unoccupied for six consecutive
months or more.
      (2)   In the event of involuntary destruction of the structure, the cost
of reconstruction does not exceed 50% of the cost of replacing the entire
structure, pursuant to division (D)(6) of this section.
      (3)   Any part of the structure occupied by a nonconforming use which is
changed to or replaced by a conforming use shall not thereafter be used by a
nonconforming use.
      (4)   In addition to the causes of termination set out in divisions (B)
(1) and (2) of this section, a nonconforming non-residential structure in any
residential zone shall be altered and converted to a conforming structure, or
completely removed, when such structure has reached the age of 40 years,
computed from the date the building was erected.
   (C)   Nonconforming structures in nonresidential zones may be continued and
maintained except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, and provided there
is no physical change in the structure except for such repairs and maintenance
as may be necessary for the structural integrity and safety of the structure,
or as may be required by law, the applicability of which shall be determined by
the Community Development Director, and which do not enlarge the structure; and
further provided:
      (1)   Any nonconforming structure in a nonresidential zone shall
terminate if the entire structure is unoccupied for six consecutive months.
      (2)   In the event of involuntary destruction, the nonconforming
structure shall terminate if the cost of reconstruction at the time of the
involuntary destruction exceeds 50% of the cost of replacing the entire
structure, pursuant to division (D)(6) of this section.
      (3)   Any legal nonconforming status of a structure shall terminate if
there is physical deterioration of the structure requiring more than ordinary
repair as may be necessary for structural integrity or safety as determined by
the Community Development Director.
   (D)   General provisions which shall apply to any nonconforming structure in
any zone, unless specifically excluded by other provisions of this subchapter,
shall include:
      (1)   Any structure or part of a structure occupied by a nonconforming
use which is changed to or replaced by a conforming use shall not thereafter be
used or occupied by a nonconforming use.
      (2)   When a single project including, but not limited to, an apartment
project, shopping center or mall, consists of two or more separate buildings or
structures located on one or more lots, the nonconformity of any one building
pursuant to this subchapter shall be considered the nonconformity of that
entire single project and the entire project shall be governed by the
applicable provisions of this subchapter.
      (3)   Any reconstruction, maintenance, repair or alteration authorized or
permitted by this subchapter to any nonconforming structure must comply with
all other applicable requirements of this code at the time such work is
performed, and the extent of nonconformity may not be intensified nor any other
changes made in the size or configuration of the structure, except as
specifically provided in this subchapter.
      (4)   Any nonconforming structure shall terminate if there is physical
change to the structure other than such repairs as may be necessary to maintain
the structural integrity or safety of the structure, but do not enlarge,
increase the floor area or materially alter the structure, and such alterations
as may be required by law, the applicability of which shall be determined by
the Community Development Director.
      (5)   Any nonconforming structure involuntarily destroyed that is
permitted to be reconstructed or repaired pursuant to this subchapter, shall
have such reconstruction or repair started within one year from the date of
damage and shall be diligently pursued to completion. Otherwise the legal
nonconforming status of the structure shall be lost.
      (6)   Whenever a determination of the cost of replacing a structure or
the cost of reconstruction is required to be made, that determination shall be
made by the Community Development Director based on a current appraisal of the
structure, provided at the owner's expense, by a California licensed and
certified appraiser.
      (7)   Repair or reconstruction of a damaged nonconforming structure shall
not extend the specified termination date of the structure, nor of the use it
housed.
      (8)   A nonconforming structure may be remodeled provided:
         (a)   There is no increase in the total size, the height or the
useable floor area of the structure;
         (b)   There is no increase in the extent of nonconformity; and
         (c)   There is no new nonconformity created.
   (F)   Exemptions to the requirements of this subchapter shall apply to
structures that are:
      (1)   Public utility structures so long as said structures are directly
involved in providing public utility services; or
      (2)   A structure made nonconforming solely by reason of a dedication to
or acquisition by the city or other government agency, directly or by eminent
domain, for a public purpose.
(Ord. 393-C.S., passed 5-18-93; Am. Ord. 687, passed 3-7-23)
§ 153.423 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   The following shall apply to all nonconforming lots existing at the
effective date of this subchapter or at the effective date of any subsequently
adopted ordinance or regulation, unless said ordinance or regulation expressly
provides otherwise.
   (A)   Any improved nonconforming lot may not be further developed with any
additional structure. Any existing structures on a nonconforming lot shall be
considered a nonconforming structure and be subject to the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Any legally existing nonconforming lot in the R-1 and R-1A Zones are
exempt from the provisions of this subchapter, except as may be otherwise
provided for in this subchapter.
   (C)   Exemptions to the requirements of this subchapter shall apply to lots
that are:
      (1)   Public utility lots so long as said lots are directly involved in
providing public utility service;
      (2)   A lot made nonconforming solely by reason of a dedication to or
acquisition by the city or other government agency, directly or by eminent
domain, for a public purpose; or
      (3)   An undeveloped lot which was lawfully created but by reason of any
subsequently adopted ordinance or regulation does not now conform to the
provisions of this code applicable to the zone in which the lot is situated.
(Ord. 393-C.S., passed 5-18-93)
§ 153.424 NOTIFICATION OF TERMINATION AND APPEAL.
   (A)   Notification to the owner of record of any nonconforming use,
structure or lot subject to termination pursuant to this subchapter shall be
provided in writing by the Community Development Department, served by
certified, return receipt first class mail, of the pending termination. The
notification shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The location of the nonconforming use, structure or lot including
street address and assessor's parcel number;
      (2)   The section of this code requiring the termination;
      (3)   The effective date of said termination; and
      (4)   The process of appeal of said termination.
   (B)   The owner of the nonconforming use, structure or lot may appeal the
proposed termination pursuant to the following administrative procedure:
      (1)   Within 30 calendar days of service of the notification of the
proposed termination the owner or other person with an interest in the property
may file a written appeal to the Community Development Director. The request
shall state all reasons, including but not limited to alleged abridgements of
the appellant's constitutional rights, and why the termination should not be
made effective.
      (2)   Within 30 calendar days of service of said appeal the Community
Development Director shall meet with the owner and/or his/her representative to
discuss the termination and the appeal. No later than ten calendar days
following the meeting the Community Development Director shall provide written
notice of his/her decision to the owner.
      (3)   No later than 15 days of service of said written decision by the
Community Development Director, the owner may appeal the decision to the City
Council by submitting a written notification of the appeal to the City Clerk
and paying an appeal fee as established from time to time by resolution of the
City Council.
      (4)   No later than 45 days from the receipt of the appeal, the City
Clerk shall place the appeal on the City Council's agenda and shall cause
notice of said appeal to be published once.
      (5)   The City Council shall hear the appeal at a regular meeting of the
council. Based on the merits of the case, the City Council shall render a
written decision with findings of fact and said decision shall be considered
final. The city shall take no action toward termination of a nonconforming use,
structure or lot pending any appeal action.
   (C)   Notwithstanding procedures provided for in this section, nothing shall
prohibit the owner of a nonconforming use from requesting relief from action as
provided for by this subchapter.
(Ord. 393-C.S., passed 5-18-93)
§ 153.425 REQUEST FOR RELIEF.
   In addition to any other provisions of this subchapter, the following
provisions for relief are available to owners of nonconforming uses, structures
or lots:
   (A)   Any owner of a nonconforming use subject to termination under the
provisions of this subchapter may apply to the Planning Commission for a
conditional use permit and/or a variance, as applicable.
   (B)   Any owner of a nonconforming structure subject to termination under
provisions of this subchapter may apply to the Planning Commission for a
variance.
   (C)   Any owner of a nonconforming lot unable to comply with the provisions
of this subchapter may apply to the Planning Commission for a variance.
(Ord. 393-C.S., passed 5-18-93)
§ 153.426 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Community Development Director shall be responsible for enforcement of
this subchapter. Actions of the Department shall include, but not be limited to
the following:
   (A)   The business license of a nonconforming use subject to termination
shall be revoked as provided for in Chapter 110 of this code;
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for a nonconforming structure nor a
nonconforming lot subject to termination;
   (C)   Such actions for public nuisance abatement as may be provided for in
Chapter 98 of this code; or
   (D)   Such code enforcement actions as may be provided for in this code.
(Ord. 393-C.S., passed 5-18-93)
§ 153.427 AMORTIZATION AND DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING MASSAGE
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   The provisions of §§
153.420 through
153.426 above shall apply to the amortization and discontinuance of
nonconforming massage establishments, except to the extent they are modified by
the provisions of this section.
   (A)   All massage establishments which have a valid certificate of operation
under
Chapter 122 of this Code prior to January 20, 2015 shall be required to have
applied for a conditional use permit no later than January 20, 2018. Any change
to the approved floor plans during this time period shall require written
approval from the Community Development Department prior to such change.
   (B)   Any massage establishment in operation on January 20, 2015 which had a
conditional use permit prior to the adoption of Ordinance 591-C.S. on September
20, 2011 need not obtain a new conditional use permit and such conditional use
permit shall be considered valid. However, all such businesses shall be
required to immediately comply with the provisions of
Chapter 122 of this Code as amended.
   (C)   Discontinuation of use. A nonconforming massage establishment use
shall terminate if it is discontinued for a period of 90 consecutive days.
(Ord. 618-C.S., passed 1-20-15; Am. Ord. 619-C.S., passed 4-21-15)
MINOR MODIFICATIONS
§ 153.440 MINOR MODIFICATIONS–AUTHORITY TO APPROVE.
   (A)   The Community Development Director shall have the authority to grant,
subject to appeals to the City Council, modifications as follows:
      (1)   Modifications of the rear yard, side yard, lot coverage, floor area
ratio, driveway, or parking stall size as may be necessary to secure an
appropriate improvement of a lot to prevent unreasonable hardship or to promote
uniformity of appearance, provided such modifications do not exceed a 20%
variation, or 10% variations for properties located within the R-1 Zone, from
existing regulations;
      (2)   Modifications of fence, wall, hedge, sign, swimming pool, and
storage regulations, including vehicles, boats, trailers, and campers, as may
be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement or use of a lot, provided
that such modifications do not exceed a 20% variation from existing
regulations;
      (3)   Reduction of other than ADA-required accessible parking by two
spaces; but
         (a)   Not to exceed 10% of the total parking requirement; and
         (b)   Not to be used in combination with any other variance or
exception or development standard modification to the parking requirements; and
         (c)   Not to be used to reduce the number of spaces required when new
buildings or new parking areas are being constructed.
      (4)   Any other modification authorized by the San Gabriel Municipal Code
pursuant to these provisions.
   (B)   The Community Development Director may, in his or her discretion,
refer to the Planning Commission any application for a modification for the
decision of the Planning Commission without further fee to the applicant.
   (C)   All acts performed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall
be construed as administrative acts performed for the purpose of assuring that
the intent and purposes of this chapter shall apply in special cases and shall
not be construed as amendments to the provisions of this chapter or to the map
adopted by the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02; Am. Ord. 535-C.S., passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 589
C.S., passed 2-1-11; Am. Ord. 639-C.S., passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord. 638-C.S.,
passed 10-17-17)
§ 153.441 APPLICATIONS; FEES.
   (A)   Form. Applications for modifications shall be made in writing to the
Community Development Department in such form as approved by the Department.
The city shall develop a Development Application Checklist which shall specify
all information required to be provided by the applicant in order for such
application to be considered complete. Applications filed pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be numbered consecutively in the order of
their filing, and copies of all notices and actions pertaining to the
application shall be attached thereto.
   (B)   Supplementary information. Applications for modifications shall be
accompanied by the following:
      (1)   A reference to the provisions of this chapter from which such
property is sought to be excepted; and
      (2)   Written consent to the modification from all property owners
abutting the property and within 65 feet of the property, regardless of whether
such property actually abuts the property which is the subject of the
modification, or a statement indicating which property owners refused to
provide such consent and the reasons therefor if known. Written consent from
all property owners shall only be a factor to be considered and does not divest
the Community Development Director, the Planning Commission, or the City
Council of the discretion to deny a minor modification application.
   (C)   Fees. A fee shall be paid to the city upon the filing of each
application for the purpose of defraying the expenditures incidental to the
proceedings set forth in this subchapter in an amount established by the City
Council, from time to time, by resolution.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1904) (Ord. 933, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 250-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - -; Am. Ord. 526-
C.S., passed 7-16-02)
§ 153.442 HEARING; NOTICE.
   If the applicant has been unable to obtain the consent of all property
owners as specified in § 143.441(B)(3) above, the Community Development
Director shall hold a hearing on the application. Such hearing shall be held
not less than ten days nor more than 40 days after submittal of a complete
application. Not less than ten days before the date of such hearing, notice
shall be given by mailing, postage prepaid, to the owners of all property
abutting and within 65 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1905) (Ord. 933, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-
02)
§ 153.443 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATIONS.
   The Community Development Director shall cause to be made such
investigations of the facts bearing upon such applications as will serve to
provide all the necessary information to assure that the action on each such
application is consistent with the intent of the provisions of this subchapter
and with previous amendments, variances, and modifications.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1906) (Ord. 933, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-
02)
§ 153.444 APPEALS FROM DECISION OF DIRECTOR.
   Appeals from decisions of the Community Development Director shall be made
in writing directly to the City Council in the time and manner specified in
§ 153.004.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1907) (Ord. 933, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-
02)
§ 153.445 DECISION ON MODIFICATION TO BE FINAL PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   No permit or license shall be issued for any use or construction involved in
an application for a modification until the decision on such application shall
have become final by reason of the expiration of the time to make an appeal.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1908) (Ord. 933, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-
02)
§ 153.446 VOIDING OF MODIFICATION.
   If for a period of six months any use or construction authorized by any
modification is, or has been, unused, abandoned, or discontinued, or the
conditions have not been complied with, such modification shall become null and
void and of no effect.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1909) (Ord. 933, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-
02)
§ 153.447 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   An extension of time for any modification maybe granted by the Community
Development Director upon the written request of an interested person filed
with the Community Development Department prior to the expiration of such six
months period. Such request shall set forth the reasons, supported by factual
data, why the modification has been unused, abandoned, or discontinued, or the
conditions not complied with. No extension of time for any modification shall
be granted unless the Director finds the facts to be substantially as set forth
and to constitute justifiable cause for such extension. If the original
modification was granted after an appeal to the City Council, then the City
Council shall consider the request for an extension. A fee shall be paid to the
city upon the filing of each request for an extension in an amount established
by the City Council from time to time by resolution, for the purpose of
defraying the expenditures incidental to the proceedings set forth in this
subchapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.1910) (Ord. 933, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 7-16-02)
DENSITY BONUS
§ 153.450 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide incentives for the production
of housing for very low income, low income, moderate income, and senior
households in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65915 - 65918 (i.e., state
density bonus law). In enacting this subchapter, it is the intent of the city
to facilitate the development of affordable housing and to implement the goals,
objectives, and policies of the Housing Element of the city's General Plan.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.451 DEFINITIONS.
   All terms used in this subchapter shall have the meanings established by
state density bonus law. Where terms are not defined by state density bonus
law, definitions in this Zoning Code shall apply.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT. An agreement between the applicant and the
city guaranteeing the affordability of rental or ownership units to very low,
low, or moderate-income households in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   APPROVING BODY. The person, commission or the City Council approving the
housing development to which the density bonus request is a part. Where there
is an appeal, the APPROVING BODY shall mean the commission or the City Council
that is hearing the appeal.
   BELOW MARKET RATE UNIT. A dwelling unit within a housing development
reserved for sale or rent at an affordable housing cost to very low, low, or
moderate-income households.
   INCENTIVE OR CONCESSION.
      (1)   A reduction in site development standards or a modification of
zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the
minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards
Commission as provided in the Cal. Health and Safety Code, Part 2.5 (commencing
with § 18901) of Division 13 including, but not limited to, a reduction in
setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking
spaces that would otherwise be required that results in identifiable and actual
cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in §
50052.5 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the units that
qualified the applicant for the density bonus award;
      (2)   Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing
project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the
cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or
other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or
planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be
located; or
      (3)   Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the
developer or the city that result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to
provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in § 50052.5 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the units that qualified the applicant
for the density bonus award.
   STATE DENSITY BONUS LAW. Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65915 et seq., as the same may
be renumbered or amended from time to time.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.452 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The granting of a density bonus, incentive(s) or concession(s), as
provided for in this subchapter, shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to
require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary
approval.
   (B)   The request for a density bonus and proposals for incentives/
concessions or waivers/ modifications of development standards shall be made in
writing at the time of filing the housing development application and shall be
processed in conjunction with the underlying application, and shall be
accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council. The information required to be submitted in the application shall be
set forth on a checklist provided by the Community Development Department.
   (C)   When multiple projects are being considered together for a density
bonus, the projects shall be submitted as one application.
   (D)   If the applicant requests a meeting with the city to discuss the
proposal, the Community Development Director or his or her designee shall meet
with the applicant within 21 working days of receipt of such request. The
meeting shall be for information purposes only and the proposal shall still be
acted upon in conjunction with the underlying housing development application.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.453 DENSITY BONUS.
   The city shall grant a density bonus and/or incentives or concessions,
waivers or reductions of development standards, and/or parking ratios as
described in state density bonus law to a qualifying project pursuant to state
density bonus law.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.454 INCENTIVES AND CONCESSIONS.
   (A)   An applicant for a density bonus shall be granted the incentive(s) or
concession(s) requested by the applicant unless the approving body makes a
written finding required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(d)(1).
   (B)   The applicant shall be entitled to receive the number of incentives or
concessions as provided by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(d)(2).
   (C)   This section does not limit or require the provision of direct
financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of
publicly owned land, by the city, or the waiver of fees or dedication
requirements. However, if the city does provide a direct financial contribution
through participation in cost of infrastructure, write-down of land costs, or
subsidizing the cost of construction, the applicant shall be required to enter
into an affordable housing agreement for 30 years.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17; Am. Ord.
690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.455 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The city shall not apply any development standard that will have the effect
of precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria described
in state density bonus law at the densities or with the concessions or
incentives permitted by this subchapter unless it makes one or more of the
findings required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(e)(1).
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.456 AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT.
   (A)   An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall ensure, continued
affordability of all below market rate units that qualified the applicant for
the density bonus award for the amount of time required by state density bonus
law.
   (B)   An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall ensure that, the
initial occupant of all for-sale units that qualified the applicant for the
award of the density bonus are persons and families of very low, low, or
moderate income, as required, and that the units are offered at an affordable
housing cost. The city shall enforce an equity sharing agreement required
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(c)(2) unless it conflicts with the
requirements of another public funding source or law.
   (C)   Affordability shall be ensured by requiring that the applicant enter
into an affordable housing agreement which shall be approved by the City
Attorney's office, shall be recorded and shall run with the land.
   (D)   When land is donated pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(9) an
affordable housing agreement shall be required for the transferred land and for
any very low-income rate units built on such land; the period of time during
which the below market rate units are required to remain affordable shall be in
accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(g)(2)(E).
   (E)   If the applicant has received a density bonus or incentive for
providing a childcare facility pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(h), the
childcare facility shall comply with the requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code §
65915(h)(2) as conditions of approval, which shall also be included in the
affordable housing agreement.
   (F)   The owner of the property shall be required to pay the city an annual
fee based on the actual hours incurred by staff in monitoring the compliance
with the terms of the affordable housing agreement. The fee shall be in an
amount established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.457 LOCATION/QUALITY OF BELOW MARKET RATE UNITS.
   (A)   The density bonus units shall be permitted in geographic areas of the
housing development as described by state density bonus law.
   (B)   Unit types shall be located so as not to create a geographic
concentration of below market rate units within the residential development.
   (C)   Below market rate units shall be consistent with the standards for
inclusionary units provided for in §
153.453.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.458 PARKING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Upon request of the developer of a housing development qualifying for
a density bonus pursuant to this subchapter, the city shall permit vehicular
parking ratios, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, consistent with
state density bonus law.
   (B)   An applicant may request additional parking incentives or concessions
beyond those provided in this section.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.459 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS.
   (A)   Applicants applying for a conversion of apartments to a condominium
project shall be eligible for a density bonus or any incentives or concessions
pursuant to this subchapter only if the requirements related to replacement of
existing very low- or low-income units in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(c)(3) are
complied with.
   (B)   An applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium
project may submit a preliminary proposal to the Community Development
Department prior to the submittal of any formal requests for subdivision map
approvals. The city shall, within 90 days of receipt of a written proposal,
notify the applicant in writing of the manner in which this section shall be
applied to the project.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to
approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.460 APPEALS.
   Any appeal relating to any issue regarding density bonuses, including but
not limited to incentives, concessions, or waivers/modifications of development
standards, shall be handled in the same manner as an appeal for the underlying
housing development.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.461 APPLICATION OF CEQA.
   Any housing development application requesting a density bonus, incentive/
concession or waiver/ modification shall be subject to CEQA.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06; Am. Ord. 690, passed 7-18-23)
§ 153.462 APPLICATION OF CEQA.
   Any housing development application requesting a density bonus, incentive/
concession or waiver/ modification shall be subject to CEQA.
(Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06)
AMENDMENTS
§ 153.470 AUTHORIZATION.
   The Council may, from time to time, after a report thereon by the Commission
and after public hearings as required by law, amend, supplement, or change the
regulations and zones established by the provisions of this chapter. An
amendment, supplement, or change may be initiated by the Council, the
Commission, or by petitions of property owners or contract purchasers in
escrow.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2001) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-
06)
§ 153.471 FILING OF APPLICATIONS.
   Whenever the owner of any improved or vacant land or building desires a
reclassification of his property, he shall present to the Community Development
Department an application, duly signed and acknowledged by him, requesting an
amendment, supplement, or change of the regulations prescribed for such
property.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2002) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-
06)
§ 153.472 FEE.
   At the time of filing any such application for a change in the regulations
prescribed in this chapter, a uniform fee in an amount established by the City
Council, from time to time, by resolution, shall be charged to cover the costs
of making maps, sending notices, and other administrative expenses incidental
to the proceedings set forth in this subchapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2003) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 197-C.S., passed - - ;
Am. Ord. 250-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 548-
C.S., passed 8-15-06)
§ 153.473 COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS.
   The Commission shall hold such hearings as may be required by law for
amendments, extensions, or additions to the Zoning Map of the city, for
recommendations upon the boundaries of the zones to be changed, and on such
other matters as may be related to such application and shall take final action
upon the application within 90 days after the filing thereof.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2004) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-
06)
§ 153.474 COUNCIL DECISIONS.
   The Council, after the receipt of the report and recommendation from the
Commission, shall hold a public hearing on the application for a change in the
regulations prescribed in this chapter, duly noticed as required by Cal. Gov't
Code §§ 65854, 65090, and 65091.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2005) (Ord. 556, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 790, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06)
§ 153.475 GENERAL PLAN.
   The Council, from time to time, may amend, supplement, or change the General
Plan in accordance with the procedures pertinent to the amendment, supplement,
or change in the zoning regulations or zones as set forth in this subchapter;
provided, however, the procedures set forth in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65350 et
seq., shall be applicable; and further provided at the time of filing any
application for a change in the General Plan, a uniform fee in an amount
established by the City Council, from time to time, by resolution, is paid to
the city to cover the costs of making maps, sending notices, and other
administrative expenses incidental to the proceedings set forth in this
subchapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2006) (Ord. 250-C.S., passed - - ; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 548-C.S., passed 8-15-06)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.480 ENFORCEMENT BY THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   It shall be the duty of the Community Development Director to enforce the
provisions of this chapter pertaining to the erection, construction,
reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration, or addition to any building or
structure.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2101) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.481 ENFORCEMENT BY ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.
   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk and all officials charged with the
issuance of licenses to enforce the provisions of this chapter pertaining to
the use of land or buildings for which any license is required by any other law
of the city.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2102) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.482 ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE OFFICERS.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Chief and all officers charged with the
enforcement of the law to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2103) (Ord. 556, passed - - )
§ 153.483 VIOLATIONS; DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.
   Any building or structure set up, erected, built, moved, or maintained and/
or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be
unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney shall, upon order of the
Council, immediately commence actions or proceedings for the abatement,
removal, and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take
such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to
grant such relief as will abate and remove such building, structure, or use and
restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting, building, moving, or
maintaining any such building or structure or using any property contrary to
the provisions of this chapter.
('65 Code, § 9-3.2104) (Ord. 556, passed - - ) Penalty, see
§ 153.999
§ 153.484 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION–PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of §§
153.484 through
153.490 is to provide a formal procedure for persons with disabilities seeking
equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California
Fair Employment and Housing Act (the “Acts”) to request reasonable
accommodation in the application of the city’s land use regulations and to
establish relevant criteria to be used when considering such requests.
   (B)   Sections
153.484 through
153.490 are intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled
under the Acts.
   (C)   Sections
153.484 through
153.490 are intended to provide for minor structural modifications and/or
regulatory exceptions. Nothing in these sections shall be interpreted to
require the city to waiver or reduce development or building fees associated
with the granting of a reasonable accommodation request.
(Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11)
§ 153.485 SAME–APPLICABILITY.
   A request for reasonable accommodations may be made by any person with a
disability, their representative, or any entity, when the application of a
zoning law or other land use regulation, policy, or practice acts as a barrier
to fair housing opportunities.
(Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11)
§ 153.486 SAME–ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Requesting reasonable accommodation. A disabled person (or his or her
representative) who requests a reasonable accommodation in the form of a
modification in the application of a zoning requirement or prohibition that
might otherwise act as a barrier to fair housing opportunities due to the
disability of the applicant may do so by submitting a letter to the Community
Development Director and paying any fees. The letter shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, address, telephone number, and e-mail
address;
      (2)   Address of the property for which the request is being made;
      (3)   The current actual use of the property;
      (4)   The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled
under the Acts;
      (5)   The zoning code provision, regulation, or policy from which
reasonable accommodation is being requested;
      (6)   Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific
property accessible to the individual.
   (B)   If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable
accommodation, the Community Development Director will make every effort to
provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to
the applicant.
   (C)   If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is
being made also requires some other discretionary approval (including, but not
limited to, a conditional use permit, design review, general plan amendment,
zoning change, annexation, and the like), then the applicant shall file the
information required by this section together for concurrent review with the
application for discretionary approval.
(Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11)
§ 153.487 SAME–REVIEW AND DETERMINATION.
   (A)   The Community Development Director shall have the authority to
consider and act on requests for reasonable accommodation. The Director may
approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request. Approvals are subject to the
applicant agreeing to comply with all other applicable zoning or building
regulations. The determination shall be made in writing. The determination
shall be based on the ability to make the required findings as set forth below.
   (B)   Rather than act on a request for reasonable accommodation, the
Community Development Director may refer the application to the Planning
Commission for consideration. The Planning Commission may approve,
conditionally approve, or deny a request. Approvals are subject to the
applicant agreeing to comply with all other applicable zoning or building
regulations. If the matter is referred to the Planning Commission, notice for a
public hearing shall be given as required by §
153.264 of this code. The determination shall be based on the ability to make
the required findings as set forth below.
   (C)   Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review
with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the
authority reviewing the discretionary land use application. The written
determination on whether to grant or deny the request for reasonable
accommodation shall be made by the authority responsible for reviewing the
discretionary land use application in compliance with the applicable review
procedure for the discretionary review. The determination shall be based on the
ability to make the required findings as set forth below.
(Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11)
§ 153.488 SAME–REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   (A)   The following findings must be analyzed, made and adopted before any
action is taken to approve, conditionally approve or deny a request for
reasonable accommodation, and must be incorporated into the record of the
proceeding relating to approval, conditional approval or denial:
      (1)   The housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by a
person with a disability as defined under the Acts:
      (2)   The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make
specific housing available to a person with a disability as defined under the
Acts;
      (3)   The requested reasonable accommodation would not impose an undue
financial or administrative burden on the city;
      (4)   The reasonable accommodation would not require a fundamental
alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to
land use and zoning;
      (5)   The impact on surrounding uses does not negatively impact the
public health, safety, and welfare;
      (6)   The physical attributes of and any proposed changes to the subject
property and structures are necessary and appropriate;
      (7)   There are no alternative reasonable accommodations which may
provide an equivalent level of benefit and greater adherence to the Code;
      (8)   The reasonable accommodation would not result in a concentration of
uses not otherwise allowed in a residential neighborhood, to the detriment of
the residential character of that neighborhood.
(Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11)
§ 153.489 SAME–CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing
authority may impose any conditions of or for approval deemed reasonable and
necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the
findings required by §
153.488.
   (B)   Conditions may be imposed to ensure that any removable structures or
physical design features that are constructed or installed in association with
the reasonable accommodation be removed once those structures or physical
design features are unnecessary to provide access to the dwelling unit for the
current occupants.
   (C)   Any approval or conditional approval of an application under §§
153.484 through
153.490 may be conditioned to provide for its rescission or automatic
expiration under appropriate circumstances.
(Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11)
§ 153.490 SAME–APPEALS.
   The decision of the Community Development Director or the Planning
Commission may be appealed as set forth in §
153.004.
(Ord. 590-C.S., passed 3-1-11)
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
§ 153.500 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MICROWAVE ANTENNA. Any device with a function of receiving or transmitting
microwave signals.
   MONO-POLE TOWER. Any tower consisting of a single structural pole on which
telecommunication sending or receiving devices are attached.
   RADIO TOWER. Any tower or pole on which devices are located to transmit or
receive radio broadcasts.
   SATELLITE DISH. Any device with a primary function of either receiving from
or sending a signal directly to a satellite in orbit.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT. Any equipment or device which serves
to receive or send signals without the direct use of wires or cables, or to
support such equipment or device, including, but not limited to microwave
antenna, satellite dishes, television and radio antennae which are larger than
two square meters in area. Antennae capable only of receiving UHF or VHF
signals are specifically precluded from this definition.
(Ord. 480-C.S., passed 6-3-97)
§ 153.501 PURPOSE FOR REGULATIONS.
   The City Council hereby finds that regulations and conditions for the
installation of wireless telecommunications equipment is necessary for the
following reasons:
   (A)   Towers and mono-poles inadequately installed or located in areas of
high concentrations of people may pose a safety threat to the public; and
   (B)   Without appropriate regulatory review, the city has no control over
the location of wireless telecommunication equipment to protect the public
health, safety and welfare; and
   (C)   Appropriate regulatory review is possible without undue burden on
access to telecommunication services.
(Ord. 480-C.S., passed 6-3-97)
§ 153.502 RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   (A)   Front Yard Prohibited. No wireless telecommunication equipment shall
be located in the front yard of any residentially zoned parcel in the city; nor
shall any telecommunication equipment be located on a building or roof facing
on the front yard of a residentially zoned parcel, unless such location is the
only feasible location from which signals can be received and a conditional use
permit has been first obtained. Satellite dishes and microwave antennae of one
meter or less in diameter shall be exempt from the general prohibition and
conditional use permit requirement of this section, unless necessary to
preserve an historic district listed or eligible for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places.
   (B)   Side Yard Prohibited. No wireless telecommunication equipment shall be
located in the side yard of any residentially zoned parcel in the city unless
said side yard is greater than 4.6 meters in width, inclusive of any driveway
located therein, unless such location is the only feasible location from which
signals can be received and a conditional use permit has been first obtained.
Satellite dishes and microwave antennae of one meter or less in diameter shall
be exempt from the general prohibition and conditional use permit requirement
of this section, unless necessary to preserve an historic district listed or
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.
   (C)   Rear Yard Restrictions.  
      (1)   Satellite dishes and microwave antennae of one meter or less in
diameter measured at its widest point, and one meter or less in height measured
from the dish or antenna mid-point to the adjoining grade shall be permitted to
be located on the ground not less than a distance equal to the height of the
dish or antenna from any property line.
      (2)   Satellite dishes and microwave antennae greater than one meter in
diameter measured at its widest point, or more than one meter in height
measured from the dish or antenna mid-point to the adjoining grade, shall be
permitted to be located on the ground not less than a distance equal to the
height of the dish or antennae from any property line, after having first
obtained a building and electrical permit from the city and paying a fee
therefor.
      (3)   All satellite dishes and microwave antenna greater than one meter
in diameter measured at its widest point proposed to be attached to the side or
rear of a building or upon the roof of any building, except in the front of the
building, shall be required to first apply for and receive approval from the
Design Review Commission and obtain a building and electrical permit from the
city and paying a fee therefor.
   (D)   No radio tower or mono-pole tower greater than four and one-half
meters in height shall be permitted in a residential zone without having first
obtained a conditional use permit from the city. The conditional use permit
application shall be in accordance with §§
153.241 through
153.248 of the Municipal Code.
   (E)   Amateur radio towers shall be permitted in the rear yard of
residentially zones properties after having obtained a conditional use permit.
Amateur radio antenna towers shall be limited to a total height of ten and one-
half meters, including any antennae attached thereto, and a maximum width of
three meters at any point.
(Ord. 480-C.S., passed 6-3-97)
§ 153.503 COMMERCIAL/MANUFACTURING ZONES.
   Wireless telecommunications equipment is permitted on commercial and
manufacturing zoned parcels (C-1, C-3, and M-1) subject to the following
conditions:
   (A)   Mono-pole towers and radio towers are permitted in commercial and
manufacturing zoned parcels provided the height does not exceed 21 meters above
the adjoining grade and a conditional use permit has first been obtained. Any
height greater than 21 meters shall require the issuance of a variance.
   (B)   Wireless communications equipment, microwave antennae and satellite
dishes greater than two meters in diameter are permitted on the roof of a
commercial building in a commercial or manufacturing zone upon payment of a fee
established by Council resolution. Unless a conditional use permit is first
obtained, the equipment must comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Wireless communications equipment, microwave antennae and satellite
dishes shall not be located closer then three meters to any side of the
building, unless attached to the building.
      (2)   Wireless communications equipment, microwave antennae and satellite
dishes shall not exceed two and one-half meters in height measured from the top
of the nearest exterior parapet wall.
      (3)   The total height of the equipment shall not exceed the maximum
height of structures permitted in the commercial and manufacturing zone in
which it is located.
      (4)   Wireless communications equipment, microwave antennae and satellite
dishes greater than two meters in diameter must be painted a color designed to
blend with the background. The proposed color shall be subject to the approval
of the Community Development Director, or his designee.
      (5)   The supporting structure of any wireless communications equipment,
microwave antennae and satellite dishes greater than two meters in diameter
shall be designed with tubular members with no diagonal bracing visible from
public view.
   (C)   Wireless communications equipment, microwave antennae and satellite
dishes greater than two meters in diameter are permitted on the side of a
commercial building in a commercial zone provided a conditional use permit has
first been obtained, and design approval has been granted by the Design Review
Commission. The following guidelines shall be considered in the review of such
applications:
      (1)   The equipment does not protrude into any required setbacks.
      (2)   The equipment is enclosed in a housing which architecturally blends
with the existing building.
      (3)   The location is not within a 100 meter radius of another wireless
communication equipment.
      (4)   No wireless telecommunication equipment shall be permitted to be
located on the ground of any commercial and manufacturing zoned parcels.
Satellite dishes and microwave antennae of two meters or less in diameter shall
be exempt from the general provisions of this section.
   (D)   Lighting designed to illuminate wireless telecommunications facility
or equipment is prohibited.
   (E)   Upon termination of use, the telecommunication equipment, facility or
tower must be removed within 30 calendar days of the termination of use.
   (F)   Certification that the wireless communication equipment, facility or
tower complies with Federal Communication Commission (FCC) guidelines regarding
all health and safety regulations shall be submitted to the city prior to
obtaining building permits.
   (G)   Certification that the applicant for wireless telecommunication
equipment, facility or tower is authorized to operate such equipment, facility
or tower from the California Public Utility Commission (PUC) and the Federal
Communication Commission (FCC), if authorization is legally required, shall be
presented with any application to the city for such equipment, facility or
tower.
(Ord. 480-C.S., passed 6-3-97)
§ 153.504 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   In addition to the conditions set forth in the aforementioned sections, the
following standards shall be considered, and appropriate conditions imposed, by
the approving body when conditional use permit is required.
   (A)   Could the tower cause damage to property if felled.
   (B)   Could the tower disrupt travel in a public right-of-way if felled.
   (C)   Does the tower contain sufficient support to meet engineering design
standards in effect at the time of installation.
   (E)   Does the tower create an undue negative impact on the visual
appearance of the neighborhood.
   (F)   Do the guide wires create a safety concern for adjoining properties or
public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 480-C.S., passed 6-3-97)
§ 153.505 SCHOOL PROPERTIES.
   All wireless telecommunication equipment, facilities and towers proposed to
be located on property owned by any public or private school shall be subject
to the requirements of
§ 153.503 of the Municipal Code.
(Ord. 480-C.S., passed 6-3-97)
§ 153.506 PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   All wireless telecommunication equipment, facilities and towers proposed to
be located on any property owned by the city or in any public right-of-way
within the city shall first obtain a permit or franchise as provided for
herein.
   (A)   An application shall be submitted and fee paid for as set by Council
resolution.
   (B)   The Design Review Commission may review, at City Council direction,
the proposed plans for the wireless telecommunication equipment, facility or
tower for its architectural compatibility and make a recommendation to the City
Council.
   (C)   The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
any application presented to it and may require a franchise if deemed
appropriate. The decision of the Council shall be final.
   (D)   A license fee and/or franchise fee for use of the public property or
right-of-way shall be set by the Council
(Ord. 480-C.S., passed 6-3-97)
CANNABIS PROHIBITION AND PERSONAL CULTIVATION REGULATIONS
§ 153.515 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the provisions of §§
153.515 through
153.523 is to expressly prohibit the establishment of commercial cannabis uses
in the city relating to medical cannabis and adult use cannabis and impose
reasonable regulations relating to personal cultivation in private residences
and accessory structures.
   (B)   The City Council finds that the prohibition on commercial cannabis
activity is necessary for the preservation of and protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare of the city. The prohibition of such uses is within
the authority conferred upon the City Council by state law and is an exercise
of its police powers to enact and enforce regulations for the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Ord. 642-C.S., passed 12-19-17)
§ 153.516 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   AUTHORIZED GROWER. A person 21 years and older who is authorized by, and in
compliance with, state law and the provisions of this subchapter relating to
the cultivation of cannabis for personal use.
   CANNABIS. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica,
or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated resin, whether crude or
purified, obtained from cannabis, and any product containing cannabis. CANNABIS
includes cannabis that is used for medical, non-medical, or other purposes.
CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from
the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized
seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. CANNABIS also does not
include industrial hemp, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §
11018.5.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY. The cultivation, possession, manufacture,
distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, packaging,
transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products for non-
medical, medical or any other purpose, and includes the activities of any
business licensed by the state or other government entity under Cal. Bus. &
Prof. Code, Div. 10 or any other provision of state law that regulates the
licensing of cannabis businesses.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS FACILITY. Any building, facility, use, establishment,
property, or location where any person or entity establishes, commences,
engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits another person or entity to
establish, commence, engage in, conduct, or carry on, any commercial cannabis
activity that requires a state license or nonprofit license under Cal. Business
and Professions Code §§ 26000 et seq. including, but not limited to cannabis
cultivation, cannabis distribution, cannabis transportation, cannabis storage,
manufacturing of cannabis products, cannabis processing, cannabis deliveries,
the sale of any cannabis products, and the operation of cannabis
microbusinesses.
   CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting,
drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
   DELIVERY. The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a
customer. DELIVERY also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer.
   FULLY ENCLOSED AND SECURE STRUCTURE. A space within a building that complies
with the California Building Code (“CBC”) as adopted by the City of San
Gabriel, or if exempt from the permit requirements of the CBC, a structure that
has a complete roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor
is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized
entry, and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors. Walls and
roofs must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken
through such as two-inch by four-inch nominal or thicker studs overlaid with
three-eighths inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent. Plastic sheeting,
regardless of the mil or inches, or similar products do not satisfy this
requirement. If skylights are used, security bars shall be added to the
skylights. The structure must provide complete visual screening.
   INDOORS. Within a fully enclosed and secure structure.
   MAUCRSA. The Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, as
codified in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code, Div. 10 (§§ 26000 et seq.) as the same may
be amended from time to time.
   MEDICINAL CANNABIS DELIVERY-ONLY RETAILER. A retailer of medicinal cannabis
by delivery only to a qualified patient for his or her personal medical use or
their primary caregiver in full compliance with Cal. Health & Safety Code §
11362.765.
   MEDICINAL CANNABIS OR MEDICAL CANNABIS. Cannabis used for medical purposes
where that medical use is deemed appropriate and has been recommended by a
physician who had determined that the person’s health would benefit from the
use of cannabis in the treatment of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS),
anorexia, arthritis, cancer, chronic pain, glaucoma, migraine, spasticity, or
any other serious medical condition for which cannabis is deemed to provide a
relief as defined in subsection (h) of Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11362.7.
   OUTDOORS. Any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure
structure.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited
liability company, collective, cooperative, non-profit, trust, estate,
association, club, receiver, syndicate, society, or other organization. The
term PERSON shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer
or salesperson.
   PRIMARY CAREGIVER. The meaning set forth in Cal. Health & Safety Code §
11362.5(e) and 11362.7(d).
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE. A house, apartment unit, condominium, mobile home, or
other similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence.
   QUALIFIED PATIENT. The meaning set forth in Cal. Health & Safety Code §
11362.7(f).
(Ord. 642-C.S., passed 12-19-17; Am. Ord. 702, passed 3-5-24)
§ 153.517 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   Commercial cannabis activities, whether or not for profit, are
expressly prohibited in all zones in the City of San Gabriel, including all
specific plan areas and overlay zones. No person shall establish, operate,
conduct, allow or engage in a commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the
city. This prohibition includes any type of business enterprise where cannabis
is complimentarily provided as part of any other non-cannabis related business
activity.
   (B)   A property owner shall not rent, lease, or otherwise permit any person
or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy real
property in the city. A property owner shall not allow any person or business
to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial cannabis
activity on any real property owner or controlled by that property owner that
is located in the city.
   (C)    No person shall conduct any deliveries that originate within the
city, but the city shall not prohibit the use of city streets or deliveries
that terminate within the jurisdictional limits of the city, except for
delivery-only medicinal cannabis retailers in compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   This section is meant to prohibit all activities for which a state
license is required pursuant to the MAUCRSA. Accordingly, the city shall not
issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any activity for which a
state license is required under the AUMA, including any local license to a non-
profit entity pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 26070.5.
   (E)   Except as provided in §
153.519, all cultivation of cannabis is expressly prohibited in all zones in
the City of San Gabriel.
(Ord. 642-C.S., passed 12-19-17; Am. Ord. 702, passed 3-5-24)
§ 153.518 MEDICINAL CANNABIS DELIVERY-ONLY RETAILER.
   (A)   Conditional use permit. A conditional use permit issued pursuant to §
153.204 through §
153.248 for a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer must include, as
conditions of approval, the operational standards set forth in this section. In
addition, the conditional use permit must incorporate by reference an
Operations Plan approved by the Police Chief, that implements not only the
operations standards set forth in this section, but such additional conditions
that the Police Chief finds reasonably necessary to implement the purpose of
this title when considering the location and size of the proposed medicinal
cannabis delivery-only retailer.
   (B)   Delivery-only. No storefront operations (no walk-in customers).
   (C)   Distance requirements.
      (1)   Not within 600 feet of a school, park, licensed daycare facility,
youth center, or licensed drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility; or
      (2)   Within 1,000 feet of any parcel where another medicinal cannabis
delivery-only retailer is operating.
      (3)   Delivery must be to a legal physical property address.
   (D)   Sunset clause; automatic repeal. This section is adopted pursuant to
the legal mandate imposed by Cal. Business and Professions Code § 26320. As set
forth in this section, the regulations in this chapter will be automatically
repealed without additional action by the City Council should Business and
Professions Code § 26322 be repealed by the California legislature or be
invalidated by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   Responsibility for compliance. The owners and operators of a medicinal
cannabis delivery-only retailer, together with any person listed as the
permittee or applicant on the medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer
application, are responsible for ensuring that the medicinal cannabis delivery-
only retailer is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with the
applicable law.
   (F)   Required permits to operate. It is unlawful for any person to engage
in or operate a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer in the city unless
the person:
      (1)   Has a valid medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit from
the city; and
      (2)   Is in compliance with all applicable law governing the medicinal
cannabis delivery-only retailer, including the duty to obtain and maintain any
required state license(s).
   (G)   Suspension or termination of delivery privileges. A medicinal cannabis
delivery-only retailer permitted pursuant to this chapter may have its delivery
privileges suspended or terminated by the City Manager, or designee, if the
medicinal cannabis delivery- only retailer is found to have violated this
chapter.
   (H)   Applications.
      (1)   Medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit applications must
be made on a form approved by the City Manager, or designee, and accompanied by
all information requested on the application.
      (2)   Each application must be accompanied by an application fee, the
amount of which will be set by City Council resolution. Any application fee is
in addition to any permit fee separately established by City Council
resolution.
      (3)   The application must identify the address of the location where the
medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer is proposed to operate.
      (4)   No person may apply for medicinal cannabis delivery- only retailer
permit until and unless a conditional use permit issued pursuant to this code
authorizes a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer use at the subject
location. A conditional use permit is required in addition to, and separately
from, a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit required by this
chapter. Before an application for a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer
permit will be accepted by the city for processing, the applicant must provide,
on a form approved by the City Manager, or designee, proof that the owner of
the underlying property, or his/her/its authorized agent, authorized filing the
application for a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit at the
subject location. A copy of the conditional use permit authorizing a cannabis-
related used on the subject property must accompany the application for a
medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit. Only one application per
parcel will be accepted and processed by the city at a given time. If an
application for a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit is denied, a
subsequent application for a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit
on the same parcel may be accepted by the city only after one year following
the denial is final and all available administrative and judicial remedies are
exhausted.
      (5)   Completed applications must be submitted to the City Manager or
designee. Only complete applications will be considered. An application is
complete if it is submitted with all the information requested therein,
together with full payment of the application fee. Applications will be
considered in the order they are received. The city may require supplemental
information from any applicant before deeming an application complete. Such
information must be provided to the City Manager, or designee, within seven
business days. Failure to provide the information results in the application
losing its priority in the queue and will not be considered “received” until
the date that all requested supplemental information is provided to the City
Manager, or designee.
      (6)   The City Council may, by resolution, establish minimum threshold
qualifications for all medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit
applications including without limitation, qualifications relating to previous
relevant business experience, criminal history, minimum liquid assets, and/or
net worth. Every application for a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer
permit must be accompanied by credible evidence demonstrating that the
applicant meets or exceeds each of the threshold requirements
established by the City Council.
   (I)   Expiration. Each medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit
issued pursuant to this chapter must be activated within 30 days after the city
approves the medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit. Activation
occurs when the permittee pays all fees required by this chapter; accepts all
conditions; provides evidence that it was issued a valid conditional use permit
and provides evidence that has applied with the State of California for all
required permits. Each medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit issued
pursuant to this chapter expires 12 months after the date it is issued.
Medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permits may be renewed as provided in
this chapter.
   (J)   Renewals.
      (1)   An application for renewal of a medicinal cannabis delivery-only
retailer permit must be filed at least 60 calendar days before the expiration
of the current permit.
      (2)   The renewal application must contain all of the information
required for a new application.
      (3)   The renewal application must be accompanied by a renewal fee
established by City Council resolution.
      (4)   The renewal application must be denied if any of the following
circumstances exists:
         (a)   The renewal application is filed less than 60 calendar days
before expiration of the permit;
         (b)   The medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit is
suspended at the time of the renewal application;
         (c)   The medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer has not been in
regular and continuous operation in the four months before the renewal
application;
         (d)   The medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer failed to conform
to the requirements of this chapter, any regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter, or applicable state law; or
         (e)   The permittee does not possess a valid license from the State of
California, if required by law.
      (5)   The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to make all decisions
concerning applications for renewal. The City Manager, or designee, may impose
additional conditions on a renewal permit if he or she determines it is
necessary to ensure compliance with state or local laws and regulations or to
preserve and protect public health, safety, or welfare.
      (6)   If a renewal application is denied for any reason, and if the
permittee wishes to obtain another medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer
permit, they must file a new application as set forth in this chapter.
   (K)   Prohibition on transfer of permits. It is unlawful for any person to
operate as a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer at any location other
than the location specifically authorized and identified on a city-issued
medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit. No person may transfer an
ownership interest, ownership, or control of a medicinal cannabis delivery-only
retailer business or transfer any medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer
permit issued under this chapter. It is unlawful for a medicinal cannabis
delivery- only retailer permittee to sell or transfer a medicinal cannabis
delivery-only retailer permit to another party. Any attempt to transfer an
ownership interest or ownership of a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer,
or of a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit, will automatically
render the medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer permit void.
   (L)   Revocation and suspension. In addition to any other penalty authorized
by law, the City Manager, or designee, may suspend or revoke a medicinal
cannabis delivery-only retailer permit for the following reasons:
      (1)   Upon learning or discovering facts that require permit denial under
this chapter that were not previously disclosed or reasonably discoverable;
      (2)   If the permittee violates any condition imposed by this chapter or
by the terms of the permit; or
      (3)   Violation of any law of moral turpitude including, without
limitation, a criminal conviction or civil liability arising from a complaint
filed in a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (M)   Operations standards.
      (1)   To operate a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer business, an
applicant must obtain and maintain both licensure from the California
Department of Consumer Affairs and a city business license.
      (2)   It is unlawful for alcohol or tobacco to be sold.
      (3)   Parking must be provided in accordance with the underlying zoning
district.
      (4)   It is unlawful for cannabis or cannabis products to be publicly
visible from the exterior of the property.
      (5)   There shall be no advertisement of the use, including any building
signage other than address identification numbers, direction or emergency
signage required by law.
      (6)   All cannabis and cannabis products sold or otherwise made available
at a medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer must be cultivated,
manufactured, and transported by licensed facilities that maintain operations
in full conformance with applicable law.
      (7)   Each medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer must provide the
City Manager, or designee, with the name and telephone number of an on-site
employee or owner to whom emergency notice can be provided. The telephone
number provided must be capable of accepting recorded voice messages in the
event the contact person does not answer.
      (8)   Uniformed security personnel must be employed to monitor all
entrances and exits during all hours of operation. Every security guard
employed by or provided by the dispensary must be currently licensed by the
California Bureau of Security and Investigative Services and in possession of a
valid "guard card." The number of such security personnel must be set forth in
the Operations Plan.
      (9)   Odor control devices and techniques must be incorporated to ensure
that odors from cannabis and cannabis products are not detectable outside of
the building or in any tenant space or area adjacent to the building.
      (10)   All law enforcement personnel seeking admission to the premises
for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the standards and regulations
of this code must be given unrestricted access to all areas of the premises at
all times during hours of operation. Consent to such unrestricted access must
be acknowledged by the permittee and included within the Operations Plan.
      (11)   All interior spaces of the retailer (except restrooms), all
parking areas, and all entrances and exits to and from the premises, must be
monitored by 24-hour video security surveillance of at least HD quality with
night vision capability. The video security system must be compatible with
software and hardware utilized by the city as determined by the Police Chief
and set forth in the Operations Plan. Surveillance video must be recorded to a
device that is securely located on the premises and all footage must be
maintained for a minimum of 45 days. The video surveillance system
specifications must be set forth in the Operations Plan before the city issues
a certificate of occupancy for the medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer.
      (12)   It is unlawful for a physician to be permitted in a medicinal
cannabis delivery-only retailer at any time for the purpose of evaluating
patients to issue a medical cannabis prescription or identification card.
      (13)   Before dispensing medical cannabis or medical cannabis products to
any person under the age of 21, the medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer
must verify that the person possesses a valid identification card. A medicinal
cannabis delivery-only retailer may sell by delivery medical cannabis, medical
cannabis products, and medical cannabis accessories to a person 18 years of age
or older who possesses a valid identification card under Health and Safety Code
§ 11362.71 and a valid government-issued identification card.
      (14)   It is unlawful for any member of the public to be allowed on the
premises of medicinal cannabis delivery-only retailer.
      (15)   The premises must have a professionally installed, maintained, and
monitored alarm system as approved through the Operations Plan.
      (16)   All food products, food storage facilities, food- related
utensils, equipment, and materials must be approved, used, managed, and handled
in accordance with the provisions of the California Retail Food Code (Health
and Safety Code § 113700, et seq.). All food products must be protected from
contamination at all times, and all food handlers must be clean, in good
health, and free from communicable diseases. The Los Angeles County Department
of Public Health may inspect the dispensary at any time during business hours
to ensure compliance with State and local laws.
      (17)   No delivery driver may carry more than $200 in cash while engaged
in the service of delivering cannabis or cannabis products.
      (18)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to be allowed to
serve as a delivery driver and no person or permittee can employ a person under
the age of 21 for the purpose of making mobile deliveries of any cannabis
product.
(Ord. 702, passed 3-5-24)
§ 153.519 PERSONAL CULTIVATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   An authorized grower shall be allowed to cultivate cannabis for
personal use only within a private residence or a fully enclosed and secure
accessory structure to a private residence subject to the following regulations
in addition to all regulations of state law:
      (1)   The cannabis cultivation area shall be contained within one single
room that shall not exceed 150 square feet.
      (2)   The room must be securely locked and accessible only to individuals
residing in the residence who are 21 years of age or older.
      (3)   The cannabis plants shall not come within 12 inches of the ceiling
or any cultivation lighting.
      (4)   Cannabis cultivation lighting shall not exceed 1,200 watts in total
for the total cultivation area within the residence.
      (5)   The use of gas products such as but not limited to CO2, butane,
methane, or any other flammable or non-flammable gas for cannabis cultivation
or processing is prohibited.
      (6)   There shall be no exterior visibility or evidence of cannabis
cultivation outside the private residence or accessory structure from the
public right-of-way or any adjoining property, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Visual observation of any cannabis plants;
         (b)   Any form of signage indicating that cannabis plants were being
grown inside the residence or accessory structure;
         (c)   Visual observation of any equipment used in the growing and
cultivation operation;
         (d)   Unusual odors, smells, fragrances, or other olfactory stimulus;
         (e)   Any light emanating from cultivation lighting.
      (7)   The authorized grower shall reside full-time in the residence where
the cannabis cultivation occurs.
      (8)   If the authorized grower is not the owner of the private residence
or fully enclosed and secure accessory structure to a person’s private
residence, the owner must secure a signed statement that the authorized grower
has permission to cultivate plans in accordance with the provisions of the AUMA
and the corresponding SGMC chapter.
      (9)   The authorized grower shall not participate in cannabis cultivation
in any other location within the city.
      (10)   The residence shall include a fully functional and usable kitchen,
bathroom, and bedroom areas for their intended use by the authorized grower,
and the premises shall not be used primarily or exclusively for cannabis
cultivation.
      (11)   The cannabis cultivation area shall be in compliance with the
provisions of the applicable building and construction codes as set forth in
Chapter 150 of the San Gabriel Municipal Code. The building official may impose
additional conditions to meet such codes if necessary, including but not
limited to installation of fire suppression sprinklers and ventilation and
filtration systems that prevent plant odors from exiting the interior of the
structure.
      (12)   The cannabis cultivation area shall not result in a nuisance or
adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of the resident or nearby
residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odors, smoke,
traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of
materials, processes, products or wastes.
      (13)   Cultivation shall be limited to six cannabis plants, mature or
immature, per private residence or a fully enclosed and secure structure. The
limit of six plants per private residence shall apply regardless of how many
individuals reside at the private residence.
      (14)   The cannabis plants and any cannabis in excess of 28.5 grams
produced by plants must be kept in a locked space on the grounds of the private
residence or accessory structure which space is not visible from the public
right-of-way by normal unaided vision.
   (B)   No outdoor cultivation of cannabis plants shall be allowed in the City
of San Gabriel, even for personal use. (This section shall be of no further
force or effect and shall be deemed repealed upon a determination by the
California Attorney General that nonmedical use of cannabis is lawful in the
State of California under federal law.)
(Ord. 642-C.S., passed 12-19-17; Am. Ord. 702, passed 3-5-24)
§ 153.520 VIOLATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance and a violation of
this subchapter for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or
possession of any property within the city to cause or allow such property to
be used in a manner which violates this subchapter.
(Ord. 642-C.S., passed 12-19-17; Am. Ord. 702, passed 3-5-24)
§ 153.521 VIOLATION–MISDEMEANOR.
   Any violation of this subchapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 642-C.S., passed 12-19-17; Am. Ord. 702, passed 3-5-24)
§ 153.522 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any
provision of this subchapter shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public
nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Cal. Code of Civil
Proc. § 731 or any other remedy available to the city.
(Ord. 642-C.S., passed 12-19-17; Am. Ord. 702, passed 3-5-24)
§ 153.523 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this subchapter, the City
Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief or the city may pursue
administrative fines and penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.24 of this code
against any person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action
brought pursuant to this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award
reasonable attorney’s fees and costs to the prevailing party.
(Ord. 642-C.S., passed 12-19-17; Am. Ord. 702, passed 3-5-24)
LANDSCAPE
§ 153.530 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLER. An automatic timing device used to remotely
control valves that operate an irrigation system.
   CHECK VALVE (ANTI-DRAIN VALVE). A valve located under a sprinkler head, or
other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent
drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.
   DRIP IRRIGATION. Any non-spray low volume irrigation system specifically
designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of
plants utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per
hour.
   EMITTER. A drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from
the system to the soil.
   GARDEN. A plot of ground where herbs, fruits, flowers, or vegetables are
cultivated.
   HYDROZONE. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water
needs.
   LANDSCAPING. The planting, configuration and maintenance of trees, ground
cover, shrubbery and other plant material, decorative natural and structural
features (walls, fences, hedges, trellises, fountains, sculptures), earth
patterning and bedding materials, and other similar site improvements that
serve an aesthetic or functional purpose.
   LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION.  The application of irrigation water at low pressure
through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as
drip, drip lines, and bubblers. LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION systems are specifically
designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of
plants.
   MULCH. Any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or
inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and decomposed granite left
loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing
evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing
soil erosion.
   NATIVE. Of indigenous origin to California.
   OVERHEAD IRRIGATION. Systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray
heads and rotors).
   OVERSPRAY. The irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.
   PERVIOUS. Any surface or material that allows the passage of water through
the material and into the underlying soil.
   RAIN SENSOR. A component which automatically suspends an irrigation event
when it rains.
   RECYCLED WATER OR RECLAIMED WATER. Nonpotable water meeting all public
health codes and standards that has been derived in any part from sewage
through wastewater treatment so that it is suitable for beneficial reuse in
landscape irrigation and decorative water features and is no longer considered
wastewater. RECYCLED OR RECLAIMED WATER may also mean reusable wastewater from
residential, commercial and industrial bathroom sinks, bath tub shower drains,
and clothes washing equipment drains that is reused on site for landscape
irrigation and decorative water features. Such RECYCLED OR RECLAIMED WATER is
sometimes referred to as GRAY WATER .
   RUNOFF. Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is
applied and flows from the landscape area.
   SOIL MOISTURE-BASED CONTROLLER.  A device that measures the amount of water
in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14; Am. Ord. 622-C.S., passed 11-17-15)
§ 153.531 PURPOSE.
   The applicant shall, first and foremost, follow the California Code of
Regulations, Title 23. Waters, Division 2. Department of Water Resources,
Chapter 2.7. Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO). The specific
purposes of the landscape regulations are to:
   (A)   Improve the appearance of the community by encouraging aesthetically
pleasing landscape on public and private sites;
   (B)   Aid in energy conservation by providing shade from the sun and shelter
from the wind;
   (C)   Soften the appearance of parking lots and other development through
the use of planting;
   (D)   Encourage conservation of water resources through the use of native
and drought-tolerant plants with water-conserving irrigation practices;
   (E)   Minimize or eliminate conflicts between potentially incompatible but
otherwise permitted land uses on adjoining lots through visual screening;
   (F)   Provide areas for residential gardening and raising of food crops;
   (G)   Preserve, maintain and provide new trees for the health and welfare of
the city in order to preserve the scenic beauty, provide shade, enhance
habitat, and promote the general welfare and prosperity of the city;
   (H)   Help restore the lost environmental value of the Los Angeles County
flood control channels (Alhambra Wash, Rubio Wash) and enhance the washes as
scenic community amenities;
   (I)   Enhance pedestrian use by encouraging shaded sidewalks and accessible
passageways;
   (J)   Enhance the ability of water to soak into soil or drain through
surfaces to reduce impacts on storm drain infrastructure and risks of flooding;
   (K)   Replenish the local aquifer by providing increased ground water
recharge;
   (L)   Increase use of permeable and porous materials;
   (M)   Utilize the street and its ability to capture, treat and convey
stormwater;
   (N)   Minimize heat island effect through the use of tree canopies and light
colored materials for paving; and
   (O)   Provide and restore habitat for the local wildlife.
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14; Am. Ord. 622-C.S., passed 11-17-15)
§ 153.532 APPLICABILITY.
   The standards of this subchapter apply to all new buildings unless
specifically stated.
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14)
§ 153.533 LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION PLANS.
   A landscape and irrigation plan shall be submitted with the permit
application for all new buildings.
   (A)   Information required. Landscape plans shall be drawn to scale and
shall at a minimum include the following:
      (1)   Proposed plant locations, species, sizes, and water use needs
(i.e., ample, moderate, or minimal as identified in the latest edition of the
Sunset Western Garden Book or low, medium, or high as identified on the
California Department of Water Resources study, Water Use Classification of
Landscape Species (WUCOLS). All water features shall be identified as high
water use.
      (2)   Location and species type of any existing trees over six inches in
diameter, and whether each such tree is proposed to be kept or to be removed.
      (3)   Location of any existing and/or proposed native or protected tree
including methods for protection.
      (4)   Location of any existing and/or proposed garden areas.
      (5)   Irrigation plan that at a minimum indicates the location, type and
size of all components of the irrigation system and demonstrates compliance
with the requirements of this section.
      (6)   Any additional proposed landscape elements and any other measures
to facilitate plant growth or control erosion.
      (7)   Location and type of any existing and/or proposed paving or
hardscape material.
   (B)   Minor deviations. The landscape requirements in §§
153.534 through
153.537 may be modified or waived through the approval of a minor deviation.
The landscape plan shall clearly detail the modifications being requested from
the provisions of these sections and how they reflect the purpose of the
landscape requirements as stated in §
153.531. If an applicant can demonstrate that the purpose of the landscape
requirements as stated in §
153.531 can be still be achieved, the Community Development Director, without
public hearing, may grant minor deviations from ordinance requirements limited
to the following:
      (1)   Minor modifications to approved landscaping, irrigation or grading
plans which comply with the spirit and intent of this subchapter, including,
but not limited to, revising or substituting plant varieties, container sizes,
plant locations, irrigation specifications, hardscape components, berm heights,
berm locations, slope features, and the like; and
      (2)   Modifications of planting, installation and/or soil preparation
details.
   (C)   Appeals. The Community Development Director’s decision may be appealed
to the Planning Commission in writing within ten days after the decision of the
Director. Appeals shall be heard in the same manner as provided for in §§
30.10 through
30.16, except that a public hearing shall not be required in granting a minor
deviation. The Director shall not approve more than one minor deviation per
project.
   (D)   Preparation by qualified person. Landscaping plans for residential
projects consisting of five or more units and plans for all commercial,
industrial, and institutional projects shall be prepared by a California
registered landscape architect. Landscape plans for single-family residential
projects in the R-1 Zone, shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect,
a licensed landscape contractor, or a licensed irrigation specialist.
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14; Am. Ord. 639-C.S., passed 10-3-17; Am. Ord. 638-
C.S., passed 10-17-17)
§ 153.534 LANDSCAPE DESIGN PRINCIPLES.
   The following design principles are general standards to be used by city
staff and decision-makers in evaluating whether landscape plans conform to the
requirements of this section. The figures contained in this section are for
illustrative purposes only and do not imply that the concept illustrated be
implemented precisely as shown but rather in a manner consistent with the
purpose of these regulations:
   (A)   Natural landscapes. Landscape designs should incorporate, build upon
and complement existing natural landscapes using specimen trees, native
vegetation (including canopy, understory, and ground cover) as well as habitat.
Particular care should be given to preserve intact natural landscapes, if any.
   (B)   Responsive to local context and character. Landscape designs should
build on the site’s and area’s unique physical characteristics, conserving and
complementing existing natural features. Naturalistic design elements such as
irregular plant spacing, undulating berm contours, and mixed proportions of
plant species should be used to ensure that new landscaping blends in and
contributes to the quality of the surrounding area. Selection and spacing of
plant material should be reflective of the surrounding area’s character.
   (C)   Continuity and connection. Landscaping should be designed within the
context of the surrounding area, provided that the landscaping is also
consistent with these design principles. Where the design intent and the
surrounding landscape is naturalistic, plant materials should blend well with
adjacent properties, particularly where property edges meet, to create a
seamless and natural landscape. Where the design intent and the surrounding
landscape is formal, consistent or similar plant material and spacing should be
utilized. Exceptions should be made when seeking to create a transition between
uses and districts.
   (D)   Enhancing architecture. Landscape designs should be compatible with
and enhance the architectural character and features of the buildings on site,
and help relate the building to the surrounding landscape. Major landscape
elements should be designed to complement architectural elevations and
rooflines through color, texture, density, and form on both vertical and
horizontal planes. Landscaping should be in scale with on-site and adjacent
buildings. Plant material should be installed at an appropriate size and
allowed to accomplish these intended goals. When foundation planting is
required, plantings and window boxes should be compatible with a building’s
architectural character and could incorporate artistic elements.
   (E)   Composition. The quality of a landscape design is dependent not only
on the quantity and selection of plant materials but also on how that material
is arranged. Landscape materials should be arranged in a manner as to provide
the following qualities and characteristics:
      (1)   Texture. Landscape designs should provide a textured appearance
through the use of a variety of plant material rather than a single species.
Contrasting large leaf textures with medium and small leaf textures, and using
a variety of plant heights supports a natural aesthetic and provides more
ecological services. Spacing of key landscaping components, such as trees and
shrubs, should be consistent with the overall design approach of the landscape
plan. Formal landscape designs benefit from a uniform spacing of plants,
whereas varied spacing and clustering of trees is more compatible with a
naturalistic design.
      (2)   Scale. Landscape design should include plant material of an
appropriate scale to the space and/or structure(s) at their mature sizes.
Trees, shrubs, and hedges, especially those used for screening and buffering,
should display a fullness at maturity that is typical of the species.
      (3)   Color. Landscape designs should include a variety of plants to
provide contrasting color to other plants in the design. Designs are encouraged
to include flowering plants and especially a mix of plants that display
colorful flowers throughout the year and support local birds, butterflies and
pollinators. For ease of maintenance and water conservation, emphasis should be
placed on flowering perennials shrubs and not annual color.
      (4)   Form. Landscape designs should consider the complete three-
dimensional form of the landscape, not simply the form of individual elements.
The interrelationship of all landscape elements can be considered so that the
final design presents a coherent whole. Principles of feng shui or occidental
garden designs should be taken into consideration when planning the garden’s
form and design.
   (F)   Use of native and drought resistant plants. Landscape designs shall
feature native and/or related plant species, especially in areas adjacent to
existing native vegetation, to take advantage of the unique natural character
and diversity of the San Gabriel Valley and the adaptability of native plants
to local environmental conditions. Where feasible, the re-establishment of
native habitats should be incorporated into the landscape design. In the same
manner, landscape designs shall utilize drought tolerant plant materials to the
maximum extent feasible. The use of drought-tolerant plants should enrich the
existing landscape character, conserve water and energy, and provide a pleasant
and varied visual appearance as well as habitat for local wildlife.
   (G)   Buffering and screening. The placement of natural landscape materials
(trees, shrubs, and hedges) is the preferred method for buffering differing
land uses, for providing a transition between adjacent properties, and for
screening the view of any parking or storage area, trash enclosure, utility
enclosures, or other service area visible from a public street, alley, or
pedestrian area. Plants may be used with fences or berms to achieve the desired
screening or buffering effect. Plant material should be mature enough at the
time of planting to provide an effective buffer or screen, and should be
planted in an appropriate location to allow for desired growth within a
reasonable period of time. When used to screen an activity area such as a
parking lot, landscape shall not obstruct the visibility of motorists or
pedestrians or interfere with public safety.
   (H)   Sustainable practices. Sustainable stormwater management creates a
system of managing stormwater through retention, treatment or infiltration.
      (1)   Rainwater harvesting is the collection, storage and use of runoff
which is captured in a collection system such as a rain barrel or cistern.
   FIGURE 153.534-(H)(1): RAINWATER HARVESTING SYSTEM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6056.jpg]
 
      (2)   Permeable or porous paving allows rainfall and runoff to pass
through the paving into the ground below. Permeable paving allows for
infiltration, slows down runoff and improves water quality.
   FIGURE 153.534-(H)(2): PERMEABLE PAVING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6058.jpg]
 
      (3)   Rain gardens are small depressed areas that allow water to pool for
a short amount of time and infiltrate into the ground. Rain gardens mimic
terrain commonly found in natural landscapes. Rain gardens help to slow down
runoff and improve water quality.
   FIGURE 153.534-(H)(3): RAIN GARDENS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6060.jpg]
 
      (4)   Bioswales are shallow basins that use vegetation and soils to
filter, treat and infiltrate rainfall and runoff. Often used to capture runoff
from parking lots, bioswales can remove pollutants and sediments from runoff
water.
   FIGURE 153.534-(H)(4): BIOSWALE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6062.jpg]
 
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14; Am. Ord. 622-C.S., passed 11-17-15)
§ 153.535 AREAS TO BE LANDSCAPED.
   The following areas shall be landscaped, and may count toward the total area
of site landscaping required by zoning district regulations. The figures
contained in this section are for illustrative purposes only and do not imply
that the concept illustrated be implemented precisely as shown but rather in a
manner consistent with the purpose of these regulations.
   (A)   Required setbacks. All required setbacks in all zones, except for
areas used for exit and entry, shall be landscaped.
   (B)   Lot perimeters. Landscape buffers shall be installed and maintained
along side and rear lot lines between differing land uses, in accordance with
the following standards.
      (1)   Required landscape buffers. Table 153.535-(B)(1), Required
Landscape Buffers, shows when a buffer treatment is required, and of what type,
based on the proposed and the adjoining use. Only the proposed use is required
to provide the buffer yard. Adjoining uses are not required to provide the
buffer yard. The type of buffer yard required refers to buffer yard-type
designations as shown in Table 153.535-(B)(2), Buffer Yard Requirements. “-”
means that a buffer yard is not required unless required by another section of
this title.
   TABLE 153.535-(B)(1): REQUIRED LANDSCAPE
 
Use         Adjoining Use
            Park or    Single-     Multiple-
            Open Space family      family      Mixed-Use Commercial Industrial
                       Residential Residential
Multiple-
family      Type 1     Type 1      -           -         -          -
Residential
Mixed-Use   Type 2     Type 2      Type 2      -         -          -
Commercial  Type 2     Type 2      Type 2      -         -          Type 1
Industrial  Type 2     Type 2      Type 2      Type 2    Type 2     -
 
      (2)   Buffer-yard types. Table 153.535-(B)(2), Buffer Yard Requirements,
describes the minimum width, plant materials, and wall requirements for each
type of buffer yard. The listed number of trees and shrubs are required for
each 100 lineal feet of buffer yard. Trees shall be planted at least 40 feet on
center. Natural areas with native vegetation or alternative planting materials
which achieve equivalent buffering effects may be approved by the Community
Development Director.
   TABLE 153.535-(B)(2): BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS
 
Buffer Yard Minimum    Trees                       Shrubs
                       Canopy       Understory     Large (mature Small (mature
Type        Width (ft) (mature      (mature height spread of 2   spread of less
                       height of 40 of less than   ft. or more)  than 2 ft.)
                       ft. or more) 40 ft.)
Type 1      5          2            2              20            40
Type 2      10         2            3              30            50
 
   FIGURE 153.535-(B)(2): BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6064.jpg]
 
      (3)   Width reduction for adjacent landscaped buffer. If an equivalent
landscape buffer exists on the adjacent lot, the width of the required buffer
may be reduced 50% provided that the abutting property owners have provided a
written agreement ensuring the adjacent landscape buffer will be preserved and
maintained.
   (C)   Building perimeters. The portions of a multi-family residential,
commercial, industrial, or institutional building that front a public street
shall have one or more landscape planters installed along a minimum 20% of that
building face. The minimum width of the planter shall be three feet. This
standard does not apply where a building is located on the front or corner side
property line.
   FIGURE 153.535-(C): BUILDING PERIMETERS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6066.jpg]
 
   (D)   Flood control channels. A 15-foot wide landscape buffer planted with
drought tolerant plants, including a 12-foot wide service road and bike path,
shall be provided along the outer edge of flood channel easements. In those
cases where a strict compliance with the landscaping requirements set forth in
this division may be a hardship on the property owner or the developer thereof,
an alternate plan accomplishing the objectives of helping restore the lost
environmental value of the Alhambra and Rubio washes and enhancing the washes
as scenic community amenities may be submitted for review by the Community
Development Director. The Community Development Director shall be authorized to
disapprove, approve, or conditionally approve the alternate plan.
   FIGURE 153.535-(D): RIVER CHANNEL EDGE CONDITIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6068.jpg]
 
   (E)   Parking areas. Parking areas as required by §
153.226, Parking Lot Landscaping and Screening.
   (F)   Parkways and street trees. Protect roots of street trees with
engineered soil and provide sufficient space for above and below ground growth.
Street trees form the canopy, provide shade, introduce seasonal color and
define the street edge. The minimum installed street tree size should be 24-
inch box to ensure long term survival of the tree and the ability for the tree
to reach mature height rapidly.
   (G)   Unused areas. All areas of a project site not intended for a specific
use, including areas planned for future phases of a phased development, shall
be landscaped or left in a natural state.
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14)
§ 153.536 MATERIALS.
   (A)   General. Landscaping may consist of a combination of groundcovers,
shrubs, vines, trees, and garden areas. Landscape may also include incidental
features such as stepping stones, benches, fountains, sculptures, decorative
stones, or other ornamental features, placed within a landscaped setting.
      (1)   Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together.
      (2)   Except for garden areas, plant materials shall be selected from
among those species and varieties known to thrive in the San Gabriel climate
and where applicable, selected from an approved list maintained by the city.
      (3)   Installation of invasive plant species is prohibited as listed on
the California Invasive Plant Council (Cal-IPC) list of Exotic Pest Plants of
Greatest Ecological Concern in California.
      (4)   Site drainage shall be directed toward landscaped areas wherever
feasible.
   (B)   Landscaped areas greater than 2,500 square feet. Where the total
landscape area is equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet for commercial,
industrial, and institutional projects or equal to or greater than 5,000 square
feet for single-family and multi-family residential projects, the following
landscape material limitations apply.
      (1)   Exclusive of garden areas, at least 60% of all plants and trees
must be native or low water use.
      (2)   A maximum of 25% of the required landscape areas shall be turf or
planted with other high water use plants except for turf areas that comprise an
essential component of a project (e.g., golf courses or playing fields), which
are exempt from this limit.
      (3)   The installation of turf on slopes greater than 25% is prohibited.
      (4)   No portion of turf areas shall be less than eight feet wide.
Landscaped areas less than ten feet wide shall be irrigated with sub-surface
drip or other technology that produces no over spray or runoff.
   (C)   Ground cover materials. Ground cover shall be of live plant material.
Groundcover may include grasses. Pervious non-plant materials such as permeable
paving, gravel, colored rock, cinder, bark, and similar materials shall not
cover more than 15% of the area required to be landscaped, except with approval
of a minor deviation to the landscape plan. Existing turf in residential zones
may be replaced with synthetic grass or artificial turf, subject to said
materials meeting design standards developed by the city. Mulch must be
confined to areas underneath shrubs and trees and is not a substitute for
ground cover plants.
   (D)   Mulch. A minimum two inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all
exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or
rooting ground covers or other special planting situations where mulch is not
recommended. Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes.
   (E)   Size and spacing. Plant materials shall be grouped in hydrozones in
accordance with their respective water, cultural (soil, climate, sun and light)
and maintenance needs. Plants shall be of the following size and spacing at the
time of installation. The figures contained in this section are for
illustrative purposes only and do not imply that the concept illustrated be
implemented precisely as shown but rather in a manner consistent with the
purpose of these regulations:
      (1)   Ground covers. Ground cover plants other than grasses may be
planted from flats or from four-inch pots. Areas planted in ground cover plants
other than grass seed or sod must be planted at a rate of one per 12 inches on
center unless otherwise approved by the Director based on plant spread.
      (2)   Shrubs. When planted to serve as a hedge or screen, shrubs shall be
planted at a minimum size of five gallons and have an expected mature height of
six to eight feet and a mature spread of three to five feet. Shrubs planted to
serve as a hedge shall be spaced three to five feet apart depending on the
plant species.
   FIGURE 153.536-(E)(2): GROUND COVER AND SHRUB PLANTING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6070.jpg]
      (3)   Trees. Trees shall be provided as follows:
         (a)   One tree for every 1,000 square feet of net lot area for new
commercial and residential development.
            1.   If the lot size or other site conditions make planting of the
required trees impractical to comply with, the trees may be planted off-site in
the public right-of-way or in public parks at twice the ratio with Director
approval.
            2.   If the required number and size of trees already exist on the
site, the applicant shall not be required to plant new trees on-site. Instead,
the existing trees shall be shown on the site and landscape plans submitted to
the Planning Division, and those trees shall be maintained in compliance with
the standards of this section.
         (b)   At least one tree shall be located in the front yard of new
residential development. If a tree does not already exist in the front yard, a
tree shall be planted.
         (c)   A minimum of 15% of the trees planted shall be 24 inch-box or
greater in size. All other trees shall be a minimum of 15 gallons in size with
a one-inch diameter at breast height (dbh).
         (d)   A minimum of 50% of trees shall be an evergreen type.
         (e)   Newly planted trees shall be supported with stakes or guy wires.
         (f)   Any tree to be planted along a lot line or adjacent to a
structure shall be no closer to said lot line or structure than one-half the
diameter of the particular species’ drip line at maturity, measured from the
center of the tree.
   FIGURE 153.536-(E)(3): TREE LAYOUT AND STAKING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/fb4bf9c985ab34f1d962ea8fdaa067aad4f4fc75/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6072.jpg]
 
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14; Am. Ord. 622-C.S., passed 11-17-15)
§ 153.537 IRRIGATION SPECIFICATIONS.
   All new landscaping shall be irrigated with an irrigation system. The
Director may waive this requirement based on plant water needs and site
characteristics.
   (A)   The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and
designed to allow for proper installation, management and maintenance. An
irrigation system shall meet or exceed 0.75 efficiency for overhead spray
devices, and 0.81 for drip system devices, and be installed in compliance with
the manufacturers' recommendations.
   (B)   All irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid runoff, low head
drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto
adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures.
   (C)   Automatic irrigation controllers and sensors are required. Controllers
may either be able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either
evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture-based controllers that
automatically adjust irrigation in response to changes in plants' needs as
weather conditions change.
   (D)   Proper irrigation equipment and schedules, including features such as
repeat cycles, shall be used to closely match application rates to infiltration
rates determined by a soil percolation test, therefore minimizing runoff.
   (E)   Low-volume irrigation shall be required in mulched areas, in areas
with slope greater than 25%, and in any narrow or irregularly shaped areas that
are less than ten feet in width in any direction.
   (F)   Overhead irrigation is prohibited within 24 inches of any non-
permeable surface. Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and
10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it.
   (G)   Irrigation systems and decorative water features may be designed to
allow for the current and future use of recycled water, if water providers
serving the city make it available.
   (H)   Recirculating water shall be used for decorative water features.
   (I)   All irrigation shall be subject to restrictions put forth by the City
of San Gabriel or local water purveyor during periods of drought.
   (J)   Irrigation systems shall consist of low-volume emitters (i.e. drip
emitters) or the following:
      (1)   Low volume rotary type heads, with check valves and pressure
regulation for turf areas;
      (2)   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices with matched
precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by manufacturer's
recommendations; and
      (3)   Separate valves for each plant hydrozone.
   (K)   Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes
that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of
sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low
pressure shut down features.
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14; Am. Ord. 622-C.S., passed 11-17-15)
§ 153.538 INSTALLATION AND COMPLETION.
   (A)   Consistency with approved plans. All landscaping shall be installed
consistent with approved plans and specifications, in a manner designed to
encourage and maintain healthy plant growth.
   (B)   Timing of installation. Required landscaping shall be installed prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the associated project.
   (C)   Certification of substantial completion. Upon completion of the
installation of the landscaping and irrigation system, a field observation
shall be completed by the landscaping professional. The landscaping
professional shall submit a certificate of substantial completion to the city,
utilizing forms designated for this purpose. The certificate shall specifically
indicate that the plants were installed as specified, that the irrigation
system was installed as designed, along with a list of any deficiencies.
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14)
§ 153.539 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. All planting and other landscape elements shall be maintained
in good growing condition. Such maintenance shall include, where appropriate,
pruning, mowing, weeding, cleaning, fertilizing, and regular watering. Wherever
necessary, plantings shall be replaced with other plant materials to ensure
continued compliance with applicable landscaping requirements. A plan ensuring
continued maintenance may be required.
   (B)   Trees. Trees shall be maintained by property owners to be free from
physical damage or injury arising from lack of water, chemical damage,
accidents, vandalism, insects and disease. Any tree showing such damage shall
be replaced with another tree. At minimum, trees shall be maintained in
accordance with
Chapter 95: Trees and Shrubs; Weeds of the San Gabriel Municipal Code.
(Ord. 601-C.S., passed 3-4-14)
HISTORIC PRESERVATION AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
§ 153.600 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Historic Preservation and Cultural
Resource Ordinance” of the City of San Gabriel.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.601 ENABLING AUTHORITY.
   Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65850 and 37361 enable municipal legislative bodies to
“provide for places, buildings, structures, works of art, and other objects,
having a special character or special historical or aesthetic interest or
value, special conditions or regulations for their protection, enhancement,
perpetuation or use, which may include appropriate and reasonable control of
the use or appearance of neighboring private property within public view, or
both.”
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.602 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City of San Gabriel, as the birthplace of the Los Angeles
metropolitan region, is home to a wide range of significant cultural resources
that reflect our shared heritage and history. Cultural resources in the city
encompass a range of resource types. These include paleontological resources,
archaeological and Native American resources, buildings, structures, objects,
historic districts, sites, public art and parks, cultural landscapes, and
natural features. The retention and stewardship of cultural resources is of
vital importance to retain and protect our heritage. The City Council also
recognizes the right of private property owners to the use of their property
and seeks to balance historic preservation important to the community as a
whole with the rights of the property owner.
   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare by providing for the identification, designation,
protection, enhancement, and ongoing use of cultural resources that represent
the city’s cultural, architectural, social, historical, economic, and political
heritage. It is the intent and purpose of the San Gabriel City Council in
passing this subchapter to:
      (1)   Preserve, maintain, and safeguard the city’s heritage and
character, for the enjoyment of present and future generations, by providing
for the protection and thoughtful management of cultural resources as defined
in this subchapter;
      (2)   Foster awareness, recognition, and stewardship of the city’s
archaeological and Native American cultural resources;
      (3)   Encourage public knowledge and appreciation of the city’s heritage
and foster civic and neighborhood pride and sense of identity through the
recognition of cultural resources;
      (4)   Encourage the maintenance and preservation of cultural landscapes
that contribute to the historic character of our neighborhoods and built
environment;
      (5)   Recognize the city’s cultural resources as economic assets;
      (6)   Stabilize and improve property values within the city and increase
the economic and financial benefits to the city and its inhabitants through the
preservation, rehabilitation, and ongoing use of cultural resources;
      (7)   Integrate the conservation of cultural resources into the public
and private development process;
      (8)   Implement the goals and policies of the General Plan Cultural
Resources Element;
      (9)   Facilitate the city’s compliance with the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA) and California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and
their provisions for cultural and historical resources;
      (10)   Preserve diverse and significant architectural styles and property
types reflecting the city’s history and encourage complementary new
construction and design, to maintain the city’s historic scale and character;
      (11)   Adopt and encourage the use of historic preservation incentives,
both regulatory and economic, that promote the retention, rehabilitation, and
protection of cultural resources.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.603 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms when used in this subchapter shall have the meaning set
forth in this section, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context.
   ALTERATION. Any act or process that modifies a cultural resource that
either:
      (1)   Requires a building or other permit and/or changes one or more of
the features of a landscape or structure including, without limitation, the
setting of the resource or the construction, reconstruction, or relocation of
any structure or any part of a structure; or
      (2)   Significantly changes the setting and/or any character-defining
feature of a landscape or exterior of a structure that relates to its status as
a historic landmark or contributing resource.
   ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCE. A cultural resource that is any material remains of
past human life, activities, or habitation that are of historic or prehistoric
significance. Such resources might include, but are not limited to, tools,
pottery, weapons, weapon projectiles, structures or portions/remnants of
structures, rock carvings, graves, skeletal remains, personal items and
clothing, or other items.
   CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (or CEQA). The statute and regulations
applying to public agencies in California as codified in the Cal. Pub. Res.
Code §§ 21000 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, and the
corresponding Guidelines for the California Environmental Quality Act in the
California Code of Regulations, §§ 15000-15387, Title 14, Chapter 3, as it may
be amended from time to time.
   CALIFORNIA NATIVE AMERICAN TRIBE. A Native American tribe located in
California that is on the contact list maintained by the Native American
Heritage Commission.
   CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE (or CHBC; also known as the STATE
HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE, or SHBC). As codified in Part 8, Title 24 of the
State Building Standards Code, shall apply to all qualified cultural resources
designated or included in an adopted inventory per federal, state, and local
authority. The CHBC provides alternative, performance-based building and zoning
regulations to allow for upgrades, changes to, and ongoing use of historically
significant properties that preserve their historic integrity.
   CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP. The certificate granted to a property
owner or applicant by the City Council to approve an initial review or
certificate of demolition for a project that, due to undue economic hardship on
the owner, does not comply with the Secretary’s Standards for the Treatment of
Historic Properties.
   CHARACTER-DEFINING FEATURE. The physical elements and characteristics of a
cultural resource that lend the resource its authenticity and significance.
CHARACTER-DEFINING FEATURES can include, but are not limited to, a property's
setting and site plan, overall form and massing, architectural style,
materials, finishes, and decorative detailing, as well as relationship to
neighboring properties, planning features, hardscaping and landscaping, and
interior features.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR (or DIRECTOR). The Director of the Community
Development Department or his or her designee.
   CONSERVATION OVERLAY ZONE (or COZ). An area that contains, within defined
boundaries, a cohesive concentration of related buildings, structures, sites,
objects, planning features, or natural/landscape features. A CONSERVATION
OVERLAY ZONE is distinguished from a historic district in that it does not
qualify as a historic district as defined in this subchapter but nonetheless
contains a cohesive collection of related properties that, considered together,
are of interest to local planning. The CONSERVATION OVERLAY ZONE is not a
historical resource pursuant to CEQA.
   CONTRIBUTING RESOURCE (or CONTRIBUTOR). A cultural resource that is any
building, structure, object, site, planning feature, sign, area, place,
landscape, or natural feature within a historic district that contributes to
the district’s historic, cultural, or architectural significance.
   CULTURAL RESOURCE. The broad category of all historic and prehistoric
(archaeological, Native American, and paleontological) resource types that are
significant in the history or prehistory of the city, region, state, or nation
as defined in this subchapter. CULTURAL RESOURCES include resources listed on
or found eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places,
California Register of Historical Resources, San Gabriel Register of Cultural
Resources, and the San Gabriel Inventory of Cultural Resources. CULTURAL
RESOURCES can include paleontological resources, archaeological and Native
American resources, buildings, structures, objects, historic districts, sites,
public art and parks, cultural landscapes and natural features, and/or any
resource defined by the CEQA Guidelines [California Code of Regulations Title
14] § 15064.5(a).
   CULTURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES. A set of guidelines that may be
developed by the Historic Preservation and Cultural Resource Commission that
describes requirements for the identification of archaeological, Native
American, and paleontological resources and the preparation of Phase I cultural
resources inventory reports; for the significance evaluation of archaeological
and Native American resources and the preparation of Phase II cultural
resources evaluation reports; for the mitigation of substantial impacts to
significant archaeological resources through data recovery and the preparation
of Phase III archaeological data recovery reports; and for the preparation of
other cultural resources studies and reports.
   CULTURAL RESOURCE SENSITIVITY MAP. The confidential map commissioned and
maintained by the Director showing the location of culturally sensitive areas,
including parcels and/or properties known or suspected to contain
archaeological and/or Native American cultural resources. Access to the
CULTURAL RESOURCE SENSITIVITY MAP shall be subject to the provisions of the
federal Archaeological Resources Protection Act (16 U.S.C. 470hh), which
requires that archaeological cultural resource site locations remain
confidential in order to ensure their preservation. The California Public
Records Act also provides for the nondisclosure of archaeological cultural
resource information (Cal. Gov’t Code § 6254.10).
   DEMOLITION. Any act or process that destroys, in whole or in part, a
building, structure, or site or permanently impairs its structural integrity
and which is not in conformance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards
for the Treatment of Historic Properties.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Community Development Department or his or her
designee.
   HISTORIC CONTEXT. The broad patterns of historical development of a
community or region that are represented by the physical development and
character of the built environment. Contexts typically are based on one or more
themes, a geographical area, and periods of significance. They also identify
important associated property types and establish eligibility criteria and
integrity thresholds.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A type of cultural resource that is a geographic area
having a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of buildings,
structures, objects, planning features, sites, natural/landscape features and
other features united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical
development.
   HISTORIC INTEGRITY. The authenticity of a property’s historic identity.
Properties with HISTORIC INTEGRITY are those properties that retain enough of
their materials, features, and characteristics from their period of
significance that they continue to convey the reasons for their significance.
Often these are original materials that date from the property’s construction
or early period. As defined by the National Park Service and in accordance with
the accepted standards of professional preservation practice, HISTORIC
INTEGRITY is the composite of seven aspects of integrity: location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association. HISTORIC INTEGRITY is
not the same as condition; a deteriorated property may still retain HISTORIC
INTEGRITY.
   HISTORIC LANDMARK. A type of cultural resource that is any improvement or
natural feature that meets the eligibility criteria defined in §
153.607 and is subsequently nominated and added to the San Gabriel Register of
Cultural Resources.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION AND CULTURAL RESOURCE COMMISSION (or COMMISSION). The
Historic Preservation and Cultural Resource Commission established pursuant to
this subchapter.
   HISTORIC RESOURCE EVALUATION. An in-depth study of a property to determine
its eligibility as a federal, state, or local historic landmark. A HISTORIC
RESOURCE EVALUATION generally results in a report including detailed, property-
specific information about the resource. This information can include
ownership/occupant history, historic context and themes of significance,
character-defining features, as well as building type, dates of construction,
architectural style, description of other design aspects, materials, and
setting, approximate dates of exterior alterations, physical condition, and
historic integrity analysis.
   HISTORIC RESOURCE SURVEY. A neighborhood- or city-wide survey to identify
eligible cultural resources, including buildings, structures, objects, sites,
historic districts, planning features, public art and parks, cultural
landscapes, conservation overlay zones, and other features. A HISTORIC RESOURCE
SURVEY generally results in an inventory of properties that are potentially
eligible for national, state, or local landmark designation. The survey
produces basic information about each resource. This information generally
includes building type, dates of construction, architectural style, description
of other design aspects, materials, and setting, approximate dates of exterior
alterations, physical condition, and notes on historic integrity.
   HISTORIC RESOURCES.
      (1)   Those cultural resources that meet the significance criteria for
designation as historic landmarks itemized in §
153.607 or for historic districts itemized in §
153.608, including all the resources identified as “contributing” to a historic
district. HISTORIC RESOURCES in San Gabriel would include resources listed on
federal, state, and local registers, identified in the Inventory, or properties
that have not yet been evaluated but which evidence shows would satisfy the
designation criteria. Generally, the term HISTORIC RESOURCE does not include
paleontological resources.
      (2)   HISTORICAL RESOURCES are defined pursuant to CEQA as resources
listed in, or formally determined eligible for listing in, the California
Register of Historical Resources; resources listed in the local, San Gabriel
Register or identified as significant in a historical resource survey prepared
in accordance with state requirements; and resources that appear to meet the
significance criteria for listing in the California Register in light of the
evidence.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, sign, fence, gate, wall, landscape,
work of art, or other object affixed to and constituting a physical betterment
of real property, or any part of such betterment.
   INITIAL REVIEW. The review completed by the Historic Preservation and
Cultural Resource Commission to determine if an application to make major
alterations, relocate, or demolish a designated cultural resource is
historically appropriate. Completion of the INITIAL REVIEW will result in a
finding that the proposed changes are in accordance with the Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties and other
applicable design guidelines provided for in this subchapter and will result in
no significant adverse impacts to the cultural resource.
   INITIAL REVIEW ADMINISTRATIVE CLEARANCE. The review completed by city staff,
at the administrative level, finding that an application for a minor alteration
to a cultural resource is historically appropriate and in accordance with the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties
and other applicable design guidelines provided for in this subchapter and will
result in no significant adverse impacts to cultural resources.
   MAJOR ALTERATIONS. Any work to a property that includes the alteration,
removal, or obstruction of character-defining features, elevations, and spaces,
or additions to a property that are visible from the public right-of-way, or,
for properties not visible from the public right-of-way, those character-
defining features that are visible from the front of the property. MAJOR
ALTERATIONS to a designated cultural resource are subject to an initial review
by the Historic Preservation and Cultural Resource Commission.
   MILLS ACT HISTORIC PROPERTY CONTRACT (or MILLS ACT CONTRACT). The historic
property contract between the city and property owner that provides the
potential for reduced property taxes in return for the rehabilitation,
restoration, and preservation of an historic resource, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code §§ 50280 et seq. and Cal. Rev. & Tax Code §§ 439 et seq.
   MINOR ALTERATIONS. Any work to a property that does not include changes/
removal of character-defining features and is subject to an initial review
administrative clearance. MINOR ALTERATIONS generally include the following, to
the extent they do not include changes/removal of, or do not affect, character-
defining features: (1) paint color; (2) roofing material; (3) repairs to
foundations; (4) ordinary maintenance and repair; (5) landscaping, including
sprinkler system work (if the work does not involve character-defining
landscaping or hardscaping features); (6) hardscaping and paving work (if the
work does not involve character-defining landscaping or hardscaping features);
(7) alterations carried out on the interior that do not affect the exterior of
property (unless those interior features were historically accessible by the
public and are specifically mentioned as character-defining features in an
approved landmark designation or adopted survey); and (8) replacement of
existing screens and awnings with the same or substantially consistent
materials, form, and shape.
   MULTI-PROPERTY NOMINATION. A group of thematically related properties that
are nominated to the San Gabriel Register. Such properties may be physically
dispersed but share a common history and/or significance.
   NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT (or NEPA). The statute codified in 42
U.S.C. 4321 et seq., and the regulations established in the C.F.R., Title 40,
1500-1508, requiring environmental review and outreach for qualifying projects.
   NATIVE AMERICAN RESOURCES. Sites, features, places, cultural landscapes,
sacred places, and objects with cultural value to a California Native American
tribe.
   NON-CONTRIBUTING RESOURCE (or NON-CONTRIBUTOR). Any building, structure,
object, site, sign, area, place, or natural feature within a historic district
that does not meet the criteria for eligibility, does not contribute to the
district’s historic, cultural, or architectural significance, and therefore is
not a cultural resource for the purposes of this subchapter.
   ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR. Work on a cultural resource that:
      (1)   Does not, by law, require issuance of a permit;
      (2)   Involves regular or customary care of an existing building,
structure, object, or site, for the purposes of preserving the property and
maintaining it in a safe and sanitary condition; and
      (3)   Does not involve a change of design, material, or appearance of any
identified character-defining features.
   PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES. Those cultural resources that consist of fossils,
or the remains, imprints, or traces of once-living organisms preserved in rocks
and sediments. Significance for PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES shall be defined by a
qualified paleontologist as defined in this subchapter.
   PRESERVATION. The act or process of sustaining the existing materials, form,
and integrity of a historic property. The focus of PRESERVATION is protecting
and stabilizing the property, through on-going maintenance and repair of
historic materials and features, rather than extensive replacement and new
construction.
   PROPERTY OWNER or OWNER. The person or persons appearing as the latest owner
of the improvement, natural feature or site on the most recent equalized
assessment roll of the County of Los Angeles.
   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL(S). Any of the following professions/occupations:
      (1)   ARCHAEOLOGIST. An archaeologist who meets and/or exceeds the
Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualifications Standards in
archaeology, as defined by the National Park Service (36 C.F.R. 61).
      (2)   ARCHITECTURAL HISTORIAN. An architectural historian who meets and/
or exceeds the Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualifications
Standards in architectural history, as defined by the National Park Service (36
C.F.R. 61).
      (3)   ECONOMIC PROFESSIONAL. A qualified economic consultant selected and
approved by the city.
      (4)   HISTORIAN. A historian who meets and/or exceeds the Secretary of
the Interior’s Professional Qualifications Standards in history, as defined by
the National Park Service (36 C.F.R. 61).
      (5)   HISTORIC ARCHITECT. A licensed architect who meets and/or exceeds
the Secretary of the Interior’s Professional Qualifications Standards in
historic architecture, as defined by the National Park Service (36 C.F.R. 61).
      (6)   NATIVE AMERICAN MONITORS. Experienced cultural resource monitors
recommended by culturally affiliated Native Americans listed by the California
Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC) as local contacts for the region.
      (7)   PALEONTOLOGIST. A paleontologist who is a qualified professional
paleontologist as defined by the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology.
      (8)   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. Any individual registered by the State of
California to practice structural engineering and to use the title structural
engineer pursuant to the Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code, Chapter 7, § 6701. When
working with historic buildings and structures for the City of San Gabriel, the
STRUCTURAL ENGINEER shall satisfy the Secretary of the Interior’s Professional
Qualifications Standards for Engineering and have demonstrable project
experience in historic preservation and the use of the California Historical
Building Code.
   REHABILITATION. The act or process of making possible a compatible use for a
property through repair, alterations, and additions while preserving those
portions or features which convey its historical, cultural, or architectural
significance.
   RESTORATION. The act or process of accurately depicting the form, features,
and character of a property as it appeared at a particular period of time by
means of the removal of features from other periods in its history and
reconstruction of missing features from the restoration period, which may
include the limited and sensitive upgrade of mechanical, electrical, and
plumbing systems and other code-required work to make the property functional
and safe.
   SAN GABRIEL INVENTORY OF CULTURAL RESOURCES (or INVENTORY). The INVENTORY of
buildings, structures, objects, sites, historic districts and historic district
contributors, signs, areas, landscapes, places, and natural features in the
city that have been found potentially eligible for historic designation through
an adopted historic resource survey prepared and approved in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter. The INVENTORY OF CULTURAL RESOURCES shall be
prepared and approved in accordance with §
153.605. The locations of archaeological resources shall remain confidential,
pursuant to the federal Archaeological Resources Protection Act (16 U.S.C.
470hh) and California Public Records Act (Cal. Gov’t Code § 6254.10).
   SAN GABRIEL REGISTER OF CULTURAL RESOURCES or (REGISTER). The list or
register of designated cultural resources, including individual historic
landmarks, historic districts, and their contributing features, archaeological
resources, paleontological resources, and Native American resources, prepared
and approved in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. The
locations of archaeological resources shall remain confidential, pursuant to
the federal Archaeological Resources Protection Act (16 U.S.C. 470hh) and
California Public Records Act (Cal. Gov’t Code § 6254.10).
   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR’S STANDARDS FOR THE TREATMENT OF HISTORIC
PROPERTIES (or SECRETARY'S STANDARDS). The Standards and Guidelines developed
by the United States Department of the Interior, National Park Service (36
C.F.R. § 68), for the preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, and
reconstruction of historic resources. In accordance with California Code of
Regulations Title 14, Chapter 3, §§ 15064.5, 15126.4(b)(1), and 15331, physical
changes to historical resources that conform with the Secretary’s Standards are
generally considered to be mitigated to a level of less than significant under
CEQA. Projects complying with the Secretary’s Standards may be eligible for a
Class 31 Categorical Exemption from CEQA.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.604 HISTORIC PRESERVATION AND CULTURAL RESOURCE COMMISSION.
   (A)   Establishment of Commission. There is hereby created the San Gabriel
Historic Preservation and Cultural Resource Commission. The Commission shall
have and exercise the powers and perform the duties set forth in this
subchapter. Except as otherwise specified in this subchapter, the Commission
shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 33 (Commissions) of this code.
   (B)   Composition and appointment of members.
      (1)   Commissioners shall be appointed pursuant to
Chapter 33 (Commissions) of this code. All members shall have an expressed and/
or demonstrated interest, experience, or knowledge of the cultural heritage,
history, and/or architecture of the city. Preference shall be given to
residents of the city.
      (2)   At least two members of the Commission shall be appointed from
among professionals in the disciplines of anthropology, archaeology,
architecture, history, historic preservation, landscape architecture, urban
planning, land economics, real estate or a related discipline, to the extent
that such professionals are available in the community.
   (C)   Terms and vacancies. The Commission will consist of five members to be
appointed by the City Council. The members will serve two-year terms and may be
appointed for additional two-year terms. Any vacancy shall be filled by the
City Council within a reasonable time after the vacancy occurs, for the
unexpired term. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. The
members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
   (D)   Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary, rules. The Commission shall elect
its chairman and vice-chairman who shall have the power to administer oaths and
take testimony.
   (E)   Member’s failure to attend meetings, successor. If a member of the
Commission fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the
Commission, or fails to attend 50% or more of the regular meetings of the
Commission during a calendar year, unless excused by the Chairman, the City
Council may declare such member’s seat vacant and appoint a new member to serve
the balance of the unexpired term.
   (F)   Meetings and record of proceedings. The Commission shall meet on a
quarterly basis, at minimum, and monthly basis if needed, as determined by the
Director. All meetings of the Commission (1) shall be open to the public and
(2) noticed and held in compliance with the provisions of the state’s Ralph M.
Brown Act. The Commission shall keep a record of minutes of all of its
proceedings and actions, which shall be available for public inspection.
   (G)   Powers and duties. The Commission shall have the following powers and
duties, in addition to any other duties specified in this subchapter:
      (1)   General powers. The Commission shall advise the City Council,
Planning Commission, and all city departments and staff on all matters relating
to the identification, protection, retention, preservation, and registration of
cultural resources in the city, as directed by the City Council.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commission shall have the following powers
and duties in addition to those otherwise provided in this subchapter:
         (a)   Administer the provisions of this subchapter;
         (b)   Advise the City Council in all matters pertaining to cultural
resource management and historic preservation in the city;
         (c)   Compile and maintain for public use and information the San
Gabriel Register of Cultural Resources;
         (d)   Compile, maintain, and periodically update the San Gabriel
Inventory of Cultural Resources;
         (e)   Recommend the designation and approval of eligible cultural
resources for inclusion in the San Gabriel Register and designation and
approval of conservation overlay zones;
         (f)   Approve or disapprove in whole or in part applications for the
demolition, alteration, or relocation of properties included on the Register
and Inventory in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, in addition
to any review by the Planning Commission and/or any other hearing body;
         (g)   Approve or disapprove in whole or in part applications for in-
fill/new construction within historic districts listed on the Register, in
addition to any review by the Planning Commission and/or any other hearing
body;
         (h)   Review and comment on the decisions and documents, including but
not limited to environmental assessments, environmental impact reports, and
environmental impact statements, prepared by the city or other public agencies
when such decisions or documents might affect designated or eligible historical
resources within the city;
         (i)   Participate in, promote, and conduct public informational,
educational, and interpretive programs pertaining to historic preservation;
         (j)   Recommend and encourage the protection, enhancement,
appreciation, and use of properties of cultural, historical, architectural,
community or aesthetic value that have not been designated as cultural
resources but are deserving of recognition;
         (k)   Review applications and make recommendations to the City Council
on Mills Act contract applications and other incentive programs;
         (l)   Upon request, make recommendations to the Planning Commission on
zoning and general plan amendments related to historic preservation goals and
policies; and
         (m)   Perform any other functions that may be designated by resolution
or action of the City Council.
      (2)   Secretary. The Director shall act as Secretary of the Commission
and shall be custodian of its records, conduct official correspondence, and
generally coordinate the clerical and technical work of the Commission in
administering this subchapter.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17 ; Am. Ord. 679, passed 10-19-21 )
§ 153.605 SAN GABRIEL INVENTORY OF CULTURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   Purpose. The Cultural Resources Chapter of the General Plan includes
goals and targets intended to identify and protect San Gabriel’s cultural
resources. Target 11.4.2 specifies the creation of an inventory of “San
Gabriel’s cultural resources and landscapes.” This section furthers this goal
by creating the San Gabriel Inventory of Cultural Resources (Inventory).
   (B)   Intent. This section establishes the process for creating and managing
the Inventory, which is the city’s list of potentially eligible cultural
resources.
   (C)   Inventory of cultural resources established. The city shall create and
maintain an official list of properties known as the San Gabriel Inventory of
Cultural Resources (“Inventory”). The Inventory shall be a list of potentially
eligible cultural resources identified through a historic resource survey. The
historic resource survey creating the Inventory shall be completed under the
direction of the Director and Commission by a qualified architectural historian
or historian as defined in this subchapter, in accordance with accepted
professional practices. Prior to commencement of a historic resource survey,
the city shall commission the preparation of a citywide historic context
statement, in order to identify significant themes and patterns of development
and to develop a consistent framework for survey work and evaluations.
   (D)   Inventory creation, review, and adoption. Within the first year of its
establishment, the Commission shall forward a plan to the City Council
recommending a comprehensive and systematic historic resource survey, which
will provide the basis for the Inventory. The Inventory shall be reviewed and
approved by the Commission. The Commission shall then refer the Inventory to
the City Council for discussion and approval. The Commission shall compile and
maintain the Inventory of Cultural Resources.
   (E)   Inventory updates. In accordance with the purpose of this subchapter
and to ensure the city’s proactive identification and treatment of cultural
resources, and consistent with the intent of Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 5024.1.g(4),
the Inventory shall be reviewed at minimum every five years and periodically
updated through historic resource surveys.
   (F)   Inventory notification. All owners and residents of properties
included on the Inventory shall be notified by the city of this inclusion, in a
process and timeline to be determined by the Director. In order to ensure that
owners, residents, and potential owners are aware of the status of cultural
resources, the Director and Building and Safety Division shall implement and
oversee a system for clearly identifying and marking the building records of
all Inventory-listed properties, including but not limited to a geographic
information systems (GIS) database.
   (G)   Inventory of cultural resources and CEQA. In accordance with
California Code of Regulations Title 14, Chapter 3, § 15064.5(a)(2), properties
included on the Inventory of Cultural Resources shall be considered historical
resources for purposes of CEQA.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.606 SAN GABRIEL REGISTER OF CULTURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   Purpose. The Cultural Resources Chapter of the General Plan includes
goals and targets aimed at identifying, conserving, and protecting San
Gabriel’s cultural resources. The creation of the San Gabriel Register of
Cultural Resources (Register) forwards the goals of the General Plan.
   (B)   Intent. This section establishes the process for creating and managing
the Register, which is the city’s list of officially designated cultural
resources.
   (C)   Register of cultural resources established. There is hereby
established the San Gabriel Register of Cultural Resources (“Register”). The
Register shall include all locally designated cultural resources, as well as
properties designated on the National Register of Historic Places and
California Register of Historical Resources. The Register is also understood to
include all contributors to designated historic districts in addition to
individually designated properties. The most current iteration of the Register
shall be made available on the city’s website and will be included in the
city’s GIS database.
   (D)    Reserved.
   (E)   Prior local designations. Any property designated as a culturally
significant landmark or as a historic landmark by the City Council on or before
the effective date of this subchapter shall be automatically designated as a
cultural resource for purposes of this subchapter and included on the Register.
Any historic property under a Mills Act contract at the time of the adoption of
this subchapter shall also be automatically added to the Register.
   (F)   New designations. New designations of cultural resources shall be
initiated in accordance with the criteria and procedures set forth in this
subchapter.
   (G)   Designation runs with the land. The designation of a cultural resource
shall not be affected by a change of the property owner.
   (H)   Rescission of designation. The conditions and process for amendment or
rescission of a cultural resource designation are described in §
153.612 (Amendment or Rescission of Designation).
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17 ; Am. Ord. 679, passed 10-19-21 )
§ 153.607 DESIGNATION CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC LANDMARKS.
   With the advice of the Commission, the City Council may designate a
property, site, public art, park, cultural landscape, or natural feature as a
historic landmark and add it to the San Gabriel Register if it meets the
requirements described in divisions (A) and (B) below:
   (A)   The property meets one of the following eligibility criteria:
      (1)   It is or was once associated or identified with important events or
broad patterns of development that have made a significant contribution to the
cultural, architectural, social, historical, economic, and political heritage
of the city, region, state, or nation.
      (2)   It is or was once associated with an important person or persons
who made a significant contribution to the history, development, and/or culture
of the city, region, state, or nation.
      (3)   It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a style, type,
period, or method of construction; represents the work of a master, or
possesses high artistic or aesthetic values; or it represents one of the last,
best remaining examples of an architectural type or style in a neighborhood or
the city that was once common but is increasingly rare.
      (4)   It has yielded or has the potential to yield information important
to the prehistory or history of the city, region, state, or nation.
   (B)   The property retains integrity from its period of significance, as
determined by a qualified architectural historian or historian. A proposed
historic landmark need not retain all seven aspects of historic integrity
(location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association),
but it must retain sufficient integrity to convey the reasons for its cultural,
architectural, social, historical, economic, and political significance.
   (C)   Neither the deferred maintenance of a proposed historic landmark nor
its dilapidated condition shall, on its own, be equated with a loss of
integrity. Integrity shall be judged with reference to the particular
characteristics that support the property’s eligibility under the appropriate
criteria and theme of significance.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.608 DESIGNATION CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   In addition to satisfying the criteria in §
153.607(A) when recommending the designation of a historic district, the
Commission and City Council must also find:
      (1)   That the historic district is an identifiable and distinct entity
with discernible boundaries, consisting of a cohesive concentration, linkage,
or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united historically or
aesthetically by plan or physical development.
      (2)   That the historic district retains integrity from its period of
significance as determined by a qualified architectural historian or historian.
Not all properties or features within a proposed district need to retain all
seven aspects of integrity (location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association), but a substantial number of such properties and
structures must retain sufficient integrity to convey the historic, cultural,
or architectural significance of the district.
      (3)   That a minimum of 51% of the buildings and structures within the
boundaries of the historic district be identified as contributors to the
historic district.
   (B)   The components of an eligible historic district may lack individual
distinction but still represent a significant and distinguishable entity that
meets eligibility criteria.
   (C)   In recommending approval of a historic district, the Commission shall
recommend the adoption of district-specific preservation plan and design
guidelines to guide subsequent in-fill and new construction, alterations and
additions, and to further the purpose of this subchapter.
   (D)   Neither deferred maintenance within a proposed district nor the
dilapidated condition of its constituent buildings and landscapes shall, on its
own, be equated with a loss of integrity. Integrity shall be judged with
reference to the particular characteristics that support the district’s
eligibility under the appropriate criteria and theme of significance.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.609 DESIGNATION PROCEDURES–HISTORIC LANDMARKS.
   (A)   Application.   The Historic Preservation and Cultural Resource
Commission, upon its own initiative or upon the written request of any person
or group, including the San Gabriel Historical Association, or any city agency,
may recommend the designation of a historic landmark to the Register. In the
event the City Council, city agency, or Commission initiates the application,
the Director shall oversee and cause the completion of the required
application.
   (B)   Notification of property owners. The property owner of each cultural
resource nominated to the Register shall be notified by the city of the
proposed designation at least 60 days prior to the Commission hearing at which
the application is considered. Notification shall be to the last owner of
record as contained on the most recent equalized assessment roll of the County
of Los Angeles and shall be by certified mail. Property owners shall have the
right to protest the designation of their property before the Commission and
City Council. Such protest shall be in writing to the Community Development
Department and/or presented in testimony before the Commission and/or City
Council.
   (C)   Landmark application materials. All applications for designation shall
be made on a form prescribed by the Director and shall include the following
data:
      (1)   The assessor’s parcel number and legal description of the site.
      (2)   A description of the property and statement of how it qualifies
under the criteria described in §
153.607 or
153.608.
      (3)   A detailed architectural description, enumerating the property’s
character-defining features, elevations, and spaces.
      (4)   Construction chronology of the property, including detailed history
of major alterations/additions.
      (5)   Ownership history.
      (6)   A statement of significance describing why and how the property or
feature meets the eligibility criteria of the code including the area of
significance, theme, and period of significance.
      (7)   Current photographs and (if available) historic photographs, maps,
sketches, drawings, or other descriptive material as available to support the
nomination.
      (8)   Any applicable fees as determined by the Director, and such other
information as requested by the Commission or Director.
      (9)   For a multi-property nomination, the application package should
include a detailed statement of significance for the class of resources being
nominated and the eligibility requirements for individual properties to be
considered part of the nomination. Documentation of the individually nominated
properties should include division (C)(1) through (5) above of the landmark
application materials and a statement of how each individual property satisfies
the specified eligibility requirements.
   (D)   Confirmation of eligibility. At the discretion of the Director, a
historic resource evaluation may be prepared to provide a professional peer
review of a designation application, to confirm the finding of eligibility.
Such an assessment shall be submitted to the Commission for review and
concurrence. The assessment shall be completed by a qualified architectural
historian or historian as defined in this subchapter.
   (E)   Commission review and recommendation. The Commission shall review and
conduct a public hearing on the merits of the application, to determine whether
the proposed landmark satisfies the criteria for landmark designation
stipulated in §
153.607 of this subchapter. The public hearing will be noticed in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter. After the close of the hearing, the
Commission shall adopt a resolution recommending to the City Council the
approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application.
   (F)   City Council determination. After receiving the Commission’s
recommendation, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the landmark
nomination application. The public hearing will be noticed in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter. The City Council shall consider the
Commission’s recommendation and any written objection to the designation by the
nominated property’s owner filed with the Director at least ten days prior to
the City Council hearing. The City Council shall adopt a resolution approving,
conditionally approving, or denying the application. If the City Council has
not taken action on the application within 180 days of the Commission’s
recommendation, then the application shall be deemed denied.
   (G)   Designation.
      (1)   Upon designation by the City Council, the Director or his or her
designee shall forward a copy of the resolution approving the designation of a
historic landmark to any department or agency that the Director deems
appropriate, and shall record or cause to be recorded the location,
characteristics, and significance of the historic landmark on a California
Department of Parks and Recreation Historic Resources Inventory Form 523, or
current equivalent form, in accordance with the practices specified by the
State Office of Historic Preservation for the recordation of cultural
resources.
      (2)   Upon adoption and placement of the property on the Register, the
resolution of designation shall be recorded with the County Recorder’s office
pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 5029, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (3)   A designated cultural resource may be identified by an approved
city marker, but such a marker is not required.
   (H)   Building records for Register-listed properties. In order to ensure
that owners, residents, and potential owners are aware of the status of
cultural resources in the city, the Director and Building and Safety Division
will implement and oversee a system for marking and identifying the building
records of all Register-listed properties in the city.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.610 DESIGNATION PROCEDURES–HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Initiation of request for designation of a historic district.
Applications for historic districts may be initiated by any property owner,
resident, or tenant in the potential historic district, the Commission, or any
city agency. The request must include the draft boundaries for the historic
district and be accompanied by a preliminary statement of how the potential
district satisfies the historic district criteria for designation, a map, and
representative photographs of the district. The request must also include a
petition signed by at least 51% of the property owners within the proposed
boundaries of the potential district, stating their support of pursuing
historic district designation.
   (B)   Preliminary determination of eligibility and public hearing to take
historic district under consideration. Upon receipt of a request for historic
district consideration, the Director shall make a preliminary determination of
eligibility, with the assistance of a qualified architectural historian or
historian as defined in this subchapter. The Commission shall conduct a public
hearing on the preliminary determination to decide whether to take the proposed
district under consideration. Notice of the meeting shall be sent to all
property owners and all addresses within the boundaries of the district.
Following the public hearing, written notice of the decision of the Commission
to proceed or not proceed with the district designation shall be sent to all
property owners and all addresses within the boundaries of the district.
   (C)   Historic resource survey. If the Commission decides to proceed with
the designation, an intensive-level historic resource survey of the district
shall be prepared by a qualified architectural historian or historian as
defined in this subchapter. The survey report shall include a clear description
of the district boundaries; an itemization of all contributing and non-
contributing resources and features within those boundaries; a statement of the
historic context of the district and how the district satisfies the designation
criteria; California Department of Parks and Recreation Inventory forms (series
523) for the district and all properties within the district boundaries; and
recommendations for a preservation plan and design guidelines for the district.
   (D)   Public workshop. During or after completion of the historic resource
survey, the Commission shall hold one or more public workshops to discuss the
formation of the historic district. The workshop(s) shall be noticed as
specified in §
153.610(B) of this subchapter.
   (E)   Commission review and recommendation. Following completion of the
historic resource survey and public workshop(s), the Commission shall review
and conduct a public hearing on the survey and district application. The public
hearing will be noticed as specified in §
153.610(B) of this subchapter. After the close of the hearing, the Commission
shall adopt a resolution recommending to the City Council the approval,
conditional approval, or denial of the application. Written notice of the
recommendation of the Commission shall be sent to all property owners and
addresses within the boundaries of the district.
   (F)   City Council determination. After receiving the Commission’s
recommendation, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the district
application. The public hearing will be noticed as specified in §
153.610(B) of this subchapter. The City Council shall adopt a resolution
approving, conditionally approving, or denying the application. If the City
Council has not taken action on the application within 180 days of the
Commission’s recommendation, then the application shall be deemed denied.
Written notice of the City Council action shall be sent to all property owners
and addresses within the boundaries of the district.
      (1)   Whenever the City Council designates a historic district, it shall
also adopt: (1) a written description and clear depiction of the district
boundaries; and (2) a detailed report that identifies and describes the
contributing resources and elements of the district, as well as those resources
and elements that are not contributing resources.
      (2)   Subsequent demolition of non-contributors, new construction,
alterations, or additions to properties within the designated historic district
shall be subject to the initial review process for historic appropriateness as
described in this subchapter.
      (3)   The Director or Commission shall, in a timely manner, also prepare
or commission the preparation of a preservation plan and design guidelines for
designated historic districts. Design guidelines shall establish standards and
recommended/not recommended approaches for new construction, alterations, and
additions within the boundaries of the historic district. In addition to (or in
the absence of) design guidelines, the Secretary’s Standards shall be used in
the completion of the initial review process for historic appropriateness for
new construction, alterations, and additions.
      (4)   The city shall not establish the district if 51% of the property
owners file an objection in writing prior to the City Council public hearing.
The percentage is to be determined based on the number of Assessor’s parcels
within the district.
   (G)   Designation. Upon designation by the City Council, the Director or his
or her designee shall forward a copy of the resolution approving the
designation of a historic district to any department or agency that the
Director deems appropriate and the resolution of designation shall be recorded
with the County Recorder’s office pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 5029, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.611 CONSERVATION OVERLAY ZONES–CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Purpose. The Cultural Resources Chapter of the General Plan includes a
number of goals and targets intended to identify, conserve, and protect the
historic character of the city’s neighborhoods. Allowing for the identification
and adoption of conservation overlay zones forwards General Plan goals and
targets.
   (B)   Intent. This section establishes the criteria and process for
identifying and adopting conservation overlay zones.
   (C)   Definition. CONSERVATION OVERLAY ZONES are cohesive groupings of
related properties that convey an era or type of construction in the city’s
history but do not qualify for designation as historic districts. This
subchapter provides for the identification and management of such CONSERVATION
OVERLAY ZONES. Alterations to properties and features found to be contributing
elements of CONSERVATION OVERLAY ZONES shall be subject to design guidelines
and standards as adopted by the Commission. For purposes of CEQA, CONSERVATION
OVERLAY ZONES are not historical resources.
   (D)   Procedures. As verified by a qualified architectural historian or
historian through a historic resource survey or evaluation, the Commission may
recommend that the City Council approve the creation of a conservation overlay
zone if the proposed zone meets one of the following criteria:
      (1)   It represents a grouping of properties and features with a cohesive
and identifiable setting, architectural style, scale, or character, and/or
development history or association that makes it an integral part of the city’s
identity; or
      (2)   It represents a recognized neighborhood identity with a definable
physical character whose retention would contribute to the historic character
and setting of the city.
   (E)   Design guidelines. The adoption of a conservation overlay zone shall
be accompanied, within a timely manner, by the adoption of design guidelines to
guide new construction/in-fill, major alterations, and additions within the
boundaries of the conservation overlay zone. The design guidelines shall
reference the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards, particularly with
reference to the mass and scale of new construction/infill, major alterations,
and additions, interpreted with the flexibility appropriate to a conservation
overlay zone.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.612 AMENDMENT OR RESCISSION OF DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Criteria for rescission. Once a cultural resource has been designated,
it shall not be repealed by the City Council unless the City Council first
determines that: (1) the evidence used to establish the designation was
erroneous; or (2) the cultural resource no longer meets the criteria for
designation established in §§
153.607 and
153.608 of this subchapter.
   (B)   Amendment or rescission. The City Council may initiate an amendment or
rescission of the designation of any designated cultural resource in the same
manner that is followed for designation. This process shall be considered a
discretionary action under CEQA.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.613 DUTY TO MAINTAIN DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   Purpose. The owner, or other person in charge, of a cultural resource
listed on the Register has a duty to maintain in good repair all exterior
features and to comply with all applicable codes, laws, and regulations
governing the maintenance of the cultural resource. It is the intent of this
section to preserve from deliberate or inadvertent neglect the exterior
features of cultural resources and the interior portions thereof when such
maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of the exterior.
Cultural resources listed on the Register shall be protected against such decay
and deterioration and shall remain free from structural defects through prompt
corrections of any of the following defects:
      (1)   Deterioration of exterior walls, foundations or other vertical
supports that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling;
      (2)   Deterioration of flooring or floor supports or other horizontal
members that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling;
      (3)   Deterioration of external chimneys that causes leaning, sagging,
splitting, listing or buckling;
      (4)   Deterioration of crumbling exterior plasters or mortars;
      (5)   Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, foundations
including broken windows and doors;
      (6)   Defective protection or lack of weather protection for exterior
walls and roof coverings, including through the lack of paint or other
protective covering;
      (7)   Rotting holes or other forms of decay;
      (8)   Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window and
door frames, cornices, entablatures, wall facings, ornament, trim and other
architectural details that cause delamination, instability, loss of shape and
form and crumbling.
   (B)   Enforcement procedures.
      (1)   The Director may file a petition listing specific defects with the
Neighborhood Improvement Services Manager, or person whom the Director has
designated to act in that capacity, requesting the correction of defects and/or
repairs to designated properties.
      (2)   Whenever such a petition is filed, the Neighborhood Improvement
Services Manager or the Director’s designee shall attempt to make direct
personal contact with the owner or other such person having legal possession or
custody and/or representative. If personal contact is not possible, then
written notification of the specific defects and a right to inspect the
property will be mailed to the owner or such person having legal possession,
custody and/or control and posted at a conspicuous location appropriate to the
identified defects. In the written notification, the Neighborhood Improvement
Services Manager or the Director’s designee shall document the nature of the
specific defects and corrective action ordered.
      (3)   After receiving agreement from the owner, representative or other
such persons having legal possession, custody and control of the property for
an inspection, the Neighborhood Improvement Services Manager or the Director’s
designee and the Director or his or her designee shall conduct an investigation
and prepare a written report on whether the property requires work to meet the
requirements of division (A) set forth above.
      (4)   If the property is found to require work to meet the requirements
of division (A) above, the owner, representative or such persons having legal
possession, custody and control of the property will be served within 15 days
with a complaint identifying the deficiencies and providing notice that a
hearing will be held before the Commission at their next available agenda. The
purpose of the hearing shall be to:
         (a)   Receive evidence about the deteriorated conditions;
         (b)   Develop a plan and schedule for undertaking the needed repairs
to stabilize the building or structure and arrest further deterioration.
      (5)   Following such notice and hearing a written determination as to the
conditions in need of correction/repair will be prepared, and the owner or
other interested parties will be served with an order to repair those defective
elements within a reasonable specified time frame.
      (6)   If the owner fails to make the necessary repairs within the
identified time frame, the city may utilize any available remedy at law to
correct the deficiencies that create any hazardous and/or unsafe conditions to
life, health, or property. The expense of this work can be recorded as a lien
on the property.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.614 INITIAL REVIEW–REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out any
alteration or relocation of a property listed on the Register unless the city
has first completed an initial review for historic appropriateness of the
proposed work in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter. The
approval or denial of the proposed work shall be deemed a discretionary action
under CEQA (California Code of Regulations, Title 14, § 15002(i)).
   (B)   Intent. It is the intent of the City of San Gabriel that cultural
resources listed on the Register will not be inappropriately altered or
relocated unless extraordinary circumstances exist. Initial reviews for
appropriateness shall comply with applicable state and federal laws and
regulations, including without limitation, CEQA, the National Historic
Preservation Act and the National Environmental Policy Act. Performance of any
work that falls within the provisions of this subchapter without an initial
review is prohibited.
   (C)   Actions requiring an initial review by administrative clearance. Minor
alterations to a cultural resource meeting the conditions described in §
153.615(A) and (B).
   (D)   Actions requiring an initial review by Commission. The following
actions shall require an initial review for appropriateness from the
Commission.
      (1)   Major alterations or relocation of a cultural resource listed on
the Register, including all properties identified as contributing to a historic
district listed on the Register;
      (2)   New construction within a historic district listed on the Register;
      (3)   Any other project referred to the Commission by the City Council,
Planning Commission, Design Review Commission, or city staff.
   (E)   Exceptions to requirement for initial review, ordinary maintenance and
repair. An initial review shall not be required for ordinary maintenance and
repair as defined in this subchapter, or for projects that do not, by law,
require issuance of a permit and do not involve a change of design, materials,
or exterior appearance. From time to time as circumstances warrant, the
Commission may, by resolution, modify the list of actions deemed to qualify for
an exemption from the initial review requirement. The following work or
construction involving a cultural resource shall not require an initial review:
      (1)   Exterior or interior paint color;
      (2)   Ordinary maintenance and repair that does not require a building
permit, as defined in §
153.603 of this subchapter;
      (3)   Landscaping, including sprinkler system work, that does not affect
a character-defining feature;
      (4)   Paving work that does not affect a character-defining feature;
      (5)   All work that is entirely interior and does not affect the exterior
of a cultural resource, except for interior features that are specifically
mentioned as character-defining features in a landmark designation adopted by
the city or character-defining interior features that were originally
accessible by the public;
      (6)   Replacement of existing screens and awnings with the same or
substantially consistent materials, form, and shape;
      (7)   Other projects as determined by the Director or his or her
designee.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.615 INITIAL REVIEW, ADMINISTRATIVE CLEARANCE FOR MINOR
ALTERATIONS–PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Purpose. An initial review administrative clearance may be completed
by the Director or his or her designee for minor alterations to designated
cultural resources that require issuance of a permit but do not involve a
change of design, material, or appearance of character-defining features or the
removal or obstruction of character-defining features. The initial review
administrative clearance shall apply to properties listed on the Register.
   (B)   Eligibility. From time to time as circumstances warrant, the
Commission may, by resolution, modify the list of actions deemed to qualify for
an initial review administrative clearance. Minor alterations that may be
eligible for an initial review administrative clearance include the following
projects:
      (1)   Demolition or relocation of non-character-defining features,
including, without limitation, non-contributing additions, garages, accessory
structures or incompatible, previously replaced windows, doors, or siding
material;
      (2)   Re-roofing, if the proposed roofing material is comparable in
appearance, color, and profile to the existing or original roofing material, as
shown through documentary evidence;
      (3)   Replacement of windows and doors if the proposed replacements are
the same materials, form, and color as the existing or original windows and
doors, as shown through documentary evidence;
      (4)   Foundation work;
      (5)   Landscape alterations, or removal or installation of tree and plant
material not specifically designated or listed as character-defining features
in the landmark nomination application;
      (6)   New paving for driveways, walkways, and/or patios not specifically
designated or listed as character-defining features in the landmark nomination
application;
      (7)   Repainting of exterior surfaces and materials that were painted
during the period of significance and specified as character-defining features
on landmark application materials. The painting of character-defining exterior
surfaces and materials that were originally unpainted are specifically excluded
from this provision;
      (8)   Installation of exterior lighting;
      (9)   Electrical, plumbing, utility work, and other permits for
mechanical and other building systems, including rooftop appurtenances not
visible from the public right-of-way or any property at street level;
      (10)   Repair or replacement of deteriorated materials with replacements/
components made of the same materials, with the same appearance and function as
the original character-defining features;
      (11)   Addition or removal of canopies whose removal does not result in
damage or destruction of character-defining features;
      (12)   An addition of fewer than 150 square feet located on rear
elevations that are not visible from the public right-of-way and that do not
change, remove, or obscure character-defining features;
      (13)   Other minor rehabilitation work as determined by the Director or
his or her designee;
      (14)   Minor changes to a previously approved administrative initial
review as determined by the Director or his or her designee;
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.616 INITIAL REVIEW, ADMINISTRATIVE CLEARANCE FOR MINOR
ALTERATIONS–FINDINGS.
   The following considerations shall guide the initial review administrative
clearance for historic appropriateness.
   (A)   The Director or his or her designee may approve or approve with
conditions an initial review administrative clearance for historic
appropriateness for minor alterations to cultural resources listed on the
Register that:
      (1)   Are compatible with the historic character and scale of the
cultural resource, including its size, massing, proportions, orientation,
architectural details, and the spatial relationships that characterize the
property and its site;
      (2)   Do not result in a change of design, material, or appearance of the
property’s character-defining features (except those changes determined to be
in compliance with the Secretary’s Standards, per division (A)(3) below;
      (3)   Comply with the Secretary’s Standards and any other applicable
design guidelines adopted by the city;
      (4)   Will not cause a substantial adverse change in the significance of
a cultural resource in accordance with CEQA;
      (5)   Are consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan; and
      (6)   Are consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   In accordance with CEQA, a project that has been determined to conform
with the Secretary’s Standards is generally considered to be a project that
will not cause a significant adverse impact to a historical resource, pursuant
to California Code of Regulations, Title 14, § 15126.4(b)(1). Projects that
comply with the Secretary’s Standards may be exempt from further review under
CEQA, pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title 14, § 15331.
   (C)   No changes shall be made to approved plans for which an initial review
administrative clearance for historic appropriateness has been completed
without resubmitting the revised plans to the Director or his or her designee
for review and approval.
   (D)   All initial reviews completed in accordance with this section shall
expire one year from the date of effectiveness unless work is started within
that time.
   (E)   If the Director or his or her designee determines that proposed work
involving a cultural resource could result in a change of design, material, or
appearance of character-defining features or could have the potential to
conflict with the Secretary’s Standards, the Director or his or her designee
may refer the project and the initial review to the Commission.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.617 INITIAL REVIEW BY COMMISSION, MAJOR ALTERATIONS–PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application. The owner or authorized representative proposing major
alterations to a cultural resource listed on the Register shall file an
application for an initial review. The application must be accompanied by any
required fee.
      (1)   The application for an initial review shall include the following
data:
         (a)   A description of the proposed work and an explanation of how it
complies with the Secretary’s Standards and other applicable design guidelines
and standards as appropriate.
         (b)   Detailed architectural plans, including floor plans, elevations,
and drawings, illustrating the scale, massing, character, and detailing of the
proposed work, including existing and proposed elevations and plans.
Information on the specifications and appearance of existing and proposed
replacement materials and features should also be included.
         (c)   A site plan showing all existing buildings and structures and
the relationship of the proposed work to the surrounding environment.
         (d)   Relationship to the existing scale, massing, architectural
style, site and streetscape, landscaping and signage, for new construction in
historic districts.
         (e)   Other information deemed necessary by the Director or his or her
designee.
      (2)   Upon deeming the application to be complete, the Community
Development Department shall transmit the application to the Commission within
ten days of the receipt of a complete application.
      (3)   Early-stage conceptual review. Prior to the hearing for an initial
review, applicants shall have the opportunity to present for discussion with
the Commission and/or city preservation staff early-stage, conceptual plans for
alterations to cultural resources and new construction in historic districts.
The purpose of conceptual review shall be to obtain preliminary comments and
direction on project design and options prior to the initial review hearing.
There is no fee for conceptual review. Conceptual review before the Commission
shall be a discussion item (no finding or decision will be taken).
      (4)   Commission review. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on
each initial review application, after which it shall adopt a resolution
approving, conditionally approving, or denying the application.
      (5)   Issuance of initial review findings. Upon approval, copies of the
initial review findings shall be forwarded to the applicant, the Building
Official, the Director, and any other department or agency that requests one.
      (6)   Appeal. Decisions of the Commission or city regarding an initial
review are subject to appeal in accordance with §
153.626 of this subchapter. No initial review shall become effective until the
time to appeal its denial or approval has expired.
      (7)   Public notice requirements. All projects requiring an initial
review subject to the Commission’s approval shall require public notification.
The city shall, no later than ten days prior to the hearing, issue a public
hearing notice indicating the place, date, and time of the Commission meeting
and include a brief description of the proposed project. Public notification
shall be provided as follows:
         (a)   Hearing notice to applicant and owners. Public notification
shall be provided to the applicant, to all owners of real property as shown on
the county’s latest equalized assessment roll, and to all legal occupants
located within a 300-foot radius of the subject parcel upon which an initial
review is requested. As determined by staff, an expanded notification may be
required to 500 feet.
         (b)   Hearing notice to owners of historic district properties. Public
notification for any project proposed within a locally designated historic
district or a district listed on the California Register shall be as follows:
the public notification described in division (A) above, plus the owners of
real property as shown on the county’s latest equalized assessment roll and to
all legal occupants of each property located within the historic district.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.618 INITIAL REVIEW BY COMMISSION, MAJOR ALTERATIONS–FINDINGS.
   (A)   The following considerations shall guide the initial review by the
Commission.
      (1)   The Commission may approve or approve with conditions an initial
review for projects involving major alterations to cultural resources that:
         (a)   Are compatible with the historic character and scale of the
cultural resource, including its size, massing, proportions, orientation,
architectural details, and the spatial relationships that characterize the
property and its site;
         (b)   Do not result in a change of design, material, or appearance of
the property’s character-defining features (except those changes determined to
be in compliance with the Secretary’s Standards, per division (A)(1)(c) below);
         (c)   Comply with the Secretary’s Standards and any other applicable
design guidelines adopted by the city and therefore are either mitigated to a
less-than-significant impact on historical resources under CEQA (CEQA
Guidelines [California Code of Regulations. Title 14] § 15064.5(b)(3)) or
exempt from CEQA under Class 31, which applies to “projects limited to
maintenance, repair, stabilization, rehabilitation, restoration, preservation,
conservation or reconstruction of historical resources in a manner consistent
with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties with Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring, and
Reconstructing Historic Buildings (1995), Weeks and Grimmer” (CEQA Guidelines
[California Code of Regulations Title 14] § 15331);
         (d)   Will not cause a substantial adverse change in the significance
of a cultural resource in accordance with CEQA;
         (e)   Are consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan;
and
         (f)   Are consistent with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   No changes shall be made to approved plans for which an initial
review was completed without resubmitting the revised plans for Commission
review.
      (3)   All initial reviews completed in accordance with this section shall
expire one year from the date of effectiveness unless work is started within
that time.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.619 SAN GABRIEL INVENTORY AND THE INITIAL REVIEW–REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. No person shall carry out or cause to be carried out any
major alteration or relocation of a potential cultural resource listed on the
Inventory unless the city has first completed an initial review in accordance
with the requirements of this subchapter. The approval or denial of the
proposed work involving Inventory-listed cultural resources shall be deemed a
discretionary action under CEQA (California Code of Regulations, Title 14, §
15002(i).
   (B)   Actions requiring an initial review. The following actions shall
require an initial review from the Director or his or her designee. The
Director may refer some initial reviews for Inventory resources to the
Commission for action. Performance of any work that falls within the provisions
of this subchapter without an initial review is prohibited.
      (1)   Major alterations or relocation of a cultural resource listed on
the Inventory;
      (2)   New construction within a historic district listed on the
Inventory;
   (C)   The Director shall develop procedures and findings associated with the
completion of an initial review for Inventory properties.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.620 RELOCATION OF DESIGNATED CULTURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   Purpose. Relocation has the potential to adversely affect the
significance of cultural resources and is discouraged. Should relocation of a
Register-listed cultural resource be necessary, this section outlines the
process and criteria for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for
relocation.
   (B)   Procedure. The Director or his or her designee shall review
applications for relocating Register-listed cultural resources. At the
discretion of the Director, relocation applications can be submitted to the
Commission for review.
   (C)   Criteria for relocation. Relocation shall be permitted only when
relocation is consistent with the goals and policies of the General Plan, this
subchapter, and applicable area or specific plans, and only when all of the
following findings can be made by the Director or Commission:
      (1)   Relocation will not significantly change, destroy, or adversely
affect the historic integrity of the cultural resource;
      (2)   Relocation will not have a significant adverse effect on the
character of the historic district or neighborhood, or surrounding properties
where the cultural resource is located or at the location of its receiver site;
      (3)   The original site and the proposed receiver site are controlled
through ownership, long-term lease, or similar assurance by the person(s)
proposing relocation, to the Commission’s approval; and
      (4)   The relocation is necessary to correct an unsafe or dangerous
condition on the site and no other measures for correcting the condition have
been determined feasible, or the relocation is necessary to preserve the
cultural resource and all other feasible options for preservation on the
original site have failed, as determined by the Director or Commission.
   (D)   Relocation timing. The cultural resource shall not be relocated until
all appropriate entitlements have been obtained.
   (E)   Relocation plan. Relocations shall follow a plan approved by the
Commission or Director and include the following:
      (1)   Application for relocation shall be made on a form provided by the
Director.
      (2)   The Commission shall hold a noticed public hearing and make a
determination to approve or deny the permit.
      (3)   The Commission shall not grant an approval for the relocation of a
listed historic resource unless the criteria for relocation have been met.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.621 CERTIFICATE OF DEMOLITION.
   (A)   Purpose. This section describes the process for obtaining a
certificate of demolition for any property listed on the Register or Inventory.
No permit shall be issued by the city or staff designee to demolish a property
included on the Register or Inventory without first obtaining a certificate of
demolition. The approval or denial of the certificate of demolition shall be
deemed a discretionary action under CEQA (California Code of Regulations, Title
14, § 15002(i)). Penalties for noncompliance with the provisions of this
subchapter are described in §
153.629 (Enforcement and Penalties).
   (B)   Intent. It is the intent of the city that cultural resources will not
be demolished unless extraordinary circumstances exist. In keeping with the
purpose of the General Plan and this subchapter, cultural resources merit
protection in order to encourage their retention for the benefit and enjoyment
of current and future generations. The following provisions are intended to
establish reasonable measures to ensure that cultural resources are not
inadvertently or unnecessarily destroyed and that all feasible alternatives to
their demolition are explored.
   (C)   Compliance with federal and state laws. Review of all applications for
a certificate of demolition shall comply with applicable state and federal laws
and regulations, including without limitation, CEQA, the National Historic
Preservation Act and the National Environmental Policy Act.
   (D)   Application materials. All applications for a certificate of
demolition will include:
      (1)   The demolition permit application, on a form prescribed by the
Director;
      (2)   If the cultural resource has been determined an imminent hazard,
documentation from the Director, including documentation from a qualified
structural engineer, as defined in §
153.603 (Definitions), describing the basis for this determination;
      (3)   If the cultural resource has been determined to no longer meet the
criteria for eligibility, documentation from a qualified architectural
historian or historian as defined in §
153.603 (Definitions), describing the basis for this determination;
      (4)   Other materials as requested by the Director. Such materials may
include (but not be limited to) current photographs of the resource(s) for
which the certificate of demolition is requested; a plot plan identifying the
resource(s) proposed for demolition and any other buildings, structures or
historic features on the property; and documentation of any claims by the
applicant regarding the condition or costs for repair of the resource.
   (E)   One hundred eighty-day waiting period. For any cultural resource not
deemed an imminent hazard, the Director and/or Commission may delay demolition
for a period of up to but not exceeding 180 days. During this period, the
Commission and Director shall work with the property owner to explore
alternatives to demolition, including adaptive re-use and/or rehabilitation in
accordance with the Secretary’s Standards, application of the California
Historical Building Code to allow for flexibility in code requirements in cases
of adaptive reuse or rehabilitation, use of financial incentives such as the
Mills Act historic property contract program, relocation, resale, or other
provisions as appropriate.
   (F)   Procedure.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for demolition, a notice of intent
to demolish, on a form approved by the Director, shall be prominently posted on
the property.
      (2)   The Director or his or her designee shall review the application
for demolition and confirm that all requested materials have been provided.
Once deemed complete, the application will be scheduled for the next available
Commission meeting.
      (3)   If the cultural resource proposed for demolition has been
determined to be an imminent threat to public health, safety, and welfare by
the City Building Official, the Director or his or her designee may approve or
deny the request.
      (4)   All projects requiring a certificate of demolition shall require
public notification. The city shall, no later than ten days prior to the
hearing, issue a public hearing notice indicating the place, date, and time of
the Commission meeting and include a brief description of the proposed project.
Public notification shall be provided as follows:
         (a)   Hearing notice to applicant and owners. Public notification
shall be provided to the applicant, to all owners of real property as shown on
the county’s latest equalized assessment roll, and to all legal occupants
located within a 300-foot radius of the subject parcel upon which a certificate
is requested.
         (b)   Hearing notice to owners of historic district properties. Public
notification for any project proposed within a locally designated historic
district or a district listed on the California Register shall be as follows:
the public notification described in division (F)(4)(a) above, plus the owners
of real property as shown on the county’s latest equalized assessment roll and
to all legal occupants of each property located within the historic district.
      (5)   The Commission shall review the application, staff report, and hear
evidence presented by property owners and members of the public to determine if
the criteria for demolition approval have been met. The Commission shall
approve, deny, delay the demolition for a specified period, approve with
conditions, or continue the application to obtain additional information
necessary to consider the demolition request.
      (6)   If the demolition request is denied because it does not meet the
aforementioned criteria, the applicant may request demolition approval based on
a finding of economic hardship in accordance with §
153.623 of this subchapter;
      (7)   If the demolition request is denied, the owner or applicant may
appeal the Commission’s decision in writing to the City Council within ten days
of the Commission’s decision in accordance with §
153.626 of this subchapter.
      (8)   If a certificate of demolition approval is granted on any basis
other than that of imminent hazard to public safety or economic hardship, the
city will not issue a certificate of demolition approval until (1) Historic
American Buildings Survey (HABS) or Historic American Engineering Report (HAER)
documentation of the resource slated for demolition and its setting have been
completed by a qualified architectural historian, historian, or historic
architect as defined in this subchapter and (2) plans for the replacement
structure have been approved by the Commission. The replacement plan must be in
compliance with existing zoning, the city’s General Plan, any adopted
neighborhood or specific plan for the area and applicable design guidelines.
Vacant land or non-use will not constitute a valid replacement plan.
      (9)   The Director or his or her designee will analyze the replacement
plan for its conformance with the Secretary’s Standards and other city-level
design guidelines as applicable and will prepare a report with recommendations.
         (a)   The Commission will review the replacement plan and make a
decision to approve, deny, approve with conditions or continue the matter with
specific instructions as to what information is needed to make a decision on
the request.
         (b)   If the replacement plan is denied, the owner or applicant may
appeal the decision of the Commission in writing to the City Council within ten
days of the decision. The City Council will hear the appeal according to §
153.626 of this subchapter.
   (G)   Mandatory findings. The city shall not issue a certificate of
demolition for a cultural resource listed on the Register or Inventory unless
the applicant has met all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The 180-day waiting period or other period of up to 180 days as
required by the Commission has expired and all steps to explore alternatives to
demolition, as described in §
153.621(E) have been explored to the Commission’s satisfaction;
      (2)   Any deterioration of the cultural resource is not the result of the
failure of the owner to maintain the property in accordance with §
153.613 of this subchapter;
      (3)   As a condition of approval, all permits have been granted for the
replacement structure;
      (4)   CEQA analysis has been conducted, and the owner has provided
substantial evidence, as defined in CEQA (Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 21080(e)),
demonstrating that no feasible alternative exists that would avoid a
significant adverse impact to the cultural resource.
   (H)   Proposed demolition of properties 45 years old or older.
      (1)   Purpose. The Cultural Resources Chapter of the General Plan
includes goals and targets intended to diminish “imminent threats to San
Gabriel’s heritage” (Goal 11.4). Specifically, Target 11.4.1 specifies the
creation of an ordinance that “provides protection against demolition.” This
provision forwards this General Plan goal.
      (2)   Intent. This section shall diminish imminent threats to properties
that qualify as cultural resources but have not been subject to evaluation. The
section describes the circumstances in which the Director or his or her
designee shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a historic resources
assessment of any property proposed for demolition that is 45 years of age or
older but not included on the Register or Inventory.
      (3)   Applicability. If a permit is sought to demolish a property that
was constructed at least 45 years prior to the date of application for
demolition, the application shall be referred to the Director to make a
preliminary determination as to whether the property meets national, state, or
local criteria for designation, if the property:
         (a)   Is not already listed on the Register or Inventory;
         (b)   Is not the subject of a pending landmark nomination for the
Register, either individually or as a contributor to a historic district.
      (4)   Exception, properties within recently surveyed areas. If the
property proposed for demolition falls within an area of the city that was
subject to a historic resource survey approved and adopted by the City Council
within the last five years, and the property was not identified as a potential
cultural resource, a historic resources assessment will not be required.
      (5)   Determination by Director.
         (a)   Time limit and criteria. Within a timely manner from receipt of
an application to demolish a property under division (H) below, the Director or
his or her designee will obtain a professional opinion from a qualified
architectural historian or historian as defined in §
153.603 (Definitions) of this subchapter as to whether the property is
potentially eligible for federal, state, or local listing. If the Director
determines that the property is potentially eligible at the federal, state, or
local level, he or she shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, with assistance
from a qualified architectural historian or historian as defined in §
153.603 (Definitions) of this subchapter, an intensive-level historic resources
evaluation (HRE) following practices promulgated by the State Office of
Historic Preservation.
         (b)   Notice. The Director shall notify the property owner of the
determination of the HRE in writing within a timely manner. Failure of the
Director to act within 60 days shall be considered a determination that the
property is not eligible for listing at the federal, state, or local level.
         (c)   Determination and effect.
            1.   If, based on a negative finding of the HRE, the Director
determines that the property is not eligible at the federal, state, or local
level, the permit to demolish the property shall be issued without further
restrictions under this subchapter.
            2.   If, based on a finding of the HRE, the Director determines
that the property is potentially eligible at the federal, state, or local
level, the Director shall schedule consideration of the HRE on the next
available agenda of the Commission. Following review of the HRE and concurrence
by the Commission, the property shall be added to the Inventory and the
provisions of §
153.621 shall apply to the proposed demolition.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.622 WORK HOLD PENDING DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Work hold–pending historic landmark designation. Except as necessary
to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition pursuant to §
153.624, it shall be unlawful for any person to carry out or cause to be
carried out any activity requiring an initial review on a proposed cultural
resource for which an application has been filed, until final approval of the
designation. An exception to the work hold shall apply for alterations shown to
comply with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of
Historic Properties, as found through the project review process and criteria
established in this subchapter.
   (B)   Work hold–pending historic district designation. Except as necessary
to correct an unsafe or dangerous condition pursuant to §
153.624, it shall be unlawful for any person to carry out or cause to be
carried out any activity requiring an initial review for any property within
the boundaries of a proposed historic district while an application for
designation is pending. An exception to the temporary moratorium shall apply
for alterations shown to comply with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards
for the Treatment of Historic Properties, as found through the project review
process and criteria established in this subchapter.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.623 CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.
   (A)   Purpose. The city recognizes that there may be circumstances in which
the provisions of this subchapter could create an undue economic hardship. This
section describes the criteria and process for property owners to demonstrate
that such a hardship exists. The City Council may issue a certificate of
economic hardship to allow alteration or demolition of a cultural resource
listed on the Register or Inventory where denial of the same would create an
undue economic hardship upon the owner.
   (B)   Threshold. For income-producing properties, the threshold for
establishing economic hardship shall be that a reasonable rate of return cannot
be obtained from the property in its present condition or if rehabilitated. For
non-income-producing properties, the threshold for establishing economic
hardship shall be that, without approval of the proposed demolition or remodel,
the property owner would be deprived of all reasonable use of or return from
the property. For proposed demolition, the commission must make the finding
that the cultural resource cannot be remodeled or rehabilitated in a manner
that would allow for a reasonable use of or return from the property.
   (C)   Applications. An application for a certificate of economic hardship
shall be subject to a pro forma evaluation completed for the city by a
qualified economic professional selected from a list of qualified economic
professionals to be maintained by the city. The application shall be made on
the prescribed form and be accompanied by the following information. The
following would be applicable, unless the Director makes the written
determination that such information is not required:
      (1)   The estimated market value of the property in its current condition
with supporting documentation.
      (2)   The estimated market value of the property after completion of the
proposed alteration or demolition with supporting documentation.
      (3)   Estimates of the costs of proposed alteration or demolition with
supporting documentation.
      (4)   In the case of demolition, the estimated market value of the
property after renovation of the existing property for continued use and an
estimate from a qualified historic architect as defined in §
153.603 (Definitions) as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse
of the existing structure on the property.
      (5)   A rehabilitation report from a qualified structural engineer or
historic architect as defined in §
153.603 (Definitions) of this subchapter as to the structural condition of the
property and feasibility of stabilization and rehabilitation.
      (6)   For income-producing properties, information on annual gross
income, operating and maintenance expenses, tax deductions for depreciation,
and annual cash flow after debt service, current property value appraisals,
assessed property valuations, and real estate taxes.
      (7)   Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the
property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years.
      (8)   All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner
or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing, or ownership of the
property.
      (9)   The amount paid for the property if purchased within the previous
36 months, the date of purchase, and the party from whom purchased, including a
description of the relationship, if any, between the owner of record or
applicant and the person from whom the property was purchased, and any terms of
financing between the seller and buyer.
      (10)   Any listing of the property for sale, rent, prices asked, and
offers received, if any within the previous two years.
      (11)   Any other information the Director may reasonably require in order
to determine whether or not the property may yield a reasonable return to the
owners.
   (F)   Hearing required. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on all
applications for a certificate of economic hardship; after which it may
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. Such hearing may be
held concurrently with any related application for an initial review or
certificate of demolition.
   (G)   Findings. The City Council shall approve a certificate of economic
hardship if it makes all of the following findings:
      (1)   Denial of the application would decrease the value of the subject
property so as to deprive the owner of any reasonable economic return on the
property.
      (2)   Sale or rental of the property is not financially feasible, when
looking at the cost of holding such property for uses permitted in the
applicable zone.
      (3)   Adaptive reuse of the property for lawful purposes is prohibited or
impractical.
      (4)   Denial of the application would damage the owner of the property
unreasonably in comparison to the benefit conferred on the community.
   (H)   Approval.
      (1)   Upon approval, copies of the certificate of economic hardship shall
be forwarded to the applicant, the Building Official, the Director, and any
other department or agency that requests one.
      (2)   No certificate of economic hardship shall become effective until
the time to appeal its approval has expired.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.624 UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   (A)   None of the provisions of this subchapter shall be construed to
prevent any construction, alteration, removal, demolition or relocation of a
historic landmark or contributing resource necessary to correct the unsafe or
dangerous conditions of any structure, or feature, or part thereof, where the
Building Official, with a report from a qualified structural engineer or other
qualified professional, has declared such condition unsafe or dangerous and the
proposed construction, alteration, removal, demolition or relocation necessary
to correct the condition. Only such work as is necessary to correct the unsafe
or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this section. All
assessments shall utilize the California Historical Building Code and the
Uniform Code for Building Conservation.
   (B)   The Building Official shall inform the Commission and Director prior
to authorizing any work pursuant to this subchapter unless he or she determines
that such work is immediately necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous
condition; in which case, the Building Official shall report his or her actions
to the Director within 48 hours and to the Commission at its next regular
meeting.
   (C)   If work authorized by the Building Official pursuant to this
subchapter is not immediately necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous
condition, the Commission may advise the Building Official of the historic
significance of the building and recommend a reasonable period of postponement
for the purpose of arranging for rehabilitation, relocation, documentation,
and/or salvage of the cultural resource or contributing resource.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if no arrangements have been made for
rehabilitation, relocation, or salvage within 60 days of an order to abate a
nuisance, or an earlier time if determined to be necessary by the Building
Official, the Building Official may proceed with the abatement action.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.625 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW.
   If any action required or taken pursuant to this subchapter is subject to
the provisions of CEQA, the time in which such action must be taken shall be
extended to the extent necessary to allow time to comply with the Act.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.626 APPEALS.
   (A)   The owner of a property subject to review, or the applicant, if
different than the owner, may appeal any decision by the Director or Commission
under this subchapter pursuant to the limitations and procedures in Title XV, §
153.004 of this code. All appeals brought under this section shall be
accompanied by a filing fee following a fee structure established by the City
Council.
   (B)   Any decision regarding a cultural resource by the Director shall
become final ten business days following the date of the decision unless an
appeal to the Commission is filed.
   (C)   Any decision of the Commission regarding a cultural resource shall
become final ten business days following the date of the decision unless an
appeal to the City Council is filed.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.627 PRESERVATION INCENTIVES.
   (A)   Purpose. The City Council may by resolution or ordinance adopt
preservation incentives to encourage the designation, preservation,
maintenance, and appropriate rehabilitation of the city’s cultural resources.
Preservation incentives, in the form of financial and regulatory incentives,
shall be made available to owners of properties that are designated cultural
resources, either individually or as contributors to historic districts, and
listed in the San Gabriel Register of Cultural Resources.
   (B)   Financial preservation incentives. The following financial incentives
shall be made available to owners of designated cultural resources, in a
process to be determined by the Director:
      (1)   Waiver of initial review for historic appropriateness/
administrative approval fees. All fees associated with the completion of an
initial review for historic appropriateness shall be waived for designated
cultural resources.
      (2)   Mills Act historic property contracts. Through the Mills Act
historic property contract program, the city allows owners of designated
cultural resources to receive a reduction in property taxes in exchange for a
commitment to complete specific repair, restoration, and/or rehabilitation
project and on-going maintenance in accordance with the Secretary’s Standards
and other applicable design guidelines and criteria. The City Council, on the
advice of the Director and Commission, shall periodically review and update the
application process, criteria, and procedures for Mills Act contracts, by
resolution or ordinance. The Mills Act was adopted by the city by resolution on
August, 21, 2001 (Resolution No. 01-31). The state-level enabling legislation
for the Mills Act program is contained in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 50280 through
50290.
      (3)   Preservation easements. Preservation easements may be acquired by
the city through donation or purchase. The preservation easement would be
accepted and administered by a state or local 501(c)(3) organization dedicated
to historic preservation. The easement would specify the conditions and
restrictions running with the land designed to preserve and maintain the
cultural resource.
   (C)   Regulatory preservation incentives. Designated cultural resources are
eligible for the following regulatory preservation incentives, which are
intended to encourage the preservation and ongoing use of the city’s cultural
resources. The following incentives shall be made available to owners of
designated cultural resources, in a process to be determined by the Director:
      (1)   California Historical Building Code. The California Historic
Building Code (Title 24, Part 8, California Administrative Code) shall guide
upgrades and alterations to designated cultural resources.
      (2)   Transfer of development rights. Through the transfer of development
rights (TDR) program, the City Council may by resolution approve the sale of
unused development rights from designated cultural resources (sender sites) to
development sites (receiver sites). Before any transferable development rights
are offered for sale, the city shall establish by resolution the criteria,
procedures, and public process, through the city’s formal bidding procedures,
to sell unused floor area development rights from sender sites to receiver
sites. TDR policies and procedures will be periodically reviewed and updated as
needed by the city.
      (3)   Exemption from design review. Design review shall be carried out
concurrently by the Historic Preservation and Cultural Resource Commission for
the following projects:
         (a)   All major alterations to designated cultural resources,
including individually listed properties and contributors to historic
districts;
         (b)   New construction and in-fill within the boundaries of designated
historic districts;
         (c)   All new construction, additions to, and alterations of a parcel
including a designated cultural resource, whether individually listed or a
contributor to a historic district.
      (4)   Exemption for nonconforming uses. On a case by case basis, a
preexisting nonconforming use or site condition may be changed to a permitted
use or site condition at the discretion of the Director, if the exemption
encourages the retention and ongoing viable use of a designated cultural
resource.
      (5)   Reduction of commercial parking requirements. At the discretion of
the Director, commercial properties included on the Register may be granted a
reduction in parking requirements, to a maximum of 50%, based on the degree to
which the historic character of the cultural resource would be preserved,
enhanced, or made more viable through the reduction in parking requirements.
      (6)   Residential waiver for garage space requirement.
         (a)   Residential properties included on the Register may be granted a
waiver of the requirement for an additional covered parking space for additions
of more than 25% of the existing gross floor area (§
153.049, Zoning Code, Garage Space Required). Waiving the requirement for
additional covered parking spaces encourages the retention and protection of
historic garages and carports, which contribute to the historic character and
integrity of historic districts and conservation overlay zones.
         (b)   This section allows the Director to waive the requirement for an
additional covered parking space where the Commission first determines through
the certificate of appropriateness approval process that:
            1.   The property has an existing historic garage or carport that
is a contributing element of the cultural resource;
            2.   The existing historic garage or carport can accommodate at
least one vehicle;
            3.   The existing historic garage or carport is structurally sound
or, if deteriorated, the Commission approves a rehabilitation plan for the
historic garage or carport as part of the certificate of appropriateness
approval process;
            4.   The second required parking space can be accommodated outside
of the existing covered parking space within an existing legal driveway or
tandem space;
            5.   The cumulative addition to the historic property is less than
50% of the existing floor area;
            6.   The additional living space does not include a new dwelling
unit on the property.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17 ; Am. Ord. 679, passed 10-19-21 )
§ 153.628 APPLICATION FILING FEES.
   The City Council shall by resolution adopt a schedule of fees to be charged
for any application for designation, termination of a designation, for
demolition permits, and for appeals pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.629 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who violates a requirement of this subchapter or fails to
obey an order issued by the City Council, Commission and/or Director, or fails
to comply with a condition of approval of any certificate or permit issued
under this subchapter, shall be subject to enforcement actions as set forth in
§
153.005 (Violations) of this code.
   (B)   In addition to all other remedies available to the city, any
alteration or demolition of a cultural resource in violation of this subchapter
is expressly declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as deemed appropriate
by the city.
   (C)   In addition to all other remedies, the city shall have the authority
to impose a temporary moratorium on the development of a property for a period
not to exceed 60 months from the date the city becomes aware of any alteration
or demolition in violation of this subchapter, unless the owner obtains permits
to restore or reconstruct the property to its original condition prior to the
violation and the work is consistent with the Secretary’s Standards. The
purpose of the moratorium is to provide the city with an opportunity to study
and determine appropriate mitigation measures for the alteration and/or removal
of the cultural resource, and to ensure measures are incorporated into any
future development plans and approvals for the subject property. Mitigation
measures, as determined by the Commission and/or Director, shall be imposed as
a condition of any subsequent permit for development of the subject property.
   (D)   The City Attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to
restrain a violation or cause, where possible, the complete or partial
restoration, reconstruction, or replacement of any cultural resource
demolished, partially demolished, altered, or partially altered in violation of
this subchapter.
   (E)   Any person who constructs, alters, removes, or demolishes a cultural
resource without the approval and issuance of a certificate or permit issued
pursuant to this subchapter may be required to restore the property to its
appearance prior to the violation to the extent such restoration is physically
possible, under the guidance of the Director. This civil remedy shall be in
addition to, and not in lieu of, any criminal penalties available.
   (F)   In addition to any other remedies provided herein, any violation of
this subchapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. Remedies
under this subchapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and
all other remedies or penalties, whether civil or criminal. The remedies
provided herein are cumulative and not exclusive. In any such action, the city
may seek as appropriate, one or both of the following remedies:
      (1)   A temporary or permanent injunction, or both;
      (2)   Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation,
inspection, or monitoring survey that led to the establishment of the
violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action
under this division (F).
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.630 IDENTIFICATION, DOCUMENTATION, AND MANAGEMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL,
NATIVE AMERICAN, AND PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   Purpose. In keeping with the goals and policies of General Plan
Chapter 11 (Cultural Resources), this section outlines the procedures and
criteria for the identification, documentation, and management of
archaeological, Native American, and paleontological cultural resources.
   (B)   Scope and applicability.
      (1)   Potential project impacts to those cultural resources that are
significant archaeological, Native American, and paleontological resources
shall be addressed during project review as described in this section. This
shall be accomplished through the identification of potential significant
cultural resources (Phase I), the evaluation of those resources’ significance
(Phase II), and, where necessary and appropriate, the mitigation of substantial
adverse impacts through data recovery/salvage (Phase III) by qualified
professionals as defined in §
153.603 of this subchapter.
      (2)   The provisions of this policy shall apply to all activities
including but not limited to proposed structures, expansions, additions,
alterations, grading, excavation, trenching, and/or demolition on properties
containing archaeological, Native American, or paleontological resources
classified as follows:
         (a)   Listed on the Register or Inventory;
         (b)   Listed on the California Register of Historical Resources or on
the National Register of Historic Places;
         (c)   Determined by the Director or the State Historic Preservation
Officer to be eligible for listing on the California Register of Historical
Resources, the National Register of Historic Places, or the Register;
         (d)   Or are located in areas with a high or medium potential for the
presence of cultural resources; in order to make this determination, the city
shall prepare or cause to be prepared a cultural resource sensitivity map.
   (C)   Report preparation.
      (1)   All development applications satisfying the above criteria shall be
required to submit a Phase I cultural resources inventory report and/or a
paleontological resources inventory report to the city as a part of their
application. Applications for properties that contain potential cultural
resources that have not been evaluated for significance shall be required to
submit a Phase II cultural resources evaluation report to the city as part of
their application. A development application shall not be considered complete
until said report(s) as required by this subchapter is submitted to the city.
      (2)   If the Director determines that the proposed project could
potentially affect a known or suspected cultural resource adjacent to the
project site, then the applicant will be required to submit a Phase I cultural
resources inventory report in order to determine whether the project has the
potential to impact the cultural resource.
      (3)   Cultural resources reports and paleontological resources reports
shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The reports shall be prepared by
qualified archaeologists or paleontologists as defined in §
153.603 of this subchapter.
      (4)   Cultural resources reports shall be prepared in a standard format:
the California Office of Historic Preservation Archaeological Resource
Management Reports (ARMR): Recommended Contents and Format. All cultural
resources reports and appended resource records shall be filed with the local
California Historical Resources Information System (CHRIS) Information Center.
      (5)   Paleontological resources reports shall be prepared in a standard
format and shall include a clear description and map of the project location,
as well as descriptions of the author’s qualifications; the criteria used to
evaluate the property; the study’s methods, limitations, and dates of
investigation; background materials consulted; the study’s results, including a
map and quantified list of identified paleontological resources identified on
the property; and the name of the facility where any recovered paleontological
resources will be curated.
      (6)   The report shall include a description and map indicating location
of specific sites, features, isolates, and fossils analyzed within the report.
The mapped location of archaeological sites, Native American resources, and
fossil localities is confidential information, not to be released for public
view. It is to be provided to the city as an appendix to the main report.
      (7)   The city may prepare or commission the preparation of Cultural
Resource Management Guidelines, in conjunction with a qualified archaeologist,
in order to establish the specific requirements for identifying, recording,
evaluating, and mitigating impacts to archaeological, Native American, and
paleontological resources, and for the preparation of Phase I, Phase II, and
Phase III reports and associated documentation.
   (D)   Exemptions. The following applications shall be exempt from the
requirements for submitting reports:
      (1)   Applications for a property for which a Phase I cultural resources
inventory report and/or paleontological resources report has been accepted by
the city within the last five years, provided that there were no significant
errors in methodology or content as determined by the Director and that the
application complies with any applicable mitigation requirements.
      (2)   Projects that require a permit application that will not excavate
deeper than 12 inches or excavate more than 50 cubic yards of earth, or those
for which the Director, based on expert advice, has determined in writing, that
the sediments to be disturbed do not have the potential to yield subsurface
artifacts, archaeological features, or fossils.
      (3)   Projects that are limited to repair and maintenance of existing
facilities and/or utilities without ground disturbing activities that extend
beyond the footprint of those facilities or utilities.
      (4)   Projects that are ground level residential additions less than 500
square feet and are in accordance with §
153.630.
   (E)   Review process.
      (1)   All development applications subject to the provisions of this
section shall be reviewed in the following manner in order to effectively
identify and evaluate any cultural resources that exist on the project site and
to mitigate substantial adverse changes to their significance:
      (2)   The applicable preliminary report shall be submitted to the
Director. The Director may take the following actions:
         (a)   If the report finds and the Director concurs that no significant
cultural resources are present, the Director shall require that the project
comply with on-site monitoring and mitigation (see division (F) below). The
Director may direct the city to retain the services of a separate qualified
archaeologist or a qualified paleontologist to provide an independent review of
these findings.
         (b)   If the report identifies the presence of archaeological, Native
American, or paleontological resources, the Director shall refer the report for
consideration to the Commission.
      (3)   The Commission, in reviewing the development proposal, shall
evaluate the report and incorporate mitigation conditions for the project in
order to preserve any known or identified significant archaeological, Native
American, or paleontological resources.
      (4)   Any conditions or mitigation measures required by the Director or
Commission shall be forwarded to the Building and Safety Division and enforced
in accordance with Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 21081.6.
      (5)   All decisions of the Director may be appealed to the Commission,
and all decisions of the Commission may be appealed to the City Council in
accordance with §
153.626 of this subchapter.
   (F)   On-site monitoring and mitigation (archaeological/Native American
resources).
      (1)   The Building and Safety Division shall be provided with an executed
consultant services contact with the individual responsible for supervising
onsite archaeological monitoring, who shall be a qualified archaeologist
selected from approved list of qualified archaeologists to be maintained by the
city.
      (2)   In instances, due to known or expected existence of subsurface
Native American resources or as an outcome of Native American consultation, the
consulting archaeologist or the Director may request that a Native American
monitor be present on-site during grading operations. If so requested, a
qualified Native American monitor shall be retained by the project applicant.
      (3)   If unanticipated subsurface cultural resources are discovered at
the site, the archaeologist shall take immediate steps to stop all construction
activity within 25 feet of the cultural material. The Director shall be
immediately informed of the situation. If it is determined that the find is an
isolated occurrence or that the remaining construction activity will not
significantly impact the cultural resource, work shall be permitted to continue
on the site. A report by the qualified archaeologist shall be submitted prior
to the final inspection of the site, detailing the contents of the unearthed
cultural resource.
      (4)   In the event of an unanticipated discovery of cultural resources
when neither an archaeologist nor Native American monitor is on site, the
information is to be communicated to the Director at once. In the event that
the discovery includes potential human remains, Cal. Health and Safety Code §
7050.5 and Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 5097.98 shall be followed.
      (5)   Should unanticipated cultural resources be encountered, work shall
be halted or diverted from the vicinity of the discovery until the significance
of the cultural resource can be determined by the Director. A recommendation
will be prepared by the qualified archaeologist indicating whether the find is
potentially significant and the recommended course of action for its protection
or further evaluation. The Director shall determine if the city should retain
the services of a separate consulting archaeologist to provide an independent
recommendation of site significance.
      (6)   On the Director’s recommendation, reports relating to the discovery
of significant archaeological or Native American resources shall be referred to
the Commission at their next available meeting. Notice of the hearing by the
Commission shall be given not less than ten days prior to any action taken on
the matter to be considered. Such notice shall include the date, time, and
place of the hearing and description of the matter under consideration. Notice
of the hearing shall also be sent to the property owner(s) of record and to
other persons who have requested to be notified of such matters, or whom the
Director or his or her designee determines may have an interest in the matter.
      (7)   The Commission, after considering the contents, recommendations,
and findings of the report, and after receiving and considering testimony by
interested individuals or groups, may take the following actions:
         (a)   Determine that the find is not significant and allow work to
resume.
         (b)   Determine that additional testing is necessary to evaluate the
significance of the find. If additional testing is determined necessary,
similar procedures as defined in divisions (F)(4) and (5) above shall be
followed.
         (c)   Determine that the proposed project will not significantly
affect the cultural resource and that it can be documented and left in situ
without compromising the integrity of the cultural resource.
         (d)   Forward a recommendation to the City Council to initiate data
recovery procedures or protect the artifacts in situ.
      (8)   If the Commission forwards a recommendation of either data recovery
or protection in situ that conflicts with currently approved plans, the item
shall be scheduled for consideration at the next meeting of the City Council as
an urgency item. The decision of the City Council shall be considered final.
      (9)   In the event that an unanticipated discovery of cultural material
is made, all expenses related to work performed shall be reimbursed by the
permit applicant.
      (10)   Whether cultural material is discovered or not, all monitors
(archaeologists and Native American) shall submit a written summary of their
services and observations.
      (11)   Prior to the issuance of any permit or action to proceed for the
demolition of a cultural resource, the owner may be required to allow for the
removal of significant features. The owner shall make these features available
to local historic interest or Native American groups. The expense of the
removal and storage of recovered features is to be borne by the historic
interest or Native American groups. The owner may also be required, as a
mitigation measure for any proposed demolition or alteration of a cultural
resource, to document the cultural resource through photographs and historic
narrative. These records will become the property of the city.
   (G)   On-site monitoring and mitigation enforcement (Paleontology).
      (1)   The Building and Safety Division shall be provided with an executed
consultant services contract with the individual responsible for supervising
on-site monitoring, who shall be a qualified paleontologist from an approved
list of qualified paleontologists to be maintained by the city to be present
on-site during grading operations.
      (2)   If paleontological material is present on the site, the qualified
paleontologist shall submit a report describing the fossils that exist on the
site. Said report shall include a statement on the significance of the
discovery and recommended actions. If the paleontologist finds that the find is
not significant, the Director may allow construction to proceed.
      (3)   On the Director’s recommendation, reports relating to the discovery
of significant paleontological resources shall be referred to the Commission at
their next available meeting. Notice of the hearing by the Commission shall be
given not less than ten days prior to any action taken on the matter to be
considered. Such notice shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing
and description of the matter under consideration. Notice of the hearing shall
also be sent to the property owner(s) of record and to other persons who have
requested to be notified of such matters, or whom the Director or his or her
designee determines may have an interest in the matter.
      (4)   The Commission, after considering the contents of the report, its
recommendations, and review of testimony by interested individuals or groups,
may take the following actions:
         (a)   Determine that the find is insignificant and allow work to
resume.
         (b)   Determine that additional study is necessary to evaluate the
significance of the fossils. Said study and report to be submitted within 30
days.
         (c)   Forward a recommendation to the City Council to initiate fossil
salvage procedures or protect the fossils in situ.
      (5)   If the Director forwards a recommendation of either fossil salvage
or protection in situ, the item shall be scheduled for consideration at the
next meeting of the City Council. The decision of the City Council shall be
considered final.
      (6)   Whether source material is discovered or not, a written report
shall be prepared by all paleontological monitors summarizing their services
and observations.
   (H)   Consultation with California Native American groups. California Native
American tribes traditionally and culturally affiliated with San Gabriel may
have expertise concerning their Native American resources, and consultation
with these groups is a required element of compliance with CEQA (Cal. Pub. Res.
Code § 21080.3.1).
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.631 SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   Should any section or provision of this subchapter be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of this subchapter as a whole or any section thereof other than the
section or provision specifically declared to be invalid.
(Ord. 636-C.S., passed 8-15-17)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period not
exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of §§
153.320 through
153.333 is hereby determined to constitute an infraction, punishable by a fine
not exceeding $100 for a first violation, a fine not exceeding $200 for a
second violation of the same section within a 12 consecutive month period, and
a fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same section
within a 12 consecutive month period. A fourth violation within a 12
consecutive month period shall constitute a misdemeanor. ('65 Code, § 9-3.2415)
(Ord. 445-C.S., passed 5-16-95)
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
153.350 through
153.357 or fails to comply with a condition of approval of a precise plan as
approved by the Planning Commission or City Council shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be subject to the penalties prescribed by state law. ('65 Code,
§ 9-3.2508) (Ord. 351-C.S., passed - - )
CHAPTER 154: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Sections
   
154.001   Open space and recreation impact fees
   
154.002   Sanitary sewer impact fee
   
154.003   Police facility impact fees
   
154.004   Fire facility impact fees
   
154.005   Traffic impact fees
   
154.006   General fee provisions
§ 154.001 OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   One of the amenities that makes a city a desirable place to live
and contributes to the quality of life is having adequate open space and
recreational facilities within the city.
      (2)   The City Council desires to make sure that the city has adequate
open space and recreational facilities to serve its existing and future
residential population.
      (3)   The Open Space Chapter of the 2004 General Plan identifies a target
of four acres of open space per 1,000 residents; the city does not have
adequate facilities or funding to meet this target.
      (4)   The City Council's purpose in enacting this section is to implement
an open space and recreation fee that will be imposed on new residential
development to ensure that such development is funding a share of the costs of
developing open space areas to help meet the 2004 General Plan standard of four
acres of open space per 1,000 residents.
   (B)   Open space and recreation fee.
      (1)   An open space and recreation fee is hereby established to be
imposed upon all new residential development in the city in an amount to be
determined by resolution of the City Council. The amount of the fee shall not
exceed the new development's fair share of the costs of developing new open
space and recreation facilities, including the acquisition, design,
construction, equipment and financing.
      (2)   The fees imposed by this section shall be deposited in the Park and
Recreational Facilities Fund and shall be used only to finance the acquisition,
expansion, and development of park, recreational and open space facilities that
are needed as a result of new development within the city.
   (C)   Credit. Any person otherwise required to pay a fee under this section
may, with city approval, receive a credit when that owner constructs a park,
recreation or open space improvement. The credit shall offset, on a
proportionate basis without interest, the park and recreation impact fee
required to be paid under this section.
(Ord. 533-C.S., passed 11-16-04)
§ 154.002 SANITARY SEWER IMPACT FEE.
   (A)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   Having adequate sewer capacity is essential to the health, well-
being and quality of life of all of those who live and work within the city.
      (2)   The Community Facilities Chapter of the 2004 General Plan
identifies a target sewer capacity of a peak factor of two times the average
flow and half full capacity.
      (3)   Existing sewer capacity in the city is not sufficient to
accommodate existing and future development within all areas of the city based
on the target adopted in the 2004 General Plan.
      (4)   The City Council's purpose in enacting this section is to implement
a sanitary sewer facility fee that will be imposed on new development
throughout the city to ensure that such development is funding its share of the
costs to upgrade the city's sewer system to handle the additional flow created
by such development, with such systems to be sized to meet the General Plan
standard.
   (B)   Sewer fee.
      (1)   A sanitary sewer system impact fee is hereby established to be
imposed upon all new development in the city in an amount to be determined by
resolution of the City Council. The amount of the fee shall not exceed the new
development's fair share of the costs of the sanitary sewer improvements.
      (2)   The fees imposed by this section shall be deposited in a Sanitary
Sewer System Facilities Fund and shall be used only to finance those sewer
improvements, or portions thereof, that are identified by resolution of the
City Council that are needed as a result of new development within the city.
   (C)   Credit. Any person otherwise required to pay a fee under this section
shall receive a credit when that person constructs a portion of the sanitary
sewer system that is to be funded by the fee.
(Ord. 533-C.S., passed 11-16-04)
§ 154.003 POLICE FACILITY IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   An adequate police department, which includes a facility large
enough to accommodate the sworn and non-sworn staff, contributes to the safety,
well-being and quality of life of all of those who live and work within the
city.
      (2)   The Community Facilities Chapter of the 2004 General Plan includes
a goal of providing a high level of police services for the city, which goal
includes providing sufficient police facilities.
      (3)   The current police facilities are inadequate for the current
population as well as new growth expected within the city. In order to provide
adequate police facilities, it is necessary to upgrade the facilities in terms
of both size and equipment.
      (4)   The City Council's purpose in enacting this section is to implement
a police facilities fee that shall be imposed upon all new development within
the city in order to ensure that such development is helping to pay its share
of the costs in upgrading the city's police facilities.
   (B)   Police facility fee.
      (1)   A Police Facility fee is hereby established to be imposed upon all
new development in the city in an amount to be determined by resolution of the
City Council. The amount of the fee shall not exceed the new development's fair
share of the costs of the new police facilities, including acquisition, design,
construction and financing.
      (2)   The fees imposed by this section shall be deposited in the Police
Facility Fund and shall be used only to finance the acquisition, design, and
construction of new police facilities identified by resolution of the City
Council that are needed as a result of new development within the city.
(Ord. 533-C.S., passed 11-16-04)
§ 154.004 FIRE FACILITY IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   An adequate fire department, which includes a facility large enough
to accommodate staff and equipment, is essential to and contributes to the
safety and quality of life of all of those who live and work within the city.
      (2)    The Community Facilities Chapter of the 2004 General Plan includes
the goal of providing a high level of fire protection and emergency response,
which goal includes the target of constructing new or modifying existing fire
stations.
      (3)   Existing fire facilities within the city are inadequate for the
current population as well as new growth expected within the city.
      (4)   The City Council's purpose in enacting this section is to implement
a fire facility fee that will be placed on all new development in the city to
ensure that such development is funding a share of the costs of upgrading the
existing fire facilities.
   (B)   Fire facility fee.
      (1)   A fire facility fee is hereby established to be imposed upon all
new development in the city in an amount to be determined by resolution of the
City Council. The amount of the fee shall not exceed the new development's fair
share of the costs of the new facility, including acquisition, design,
construction and financing.
      (2)    The fees imposed by this section shall be deposited in the Fire
Facility Fund and shall be used only to finance new fire facilities identified
by resolution of the City Council that are needed as a result of new
development within the city.
(Ord. 533-C.S., passed 11-16-04)
§ 154.005 TRAFFIC IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   Traffic congestion is one factor which leads to a deterioration in
the quality of life, as well as wastes productive time of those caught in
traffic.
      (2)   Traffic congestion and interrupted traffic flow are a problem
within the city and this problem will continue to worsen as the city builds
out.
      (3)   The Mobility Chapter of the 2004 General Plan identifies level of
service “D” as the target to be attained for principal intersections throughout
the city. This chapter also identifies the long-range improvements to streets
and intersections that are required to meet the target.
      (4)   The City Council's purpose in enacting this section is to implement
a traffic impact fee that shall be placed upon all new development within the
city in order to ensure that such development is helping to pay its share of
the costs in upgrading the city's traffic system to maintain a level of service
“D” at all intersections of arterial streets as required by the current General
Plan. Maintaining a level of service “D” at the intersections requires a level
of service “C” for the associated roadway links.
   (B)   Traffic impact fee.
      (1)   A traffic impact fee is hereby established to be imposed upon all
new development within the city in an amount to be determined by resolution of
the City Council. The amount of the fee shall not exceed the new development's
fair share of the costs of improvements which shall be based upon that portion
of the costs of the improvements attributable to that development, based upon
maintaining a level of service “D” at all intersections of arterial streets.
      (2)   The costs shall include design, construction, financing and
acquisition costs.
      (3)   The fees imposed by this section shall be deposited in the Traffic
Impact Fund and shall be used only to finance those roadway improvements
identified by resolution of the City Council that are needed as a result of new
development within the city.
   (C)   Credit. Any person otherwise required to pay a fee under this section
shall receive a credit when such person constructs a portion of the roadway
system that is to be funded by the fee.
(Ord. 533-C.S., passed 11-16-04)
§ 154.006 GENERAL FEE PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this section apply to each of the fees set forth above.
   (A)   New development. For purposes of this chapter NEW DEVELOPMENT shall
have the following meanings:
      (1)   NEW DEVELOPMENT, when applied to the development of residential
uses, including the placement of mobilehomes on real property, means that
development or installation which increases the number of dwelling units on a
given parcel or which increases the square footage of a residential use by at
least 25% of gross floor area.
      (2)   NEW DEVELOPMENT, when applied to construction or installation of
nonresidential buildings, means the development, construction or installation
of new buildings on a given parcel or which increases the amount of floor space
for nonresidential buildings by at least 25% of the gross floor area.
   (B)   Credit for existing development. All new development shall receive a
credit for any use on the property which currently exists and which will be
replaced by the new development. The fee shall only be charged for the
intensification of the use.
   (C)   Fund. Any reference in this chapter, or any resolution enacted
thereunder, to a specific capital facilities fund, shall mean a separate fund
or account.
   (D)   Fee adjustment.
      (1)   The developer of a project subject to a fee under this chapter may
request a waiver or adjustment of that fee based upon the absence of any
reasonable relationship between the impact on public facilities of that
development and either the amount of fee charged or the type of facilities to
be financed.
      (2)   The request shall be made in writing and shall be processed
concurrently with the development permit application for the project. If no
development permit is required, the request for a fee adjustment or waiver
shall be made with the application for a building permit. The request shall
state in detail the factual basis and legal theory for the waiver or
adjustment.
      (3)   The applicant shall bear the burden of proof of presenting
substantial evidence to support the request for an adjustment or waiver.
   (E)   Waiver of fee. Upon the request of the developer, all or a portion of
the fees set forth in this chapter may be waived for very low and low income
housing, as defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 50079.5 and 50105
respectively, when such housing is guaranteed affordability for a minimum
period of 30 years. The request for such a waiver shall be submitted in writing
and shall be processed with the development permit application for the project.
   (F)   When any of the fees set forth above are imposed upon a residential
development, the fees shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of
Cal. Government Code § 66007 as the same may be amended from time to time. Fees
for all other types of development projects shall be paid prior to the issuance
of the building permit.
   (G)   For each of the fees set forth above, the Finance Department shall
timely prepare the information required by Cal. Government Code § 66006, as the
same may be amended from time to time.
   (H)   Whenever fees are imposed pursuant to this chapter, the city shall
provide the project applicant with a notice in writing at the time of the
approval of the project or at the time of the imposition of the fees, a
statement of the amount of the fees and notification of the 90-day approval
period in which the applicant may protest the imposition of the fees. Said
notice shall be in substantially the following form:
The conditions of project approval for your project, identified as
                        , include certain fees, dedication requirements,
reservation requirements and/or other exactions more specifically described as:
(identification of the amount of the fee and description of the dedications,
reservation, or other exactions) . The applicant is hereby notified that the
90-day protest period to challenge such items has begun as of the date of the
project approval or the date of the fee imposition, which date was
                         . If the applicant fails to file a protest regarding
any of the fees, dedication, reservation, or other exaction requirements as
specified in Cal. Government Code § 66020, the applicant shall be legally
barred from later challenges.
   (I)   The fees established by this chapter are intended to establish a
supplemental method for funding the cost of certain facilities and services,
the demand for which will be generated by the expected build- out of the city.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of the
City Council to impose any other fee or exactions or to continue to impose
existing ones on development within the city, but shall be in addition to any
other requirements which the City Council is authorized to impose, or has
previously imposed within the city. In particular, individual property owners
shall remain obligated to fund, construct, and/or dedicate the improvements,
public facilities and other exactions required by the city, including without
limitation those required by the city standard details and specifications and
other applicable public works standards. Any credits or reimbursements shall
not include the funding, construction or dedications described in this
division.
(Ord. 533-C.S., passed 11-16-04)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to California Codes
References to 1965 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES
Administrative Code
 
State Cite       Code Section
Title 24, Part 8 150.080,
                 150.086
 
Business and Professions Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                 Code Section
460                        122.01
Div. 2, § 500 et seq.     122.03
4600 et seq.               122.02
4600 - 4620                122.02
4609(a)                    122.02
                           153.322,
5499.1 et seq.             153.330,
                           153.331
Ch. 7, § 6701             153.603
7300 et seq.               122.03
7362 et seq.               122.03
7395.1                     122.03
8771                       152.24
10000 et seq.              110.61
16000                      122.01
19986(h)                   116.010
22435.1                    126.04
23000 et seq.              114.026
Div. 10                    153.516
Div. 10 (§§ 26000 et seq.153.516
26320                   153.518
26322                      153.518
26070.5                    153.517
                           
 
Civil Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite        Code Section
683.110 - 683.220 11.13
697.340           11.13
1351 et seq.      153.380
1351              50.027,
                  153.451
1352              153.381
1363.1            153.381
3479              98.02
3480              98.02
Div. 4, Part 3    95.67
4080              150.168
                  
 
Civil Procedure Code
 
State Cite    Code Section
§ 731        153.522
1094.5        122.34
              35.097,
              121.07,
1094.6        121.14,
              121.32,
              121.36,
              122.34
Part 2, Ch. 2 95.67
 
Education Code
 
State Cite                                                                Code
                                                                          Section
Art. 13 (commencing with § 49580) to Ch. 9 of Part 27 of Div. 4 of Title 50.031
2
94300 et seq.                                                             121.01
 
Family Code
 
State Cite Code Section
7002       130.53
 
Government Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                         Code Section
Title 7, Ch. 3, Div. 1, Art. 12                    153.162
Div. 104, Part 9, Ch. 8 (commencing with § 114960)50.027
Div. 104, Part 14, (commencing with § 117600)     50.027
900 et seq.                                        35.003
910                                                35.004
913                                                35.096
935                                                35.005
935(b)                                             35.097
940 - 949                                          35.006
945.6                                              35.005,
                                                   35.096
946                                                35.096
950 - 951                                          35.006
6254.10                                            153.603
9611                                               35.087
12650 et seq.                                      35.100
36516                                              30.02
36518 - 36521                                      34.67
36900 - 26901                                      10.99
36900                                              130.18
36903 - 36904                                      10.99
36937                                              10.15
37100                                              122.01
37203                                              34.09
37209                                              32.24
37361                                              153.601
38773.5                                            90.14
40601                                              34.38
40801 et seq.                                      31.10
40802 - 40805                                      32.24
40805.5                                            32.24
50280 et seq.                                      153.603
50280 through 50290                                153.627
51030 et seq.                                      122.01
51038(c)(4)                                        127.02
51179                                              96.05
51500 et seq.                                      35.001
53069.4                                            11.01,
                                                   11.20
53730 - 53737                                      34.50
53750                                              35.092
53750(h)(2)                                        35.092
54201 - 54205                                      34.25
54956                                              33.33
6250 et seq.                                       50.038
65090                                              153.474
                                                   121.32,
                                                   121.36,
65091                                              153.245,
                                                   153.266,
                                                   153.358,
                                                   153.474
65100 et seq.                                      33.30,
                                                   33.40
65350 et seq.                                      153.475
65402                                              152.01
65450 et seq.                                      153.290,
                                                   153.300
65582                                              153.162
65583.2                                            153.162
65589.5                                            153.162
65589.5(d)(2)                                      153.456
65651                                              153.162
65652                                              153.162
65850                                              153.601
65850.5                                            150.160
65850.7                                            150.300
65850.55                                           150.167
65852.1                                            153.055
65852.2                                            153.055
65852.21                                           153.003,
                                                   153.048
65852.22                                           153.047
65852.26                                           153.047
65854                                              153.474
65905                                              153.245,
                                                   153.266
65915                                              153.162
65915 et seq.                                      153.451
65915 - 65918                                      153.450
65915(c)(2)                                        153.456
65915(c)(3)                                        153.459,
                                                   153.162
65915(d)(1)                                        153.454
65915(d)(2)                                        153.454
65915(e)(1)                                        153.455
65915(g)(2)(E)                                     153.456
65915(h)                                           153.456
65915(h)(2)                                        153.456
65915(9)                                           153.456
65943                                              153.402,
                                                   153.162
66006                                              154.006
66007                                              154.006
66015                                              150.167
66020                                              154.006
66140 et seq.                                      152.02
66411.7                                            153.003,
                                                   153.048
66451.3                                            152.10
66452.5                                            152.13
66452.6                                            152.11
66473.5                                            152.13
66474                                              152.13
66474.1                                            152.13
66474.2                                            152.48
66474.6                                            152.13
66483                                              152.20
66484                                              152.21
66498.1                                            152.40
66499                                              152.22
66499.3                                            152.22
68632(a)                                           127.05
81004                                              40.01
84100                                              40.01
84602(a)(2)                                        40.01
84615(a)                                           40.01
87200                                              40.01
87300                                              40.01
114079                                             50.031
 
Health and Safety Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                                       Code Section
Art. 1 (commencing with § 17960) of Ch. 5 of Part 1.5 of Div. 13153.047
Ch. 6.95                                                         96.40
7050.5                                                           153.630
Div. 13, Part 2.5                                                153.451
11018.5                                                          153.515
11054 - 11058                                                    122.02
11550                                                            122.02
17951                                                            150.167
17958.1                                                          153.003
17980.12                                                         153.047
18007                                                            153.003
25500 et seq.                                                    96.41
25501                                                            96.42
25513                                                            96.44
39730.5                                                          34.80,
                                                                 50.027
39730.6                                                          34.80,
                                                                 50.027
39730.7                                                          34.80,
                                                                 50.027
39730.8                                                          34.80,
                                                                 50.027
50052.5                                                          153.451
50079.5                                                          154.006,
                                                                 153.162
50105                                                            154.006
50675.2(h)                                                       153.100
50675.14                                                         153.162
50675.14(b)                                                      153.100
50801                                                            153.151
11362.5(e)                                                       153.516
11362.7                                                          153.516
11362.7(f)                                                       153.516
11362.71                                                         153.518
11362.765                                                        153.516
113700 et seq.                                                   153.518
113783                                                           50.027
113789                                                           50.027
113841                                                           50.027
113842                                                           50.027
118910                                                           125.25
 
Penal Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite              Code Section
19                      10.99
266h                    122.02
266i                    122.02
290                     121.01,
                        122.02
302                     130.21
314                     122.02
315                     122.02
316                     122.02
318                     122.02
330a                    116.011
337j(e)                 116.010
365                     130.19
372                     95.67
403                     130.21
415                     122.02
597.5(a)                92.81
599(aa)                 92.81
602                     122.02
626.10                  130.05
647(a),(b) or (d)       122.02
653.22                  122.02
653.23                  122.02
853.6                   10.32
1203.4                  122.02
11225 et seq.           121.01
11225 - 11235           122.02
13510(c)                32.51
13512                   32.51
13522                   32.51
Title 9, Part 1, Ch. 9  116.011
Title 9, Part 1, Ch. 10 116.019
14051                   150.21
 
Public Contract Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite     Code Section
12200          34.80
12209          34.80
20160 et seq.  34.25
22000 et seq.  34.75
22032          34.75
22032 et seq.  34.75
22034          34.76
22036          34.77
22150 to 22154 34.80
 
Public Resource Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                                            Code Section
Div. 13 (commencing with § 21000)                    153.162
Div. 30                                               50.027
Div. 30, Part 3, Ch. 12.8 (commencing with § 42649)  50.025
Div. 30, Part 3, Ch. 12.9 (commencing with § 42649.8)50.025
Div. 30, Part 3, Ch. 13.1 (commencing with § 42652)  34.80,
                                                      50.027
5024.1.g(4)                                           153.605
5029                                                  153.609,
                                                      153.610
5097.98                                               153.630
21000 et seq.                                         112.303
21080(e)                                              153.621
21080.3.1                                             153.630
21081.6                                               153.630
21155                                                 153.047
40000 et seq                                          50.025
40141                                                 50.027
40181                                                 50.027
40191                                                 50.027
40195.1                                               34.80,
                                                      50.027
41500                                                 50.027
41730                                                 50.025
41731                                                 50.025
41734                                                 50.025
41734.5                                               50.025
41735                                                 50.025
41736                                                 50.025
41780.01                                              50.025
41800                                                 50.025
41802                                                 50.027
42926                                                 50.025
44004                                                 50.025
50001                                                 50.025
                                                      
 
Public Utilities Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite Code Section
280.5      112.302
           35.087,
799        35.101,
           35.107
21411   35.125
4303       110.67
5860       112.301
5870       112.301
5885       112.303
5900       112.302
6354(e)    35.095
 
Revenue and Taxation Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite             Code Section
439 et seq.            153.603
5096                   35.025
6001 et seq.           35.122
6067                   35.037,
                       35.124
6203                   35.038,
                       35.123
6366                   35.038,
                       35.125
6366.1                 35.038,
                       35.125
6701                   35.038,
                       35.123
6702                   35.038,
                       35.123
6711                   35.038,
                       35.123
6715                   35.038,
                       35.123
6737                   35.038,
                       35.123
6797                   35.038,
                       35.123
6828                   35.038,
                       35.123
7251 et seq.           35.117
7284.6                 35.091,
                       35.095
7284.7                 35.095
7285.9                 35.117
10783                  72.073
11901                  35.015
11921 - 11929          35.018
23701                  130.07
                       35.037,
Div. 2, Part 1         35.038,
                       35.123,
                       35.126
Div. 2, Part 1.5       35.036 -
                       35.040
                       35.117,
Div. 2, Part 1.6       35.122,
                       35.125,
                       35.127
Div. 2, Parts 1.6, 1.7 35.117,
                       35.126
Div. 2, Part 6.7       35.024
 
Vehicle Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite    Code Section
2453          96.43
4000 et seq.  35.125
9105          72.073
9840 et seq.  35.125
11701 - 11714 113.04
12110(b)      70.40
22650 et seq. 90.04
22660         90.01
23112.5       96.43
42002         10.99
 
Water Code
 
State Cite Code Section
n/a        n/a
 
Welfare and Institutions Code
 
State Cite      Code Section
Div. 8, Ch. 6.5 153.162
                153.031,
5116            153.032,
                153.240
 
REFERENCES TO 1965 CODE
1965 Code Section 1996 Code Section
1965 Code Section 1996 Code Section
1-1.08            10.20
1-2.01            10.99
1-2.02            10.21
1-2.03            10.21
1-2.04            10.21
1-2.05            10.22
1-2.07            37.01
1-3.10            10.19
1-3.11            10.19
1-3.13(a)         10.05
1-3.13(c)         10.05
1-3.13(e)         10.05
1-3.13(m)         10.05
1-3.13(o)         10.05
1-3.13(p)         10.05
1-3.13(q)         10.05
1-3.13(r)         10.05
1-3.13(u)         10.05
1-3.13(v)         10.05
1-4.01            30.10
1-4.02            30.11
1-4.03            30.12
1-4.04            30.13
1-4.07            30.14
1-4.08            30.15
1-4.09            30.16
1-5.01            10.30
1-5.02            10.31
1-5.03            10.32
2-1.01            30.01
2-1.02            30.01
2-1.03            30.02
2-2.02            37.30
2-2.03            37.31
2-2.04            37.32
2-2.05            37.33
2-2.06            37.34
2-2.07            37.35
2-3.201           38.15
2-3.202           38.16
2-3.301           31.30
2-4.01            32.51
2-4.02            32.51
2-4.03            32.51
2-5.01            32.52
2-5.02            32.52
2-5.03            32.52
2-6.01            32.50
2-6.02            32.50
2-6.03            32.50
2-6.04            32.50
2-6.05            32.50
2-6.06            32.50
2-6.07            32.50
2-6.08            32.50
2-6.09            32.50
2-7.01            34.25
2-7.02            34.26
2-7.03            34.27
2-7.04            34.28
2-7.05            34.29
2-7.06            34.30
2-7.09            34.39
2-7.10            34.41
2-7.11            34.37
2-7.12            34.42
2-7.13            34.43
2-7.14            34.44
2-7.15            34.45
2-7.16            34.47
3-1.101           110.01
3-1.102           110.02
3-1.102.1         110.03
3-1.103           110.04
3-1.104           110.05
3-1.105           110.06
3-1.106           110.07
3-1.107           110.08
3-1.108           110.09
3-1.109           110.10
3-1.110           110.11
3-1.111           110.12
3-1.112           110.13
3-1.113           110.14
3-1.114           110.15
3-1.115           110.16
3-1.116           110.17
3-1.117           110.18
3-1.118           110.20
3-1.201           110.30
3-1.202           110.31
3-1.203           110.32
3-1.205           110.33
3-1.206           110.34
3-1.207           110.35
3-1.208           110.36
3-1.209           110.37
3-1.210           110.38
3-1.211           110.39
3-1.212           110.40
3-1.213           110.41
3-1.214           110.42
3-1.216           110.43
3-1.218           110.44
3-1.219           110.45
3-1.220           110.46
3-1.221           110.47
3-1.301           110.60
3-1.302           110.61
3-1.303           110.62
3-1.304           110.63
3-1.305           110.64
3-1.306           110.65
3-1.307           110.66
3-1.308           110.67
3-1.309           110.68
3-1.311           110.69
3-2.01            34.01
3-2.02            34.02
3-2.03            34.03
3-2.04            34.04
3-2.05            34.05
3-2.06            34.06
3-2.07            34.07
3-2.08            34.08
3-2.09            34.09
3-2.10            34.10
3-2.11            34.11
3-2.12            34.12
3-3.101           32.20
3-3.102           32.21
3-3.103           32.22
3-3.104           32.23
3-3.201           32.24
3-3.202           32.24
3-3.203           32.24
3-4.101           34.50
3-4.102           34.50
3-4.103           34.50
3-4.104           34.50
3-5.01            34.65
3-5.02            34.66
3-5.03            34.67
3-6.101           35.001
3-6.102           35.002
3-6.201           35.035
3-6.202           35.036
3-6.204           35.037
3-6.205           35.038
3-6.206           35.039
3-6.207           35.040
3-6.208           35.041
3-6.301           35.055
3-6.302           35.056
3-6.303           35.057
3-6.304           35.058
3-6.305           35.059
3-6.306           35.060
3-6.307           35.061
3-6.308           35.062
3-6.309           35.063
3-6.310           35.064
3-6.311           35.065
3-6.312           35.066
3-6.313           35.067
3-6.314           35.068
3-6.401           35.015
3-6.402           35.016
3-6.403           35.017
3-6.404           35.019
3-6.405           35.020
3-6.406           35.021
3-6.407           35.022
3-6.408           35.023
3-6.409           35.024
3-6.410           35.025
3-6.501           35.080
3-6.502           35.081
3-6.503           35.082
3-6.504           35.083
3-6.505           35.084
3-6.506           35.085
3-6.507           35.088
3-6.508           35.089
3-6.509           35.090
3-6.510           35.092
3-6.511           35.094
3-6.512           35.095
3-6.513           35.096
3-6.514           35.098
3-6.515           35.099
3-6.517           35.102
3-6.519           35.103
3-6.520           35.104
4-2.01            100.115
4-2.02            100.116
4-2.03            100.117
4-2.04            100.118
4-2.05            100.119
4-3.01            36.01
4-3.02            36.02
4-3.03            36.03
4-3.04            36.04
4-3.05            36.05
4-3.06            36.06
4-3.07            36.07
4-3.08            36.08
4-3.09            36.09
4-3.10            36.10,
                  36.99
4-4.101           96.01
4-4.102           96.02
4-4.104           96.03
4-4.105           96.04
4-4.106           96.99
4-4.201           96.20
4-4.202           96.21
4-4.203           96.22
4-4.204           96.23
4-4.301           96.40
4-4.302           96.41
4-4.303           96.42
4-4.304           96.43
4-4.305           96.99
4-4.306           96.44
4-5.102           70.01
4-5.104           70.01
4-5.105           70.01
4-5.106           70.01
4-5.107           70.01
4-5.108           70.01
4-5.109           70.01
4-5.110           70.01
4-5.111           70.01
4-5.112           70.01
4-5.113           70.01
4-5.114           70.01
4-5.201           70.30
4-5.202           70.30
4-5.203           70.31
4-5.204           70.32
4-5.205           70.32
4-5.206           70.33
4-5.207           70.33
4-5.301           70.34
4-5.302           70.34
4-5.303           70.35
4-5.304           70.36
4-5.305           70.37
4-5.306           70.38
4-5.307           70.39
4-5.401           70.10
4-5.402           70.11
4-5.403           70.12
4-5.404           70.13
4-5.405           70.14
4-5.406           70.15
4-5.407           70.16
4-5.408           70.17
4-5.409           70.18
4-5.410           70.19
4-5.501           71.50
4-5.502           71.51
4-5.503           71.52
4-5.504           71.53
4-5.601           70.20
4-5.701           71.35
4-5.702           71.36
4-5.703           71.37
4-5.801           71.01
4-5.802           71.02
4-5.803           71.03
4-5.804           71.04
4-5.805           71.05
4-5.806           71.06
4-5.807           71.07
4-5.808           71.08
4-5.809           71.75
4-5.901           71.65
4-5.902           71.66
4-5.1001          72.001
4-5.1002          72.002
4-5.1003          72.003
4-5.1004          72.004
4-5.1005          72.005
4-5.1006          72.006
4-5.1007          72.007
4-5.1008          72.008
4-5.1009          72.009
4-5.1010          72.010
4-5.1011          72.011
4-5.1012          72.012
4-5.1013          72.013
4-5.1101          72.065
4-5.1102          72.066
4-5.1103          72.067
4-5.1104          72.068
4-5.1105          72.069
4-5.1106          72.070
4-5.1107          72.071
4-5.1108          72.072
4-5.1109          72.073
4-5.1110          72.074
4-5.1111          72.075
4-5.1112          72.076
4-5.1113          72.077
4-5.1114          72.078
4-5.1201          72.085
4-5.1202          72.086
4-5.1203          72.087
4-5.1204          72.088
4-5.1205          72.088
4-5.1206          72.088
4-5.1207          72.089
4-5.1208          72.090
4-5.1209          72.091
4-5.1301          71.20
4-5.1302          71.21
4-5.1303          71.22
4-5.1304          71.23
4-5.1401          72.091
4-5.1501          72.025
4-5.1502          72.026
4-5.1503          72.027
4-5.1504          72.028
4-5.1505          72.029
4-5.1506          72.030
4-5.1507          72.031
4-5.1508          72.032
4-5.1509          72.033
4-5.1510          72.034
4-5.1512          72.035
4-5.1513          72.036
4-5.1601          71.76
4-5.1701(a)       72.045
4-5.1701(b)       72.046
4-5.1702          72.047
4-5.1703          72.048
4-5.1801          72.055
4-5.1802          72.056
4-7.01            124.040
4-7.02            124.041
4-7.03            124.042
4-7.04            124.043
4-7.05            124.044
4-7.06            124.045
4-7.07            124.046
4-7.08            124.047
4-7.09            124.048
4-7.10            124.049
4-9.01            124.030
4-9.02            124.031
4-10.01           91.01
4-10.02           91.02
4-10.03           91.25
4-10.04           91.26
4-10.05           91.27
4-10.06           91.28
4-10.07           91.03
4-10.08           91.04
4-10.09           91.05
4-10.10           91.06
4-10.11           91.07
4-10.12           91.08
4-10.13           91.09
4-10.14           91.10
4-10.15           91.11
4-10.16           91.12
4-10.17           91.13
4-10.18           91.14
4-10.19           91.15
4-11.01           124.001
4-11.02           124.002
4-12.01           117.01
4-12.02           117.02
4-12.03           117.03
4-12.04           117.04
4-12.05           117.05
4-12.06           117.06
4-12.07           117.07
4-12.08           117.08
4-12.09           117.09
4-12.10           117.10
4-12.11           117.11
4-12.12           117.12
4-12.13           117.13
4-12.14           117.14
4-12.15           117.15
4-12.16           117.16
5-3.01(a)         116.010
5-3.01(c)         116.010
5-3.02            116.011
5-3.03            116.013
5-3.04            116.014
5-3.05            110.63
5-3.06            116.016
5-3.07            116.017
5-3.08            116.018
5-3.09            116.019
5-3.10            116.020
5-3.11            116.021
5-3.12            116.022
5-3.13            116.023
5-3.14            116.024
5-3.15            116.025
5-3.18            116.012
5-3.20            116.027
5-3.21            116.010
5-3.22            116.028
5-3.23            116.029
5-5.01            93.01
5-5.02            93.02
5-5.03            93.03
5-6.01            116.001
5-7.01            124.015
5-7.02            124.016
5-7.03            110.61
5-7.04            124.018
5-8.01            130.30
5-8.02            130.31
5-8.03            130.32
5-9.101           114.001
5-9.102           114.002
5-9.103           114.003
5-9.104           114.004
5-9.105           114.005
5-9.106           114.006
5-9.107           114.007
5-9.201           114.020
5-9.202           114.021
5-9.203           114.022
5-9.205           114.023
5-9.206           114.024
5-9.207           114.025
5-9.208           114.026
5-9.209           114.027
5-9.210           114.028
5-9.211           114.029
5-9.212           114.030
5-9.213           114.031
5-9.214           114.032
5-9.301           114.045
5-9.302           114.046
5-9.303           114.047
5-9.304           114.048
5-9.305           114.049
5-9.306           114.050
5-9.307           114.051
5-9.308           114.052
5-9.309           114.053
5-9.310           114.054
5-9.311           114.055
5-9.312           114.056
5-9.313           114.057
5-9.314           114.058
5-9.315           114.059
5-9.401           114.070
5-9.402           114.071
5-9.403           114.072
5-9.404           114.073
5-9.405           114.074
5-9.406           114.075
5-9.407           114.076
5-9.408           114.077
5-9.409           114.078
5-9.410           114.079
5-9.411           114.080
5-9.412           114.081
5-9.413           114.082
5-9.414           114.083
5-9.415           114.084
5-9.416           114.085
5-9.417           114.086
5-10.01           130.15
5-11.01           116.040
5-11.02           116.041
5-11.03           116.042
5-12.01           118.01
5-12.02           118.02
5-12.03           118.03
5-12.04           118.04
5-12.05           118.05
5-12.06           118.06
5-12.07           118.07
5-13.01           130.50
5-13.02           130.51
5-13.04           130.52
5-13.05           130.53
5-14.01           130.01
5-14.02           130.02
5-14.03           130.03
5-14.04           130.04
5-14.06           130.06
5-14.06.1(a)      130.07
5-14.06.1(b)      130.99
5-14.07           130.08
5-14.08           130.09
5-14.09           100.002
5-14.10           100.003
5-14.11           130.10
5-14.12           130.11
5-14.14           130.99
5-14.15           130.12
5-14.16           130.13
5-14.17           130.14
5-14.18           71.09
5-14.19           71.10
5-15.01           115.01
5-15.02           115.02
5-15.03           115.03
5-15.04           115.04
5-16.01           116.056
5-16.02           116.057
5-16.03           116.058
5-16.04           116.059
5-16.05           116.060
5-16.06           116.061
5-16.07           116.062
5-16.08           116.063
5-16.09           116.064
5-16.10           116.065
5-16.11           116.066
5-17.01           130.16
5-18.01           123.01
5-18.02           123.02
5-18.03           123.03
5-18.04           123.04
5-18.05           123.05
5-18.06           123.06
5-18.07           110.68
5-18.08           123.08
5-18.09           123.09
5-18.10           123.20
5-18.12           123.21
5-18.13           123.22
5-18.15           123.24
5-18.16           123.25
5-21.201          124.090
5-21.202          124.091
5-21.203          124.092
5-21.204          124.093
5-21.205          124.094
5-21.206          124.095
5-21.207          124.096
5-21.208          124.097
5-21.209          124.098
5-21.210          124.099
5-21.211          124.100
5-21.212          130.05
5-22.01           119.01
5-22.02           119.02
5-22.03           119.03
5-22.04           119.04
5-22.06           119.06
5-22.08           119.08
5-22.09           119.09
5-22.10           119.09
5-22.11           119.10
5-22.12           119.11
5-22.13           119.12
5-23.01           113.01
5-23.02           113.02
5-23.03           113.04
5-23.04           113.05
5-23.05           113.06
5-23.06           113.07
5-23.09           113.10
5-24.01           90.01
5-24.02           90.02
5-24.03           90.04
5-24.04           90.05
5-24.05           90.06
5-24.06           90.07
5-24.07           90.08
5-24.08           90.09
5-24.09           90.10
5-24.10           90.11
5-24.11           90.12
5-24.12           90.13
5-24.13           90.14
5-24.14           90.03
5-24.15           90.15
5-25.01           100.150
5-25.02           100.151
5-25.03           100.152
5-25.04           100.153
5-25.05           100.154
5-25.06           100.155
5-25.07           100.156
5-25.10           100.158
5-25.11           100.159
5-25.12           100.160
5-25.13           100.161
5-26.01           120.01
5-26.02           120.02
5-26.03           120.03
5-26.04           120.04
5-26.05           110.63
5-26.06           120.06
5-26.07           120.07
5-29.01           153.162
5-29.02           153.162
5-30.01           37.55
5-30.02           37.56
5-30.03           37.57
5-30.04           37.58
5-30.05           37.59
5-31.01           121.01
5-31.02           121.02
5-31.03           121.03
5-31.04           121.04
5-31.05           121.05
5-31.06           121.06
5-31.07           121.07
5-31.08           121.08
5-31.09           121.09
5-31.10           121.10
5-31.11           121.11
5-31.12           121.12
5-31.13           121.13
5-31.14           121.14
5-31.15           121.15
5-31.16           121.16
5-31.17           121.99
5-31.18           121.17
6-1.01            37.15
6-1.02            37.16
6-2.101           92.01
6-2.102           92.02
6-2.301           92.45
6-2.302           92.46
6-2.303           92.47
6-2.304           92.48
6-2.305           92.48
6-2.306           92.49
6-2.307           92.49
6-2.308           92.50
6-2.309           92.51
6-2.310           92.52
6-2.311           92.53
6-2.312           92.54
6-2.313           92.55
6-2.314           92.56
6-2.315           92.57
6-2.316           92.58
6-2.317           92.58
6-2.318           92.59
6-2.319           92.60
6-2.320           92.61
6-2.401           92.20
6-2.402           92.21
6-2.403           92.22
6-2.601           97.10
6-2.602           97.11
6-2.603           97.12
6-2.604           97.13
6-2.605           97.14
6-2.606           97.15
6-2.607           97.16
6-2.701           92.35
6-2.702           92.36
6-3.01            94.01
6-3.02            94.02
6-4.101           50.001
6-4.104           50.004
6-4.105           50.004
6-4.127           50.011
6-4.301           95.50
6-4.303           95.51
6-4.305           95.52
6-4.308           95.53
6-4.309           95.54
6-4.311           95.55
6-4.313           95.56
6-4.315           95.57
6-4.317           95.57
6-4.319           95.58
6-4.321           95.59
6-4.323           95.60
6-4.325           95.61
6-4.327           95.62
6-4.329           95.63
6-4.331           95.64
6-4.333           95.65
6-4.335           95.66
6-4.339           95.67
6-4.411(a)        50.014
6-4.411(b)        50.014
6-4.411(c)        50.999
6-6.01            151.01
6-6.02            151.02
6-6.03            151.03
6-8.101           51.01
6-8.102           51.02
6-8.103           51.55
6-8.114           51.40
6-8.116           51.41
6-8.117           51.25
6-8.118           51.26
6-8.119           51.27
6-8.120           51.28
6-8.121           51.03
6-8.122           51.04
6-8.123           51.05
6-8.124           51.06
6-8.125           51.07
6-8.126           51.08
6-8.127           51.09
6-8.128           51.10
6-8.129           51.11
6-8.130           51.12
6-8.131           51.13
6-8.132           51.14
6-8.133           51.15
6-8.134           51.16
6-8.201           52.01
6-8.202           52.10
6-8.203           52.11
6-8.204           52.12
6-8.205           52.12
6-8.206           52.13
6-8.207           52.14
6-8.208           52.14
6-8.209           52.15
6-8.210           52.16
6-8.211           52.17
6-8.212           52.18
6-8.213           52.18
6-8.214           52.18
6-8.215           52.18
6-8.216           52.18
6-8.217           52.19
6-8.218           52.20
6-8.219           52.21
6-8.220           52.35
6-8.221           52.36
6-8.222           52.37
6-8.223           52.38
6-8.224           52.39
6-8.225           52.40
6-8.301           52.50
6-8.302           52.51
6-8.303           52.52
6-8.304           52.53
6-8.305           52.54
6-8.306           52.55
6-8.307           52.56
6-8.308           52.57
6-8.309           52.58
6-8.310           52.59
6-8.311           52.60
6-10.01           97.01
7-1.01            100.085
7-1.02            100.085
7-2.03            100.016
7-2.04            100.017
7-2.05            100.018
7-2.06            100.019
7-2.07            100.030
7-2.08            100.031
7-2.09            100.032
7-2.10            100.001
7-3.01            100.045
7-3.02            100.046
7-3.03            100.047
7-3.04            100.048
7-3.05            100.049
7-3.06            100.050
7-3.07            100.051
7-3.08            100.052
7-3.09            100.053
7-3.10            100.054
7-3.11            100.055
7-3.12            100.056
7-3.13            100.057
7-3.14            100.058
7-3.15            100.059
7-3.16            100.060
7-3.17            100.061
7-3.18            100.062
7-3.19            100.063
7-3.20            100.064
7-3.21            100.065
7-3.22            100.066
7-3.23            100.067
7-3.24            100.068
7-3.25            100.069
7-3.26            100.070
7-3.27            100.071
7-3.28            100.072
7-4.01            100.088
7-5.01            100.086
7-5.02            100.087
7-5.03            100.088
7-5.04            100.089
7-6.01            100.100
7-6.02            100.101
7-6.03            100.102
7-6.04            100.103
7-6.05            100.104
7-6.06            100.105
7-6.07            100.106
7-7.01            95.01
7-7.02            95.02
7-7.03            95.03
7-7.04            95.03
7-7.05            95.04
7-7.06            95.05
7-7.07            95.06
7-7.08            95.07
7-7.09            95.07
7-7.10            95.07
7-7.11            95.07
7-7.12            95.07
7-7.13            95.07
7-7.14            95.07
7-7.15            95.08
7-7A.01           95.20
7-7A.02           95.22
7-7A.03           95.23
7-7A.04           95.24
7-7A.05           95.99
7-7A.06           95.25
7-7A.07           95.21
7-7B.01           95.35
7-7B.02           95.37
7-7B.03           95.38
7-7B.04           95.39
7-7B.05           95.99
7-7B.06           95.40
7-7B.07           95.36
7-8.101           112.001
7-8.201           112.002
7-8.301           112.003
7-8.302           112.003
7-8.303           112.003
7-8.304           112.003
7-8.305           112.003
7-8.306           112.003
7-8.307           112.003
7-8.308           112.003
7-8.309           112.003
7-8.310           112.003
7-8.311           112.003
7-8.312           112.003
7-8.313           112.003
7-8.314           112.003
7-8.315           112.003
7-8.316           112.003
7-8.317           112.003
7-8.318           112.003
7-8.319           112.003
7-8.320           112.003
7-8.321           112.003
7-8.322           112.003
7-8.323           112.003
7-8.324           112.003
7-8.325           112.003
7-8.326           112.003
7-8.327           112.003
7-8.328           112.003
7-8.329           112.003
7-8.330           112.003
7-8.331           112.003
7-8.332           112.003
7-8.333           112.003
7-8.334           112.003
7-8.335           112.003
7-8.336           112.003
7-8.337           112.003
7-8.338           112.003
7-8.339           112.003
7-8.340           112.003
7-8.341           112.003
7-8.342           112.003
7-8.343           112.003
7-8.344           112.003
7-8.346           112.003
7-8.348           112.003
7-8.349           112.003
7-8.350           112.003
7-8.351           112.003
7-8.401           112.020
7-8.402           112.021
7-8.403           112.022
7-8.404           112.023
7-8.405           112.024
7-8.406           112.025
7-8.407           112.026
7-8.408           112.027
7-8.409           112.028
7-8.410           112.029
7-8.411           112.030
7-8.412           112.031
7-8.501           112.040
7-8.502           112.041
7-8.503           112.042
7-8.504           112.043
7-8.505           112.044
7-8.506           112.045
7-8.507           112.046
7-8.508           112.047
7-8.601           112.060
7-8.602           112.061
7-8.603           112.062
7-8.604           112.063
7-8.605           112.064
7-8.701           112.130
7-8.702           112.131
7-8.703           112.132
7-8.704           112.133
7-8.705           112.134
7-8.706           112.135
7-8.707           112.136
7-8.708           112.137
7-8.709           112.138
7-8.710           112.139
7-8.711           112.140
7-8.712           112.141
7-8.713           112.142
7-8.801           112.155
7-8.802           112.156
7-8.803           112.157
7-8.804           112.158
7-8.805           112.159
7-8.806           112.160
7-8.807           112.161
7-8.808           112.162
7-8.809           112.163
7-8.810           112.164
7-8.811           112.165
7-8.812           112.166
7-8.901           112.115
7-8.902           112.116
7-8.903           112.117
7-8.904           112.118
7-8.905           112.119
7-8.906           112.120
7-8.907           112.121
7-8.1001          112.175
7-8.1002          112.176
7-8.1003          112.177
7-8.1004          112.178
7-8.1005          112.179
7-8.1101          112.190
7-8.1201          112.100
7-8.1202          112.101
7-8.1203          112.102
7-8.1301          112.075
7-8.1302          112.076
7-8.1303          112.077
7-8.1304          112.078
7-8.1305          112.079
7-8.1306          112.080
7-8.1307          112.081
7-8.1308          112.082
7-8.1309          112.083
7-8.1310          112.084
7-8.1311          112.085
7-8.1312          112.086
7-8.1313          112.087
7-8.1314          112.088
7-8.1401          112.004
7-8.1402          112.005
7-8.1403          112.005
7-8.1404          112.006
7-8.1405          112.007
7-8.1407          112.008
7-8.1408          112.009
7-8.1409(a)       112.010
7-8.1409(b)       112.999
7-8.1501          112.200
7-8.1502          112.201
7-9.01            150.200
7-9.02            150.201
7-9.04            150.203
7-9.05            150.204
8-1.01            150.001
8-1.09            150.002
8-1.12            150.002
8-1.15            150.002
8-1.20            150.002
8-1.25            150.002
8-1.30            150.002
8-1.35            150.002
8-2.01            150.040
8-2.02            150.041
8-2.03            150.042
8-2.04            150.043
8-2.05            150.044
8-2.06            150.045
8-2.07            150.046
8-2.08            150.047
8-2.09            150.048
8-2.10            150.049
8-2.11            150.050
8-3.01            150.060
8-3.02            150.061
8-3.03            150.062
8-3.04            150.063
8-3.05            150.064
8-3.06            150.065
8-3.07            150.066
8-3.08            150.067
8-3.09            150.068
8-3.10            150.069
8-3.11            150.070
8-3.12            150.071
8-3.13            150.072
8-4.01            100.130
8-4.02            100.130
8-4.03            100.130
8-4.04            100.130
8-4.05            100.131
8-4.06            100.132
8-4.07            100.133
8-4.08            100.134
8-4.09            100.135
8-4.11            100.136
8-4.12            100.137
8-5.01            150.010
8-5.03            150.011
8-5.04            150.011
8-5.05            150.012
8-7.02            150.110
8-7.03            150.111
8-7.07            150.112
8-7.08            150.113
8-7.09            150.114
8-7.10            150.115
8-8.01            150.030
8-8.03            150.031
8-10.02           150.180
8-10.04           150.181
8-11.01           98.01
8-11.02           98.02
8-11.03           98.03
8-11.04           98.04
8-11.05           98.05
8-11.06           98.06
8-11.07           98.07
8-11.08           98.08
8-11.09           98.09
8-11.10           98.10
8-11.11           98.11
8-11.12           98.12
8-11.13           98.13
8-11.14           98.14
8-11.15           98.15
8-11.16           98.16
8-11.17           98.17
8-11.18           98.18
8-11.19           98.19
8-11.20           98.20
8-11.21           98.21
8-11.22           98.22,
                  98.99
8-12.01           150.140
8-12.02           150.141
8-12.03           150.142
8-12.05           150.144
8-12.06           150.145
8-12.07           150.146
8-12.08           150.147
8-12.09           150.148
8-13.01           150.160
8-13.02           150.161
8-13.03           150.162
8-13.05           150.163
8-13.06           150.164
8-14.01           150.020
8-14.03           150.021
8-15.01           150.080
8-15.02           150.081
8-15.03           150.082
8-15.04           150.083
8-15.05           150.084
8-15.06           150.085
8-15.07           150.086
8-15.08           150.087
8-15.09           150.088
8-15.10           150.089
8-15.11           150.090
8-15.12           150.091
9-1.01            33.30
9-1.02            33.31
9-1.03            33.32
9-1.05            33.34
9-1.06            33.35
9-1.07            33.36
9-1.08            33.37
9-1.09            33.38
9-1.10            33.39
9-1.12            33.40
9-1.13            33.41
9-2.01            152.01
9-2.02            152.02
9-2.03            152.03
9-2.04            152.04
9-2.05            152.05
9-2.06            152.06
9-2.07            152.07
9-2.08            152.08
9-2.09            152.09
9-2.10            152.10
9-2.11            152.11
9-2.12            152.12
9-2.13            152.13
9-2.14            152.14
9-2.15            152.15
9-2.16            152.16
9-2.17            152.17
9-2.18            152.18
9-2.19            152.19
9-2.20            152.20
9-2.21            152.21
9-2.22            152.22
9-2.23            152.22
9-2.24            152.22
9-2.25            152.23
9-2.26            152.24
9-2.27            152.25
9-2.28            152.26
9-2.29            152.27
9-2.30            152.28
9-2.31            152.29
9-2.32            152.30
9-3.101           153.001
9-3.102           153.002
9-3.202           153.003
9-3.203           153.003
9-3.203.2         153.003
9-3.204           153.003
9-3.205           153.003
9-3.207           153.003
9-3.208           153.003
9-3.209           153.003
9-3.210           153.003
9-3.211           153.003
9-3.212           153.003
9-3.213           153.003
9-3.214           153.003
9-3.215           153.003
9-3.216           153.003
9-3.218           153.003
9-3.219           153.003
9-3.219.2         153.003
9-3.220           153.003
9-3.221           153.003
9-3.222           153.003
9-3.223           153.003
9-3.224           153.003
9-3.225           153.003
9-3.226           153.003
9-3.227           153.003
9-3.227.5         153.003
9-3.229           153.003
9-3.229.2         153.003
9-3.229.4         153.003
9-3.229.6         153.003
9-3.230           153.003
9-3.231           153.003
9-3.233           153.003
9-3.233.5         153.003
9-3.234           153.003
9-3.235           153.003
9-3.236           153.003
9-3.237           153.003
9-3.301           153.015
9-3.302           153.016
9-3.303           153.017
9-3.304           153.018
9-3.305           153.019
9-3.501           153.055
9-3.502           153.056
9-3.503           153.057
9-3.504           153.058
9-3.505           153.059
9-3.505(a)        153.060
9-3.506           153.061
9-3.507           153.062
9-3.508           153.063
9-3.509           153.064
9-3.510           153.065
9-3.511           153.066
9-3.512           153.067
9-3.601           153.080
9-3.602           153.081
9-3.603           153.082
9-3.604           153.083
9-3.605           153.084
9-3.606           153.085
9-3.607           153.086
9-3.608           153.087
9-3.701           153.100
9-3.702           153.101
9-3.703           153.102
9-3.704           153.103
9-3.705           153.104
9-3.706           153.105
9-3.707           153.106
9-3.708           153.107
9-3.709           153.108
9-3.801           153.150
9-3.804           153.151
9-3.808           153.152
9-3.812           153.153
9-3.816           153.154
9-3.820           153.155
9-3.824           153.156
9-3.828           153.157
9-3.832           153.158
9-3.836           153.159
9-3.840           153.160
9-3.844           153.161
9-3.848           153.162
9-3.852           153.163
9-3.856           153.164
9-3.860           153.165
9-3.1201          153.170
9-3.1204          153.171
9-3.1208          153.172
9-3.1212          153.173
9-3.1216          153.174
9-3.1301          153.185
9-3.1302          153.186
9-3.1303          153.187
9-3.1304          153.188
9-3.1305          153.189
9-3.1306          153.190
9-3.1307          153.191
9-3.1309          153.192
9-3.1503          153.125
9-3.1506          153.126
9-3.1507          153.127
9-3.1507.1        153.128
9-3.1509          153.129
9-3.1510          153.130
9-3.1512          153.131
9-3.1515          153.133
9-3.1605          153.221
9-3.1606          153.222
9-3.1607          153.223
9-3.1609          153.225
9-3.1610          153.226
9-3.1701          153.240
9-3.1702          153.241
9-3.1704          153.243
9-3.1705          153.244
9-3.1706          153.245
9-3.1707          153.246
9-3.1709          153.248
9-3.1801          153.260
9-3.1802          153.261
9-3.1803          153.262
9-3.1804          153.263
9-3.1805          153.264
9-3.1806          153.265
9-3.1807          153.266
9-3.1808          153.267
9-3.1809          153.268
9-3.1810          153.269
9-3.1910          153.447
9-3.
 
9-3.2101          153.480
9-3.2102          153.481
9-3.2103          153.482
9-3.2104          153.483
9-3.2301          153.280,
                  153.286
9-3.2302          153.281
9-3.2303          153.282
9-3.2304          153.283
9-3.2305          153.284
9-3.2306          153.285
9-3.2308          153.286
9-3.2309          153.286
9-3.2312          153.286
9-3.2313          153.286
9-3.2401          153.320
9-3.2402          153.321
9-3.2403          153.322
9-3.2404          153.323
9-3.2405          153.324
9-3.2406          153.325
9-3.2407          153.326
9-3.2408          153.327
9-3.2409          153.328
9-3.2410          153.329
9-3.2411          153.330
9-3.2412          153.331
9-3.2413          153.332
9-3.2414          153.333
9-3.2415          153.999
9-3.2501          153.350
9-3.2502          153.351
9-3.2503          153.352
9-3.2504          153.353
9-3.2505          153.354
9-3.2506          153.355
9-3.2507          153.356
9-3.2508          153.357,
                  153.999
9-3.2701          153.380
9-3.2702          153.381
9-3.2703          153.382
9-3.2704          153.383
9-3.2801          153.365,
                  153.400
9-3.2802          153.366,
                  153.401
9-3.2803          153.402
9-3.2804          153.403
9-3.2805          153.404
9-3.3001          121.01,
                  121.99
9-3.3002          121.30
9-3.3003          121.30
9-3.3004          121.32
9-3.3005          121.33
9-3.3006          121.34
9-3.3007          121.35
9-3.3008          121.36
9-3.3009          121.37
9-4.101           152.40
9-4.102           152.41
9-4.103           152.42
9-4.104           152.43
9-4.105           152.44
9-4.201           152.45
9-4.202           152.46
9-4.203           152.47
9-4.301           152.48
9-4.302           152.49
9-4.303           152.50
10-1.01           33.01
10-1.02           33.02
10-1.03           33.04
10-2.01           99.01
10-2.02           99.02
10-2.03           99.15
10-2.04           99.16
10-2.05           99.17
10-2.06           99.03
10-2.07           99.04
10-2.08           99.05
Table 15-A        150.093
Table 15-B        150.093
Table 15-C        150.093
Table 15-D        150.093
Table 15-E        150.093
Table 15-F        150.093
Table 15-G        150.093
Table 15-H        150.093
Table 15-I        150.093
Table 15-J        150.093
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
4-C.S.    - -         124.096
10-C.S.   - -         153.127,
                      153.128
                      114.020 -
12        - -         114.028,
                      114.051
14        - -         100.086
15        - -         100.087
16        - -         100.088
16-C.S.   - -         110.68
17        - -         100.089
17-C.S.   - -         153.131
19-C.S.   - -         153.130
20-C.S.   - -         110.65
21-C.S.   - -         100.001
23-C.S.   - -         110.66
30-C.S.   - -         150.140 -
                      150.148
32-C.S.   - -         151.02,
                      153.130
34-C.S.   - -         31.30
35-C.S.   - -         130.12 -
                      130.14
36-C.S.   - -         35.015 -
                      35.025
37-C.S.   - -         153.127
40-C.S.   - -         90.01 -
                      90.15
46-C.S.   - -         99.04,
                      99.05
                      70.01,
                      70.10 -
                      70.20,
                      70.30 -
                      70.39,
                      71.01 -
                      71.08,
                      71.20 -
                      71.23,
                      71.35 -
49-C.S.   - -         71.37,
                      71.50 -
                      71.53,
                      71.65,
                      71.66,
                      71.75,
                      72.001 -
                      72.013,
                      72.065 -
                      72.077,
                      72.085 -
                      72.091
50-C.S.   - -         52.50 -
                      52.60
51        - -         35.001,
                      35.002
52-C.S.   - -         92.01,
                      92.02
53-C.S.   - -         93.01 -
                      93.03
55-C.S.   - -         72.025 -
                      72.036
                      71.76,
56-C.S.   - -         72.045 -
                      72.048,
                      Ch. 73, Sched. I
60-C.S.   - -         72.055,
                      72.056
72-C.S.   - -         31.30
77-C.S.   - -         124.040 -
                      124.049
78-C.S.   - -         31.30
                      153.080 -
                      153.083,
80-C.S.   - -         153.085,
                      153.087,
                      153.105,
                      153.221
84-C.S.   - -         33.31
85-C.S.   - -         32.50
85        - -         116.056 -
                      116.066
                      37.30,
87-C.S.   - -         37.31,
                      37.33 -
                      37.35
                      90.06,
97-C.S.   - -         90.09,
                      90.10,
                      90.13
99-C.S.   - -         153.130
101       - -         93.01
103-C.S.  - -         153.192
104-C.S.  - -         100.031
105       - -         130.30 -
                      130.32
                      110.03,
                      110.05,
107-C.S.  - -         110.12,
                      110.42,
                      110.60,
                      110.62
                      36.01 -
108-C.S.  - -         36.10,
                      36.99
111       - -         100.130 -
                      100.137
111-C.S.  - -         114.028
                      100.002,
                      100.003,
118       - -         130.01 -
                      130.09,
                      130.99
140-C.S.  - -         110.63
142-C.S.  - -         153.226
154-C.S.  - -         35.037,
                      35.038
159-C.S.  - -         100.150 -
                      100.161
160-C.S.  - -         37.32 -
                      37.35
162-C.S.  - -         92.49
163-C.S.  - -         35.057
164-C.S.  - -         33.02,
                      33.31
165-C.S.  - -         110.67
166-C.S.  - -         72.033
                      110.63,
167-C.S.  - -         120.01 -
                      120.07
168-C.S.  - -         152.01 -
                      152.30
170-C.S.  - -         92.49
173       - -         100.115 -
                      100.119
182-C.S.  - -         72.033
185-C.S.  - -         114.005
187-C.S.  - -         130.07,
                      130.99
188-C.S.  - -         99.03
190-C.S.  - -         30.02
197       - -         115.01 -
                      115.04
                      51.40,
                      52.21,
                      72.026,
                      72.027,
                      72.031,
                      92.49,
                      100.031,
                      110.05,
                      110.09,
                      110.11,
                      110.60 -
197-C.S.  - -         110.68,
                      116.060,
                      120.03,
                      124.096,
                      130.07,
                      130.99,
                      150.062,
                      150.067,
                      150.142,
                      153.262,
                      153.441,
                      153.472
199-C.S.  - -         35.057
                      52.01,
                      52.10 -
                      52.21,
                      52.35 -
201       - -         52.39,
                      100.100,
                      100.101,
                      100.103,
                      100.104,
                      100.105
201-C.S.  - -         110.68
202-C.S.  - -         150.114
206-C.S.  - -         110.63,
                      116.011
212-C.S.  - -         90.09
215       - -         150.044
216-C.S.  - -         30.02
218       - -         100.030 -
                      100.032
222-C.S.  - -         100.154
232-C.S.  - -         124.030,
                      124.031
234-C.S.  - -         116.010,
                      116.028
                      116.010,
236-C.S.  - -         116.028,
                      116.029,
                      153.240
238       - -         33.30 -
                      33.40
241-C.S.  - -         153.100
                      91.01 -
242-C.S.  - -         91.15,
                      91.25 -
                      91.28
243-C.S.  - -         116.017,
                      116.018
                      112.001 -
                      112.010,
                      112.020 -
                      112.031,
                      112.040 -
                      112.047,
                      112.060 -
                      112.064,
                      112.075 -
                      112.088,
                      112.100 -
244-C.S.  - -         112.102,
                      112.115 -
                      112.121,
                      112.130 -
                      112.142,
                      112.155 -
                      112.166,
                      112.175 -
                      112.179,
                      112.190,
                      112.200,
                      112.201,
                      112.999
245-C.S.  - -         153.003,
                      153.221
247       - -         150.043,
                      150.047
                      153.015,
247-C.S.  - -         153.280 -
                      153.286
                      153.015,
248-C.S.  - -         153.222,
                      153.226
                      152.06,
                      153.241,
250-C.S.  - -         153.262,
                      153.472,
                      153.475
                      150.160 -
251-C.S.  - -         150.162,
                      150.164
252-C.S.  - -         152.11
253       - -         100.100
254-C.S.  - -         35.037,
                      35.038
262-C.S.  - -         150.002
                      110.69,
264-C.S.  - -         118.01 -
                      118.07
                      153.240,
265-C.S.  - -         153.241,
                      153.246
266-C.S.  - -         150.030,
                      150.031
267-C.S.  - -         100.137
273-C.S.  - -         152.40 -
                      152.50
274       - -         100.085
274-C.S.  - -         92.02
275-C.S.  - -         110.61
281-C.S.  - -         150.002
                      153.087,
                      153.101,
285-C.S.  - -         153.103 -
                      153.107,
                      153.133
                      153.087,
286-C.S.  - -         153.101 -
                      153.107,
                      153.133
287       - -         150.040
                      119.01 -
290       - -         119.04,
                      119.10 -
                      119.12
                      153.003,
297-C.S.  - -         153.162,
                      153.240
                      72.026,
                      72.027,
                      152.06,
                      152.11,
307-C.S.  - -         153.241,
                      153.248,
                      153.262,
                      153.269,
                      153.472,
                      153.475
                      153.089,
308-C.S.  9-20-88     153.090,
                      153.110
313-C.S.  - -         116.013
314-C.S.  - -         130.50 -
                      130.53
315       - -         33.30,
                      33.40
315-C.S.  - -         95.50 -
                      95.67
316-C.S.  - -         35.057
317-C.S.  - -         37.55 -
                      37.59
318-C.S.  - -         150.030,
                      150.031
319-C.S.  - -         150.020,
                      150.021
321-C.S.  - -         150.080 -
                      150.091
325-C.S.  - -         72.032
328       - -         130.10,
                      130.11
332-C.S.  - -         72.033
334-C.S.  - -         10.99
                      153.056,
                      153.059,
337-C.S.  - -         153.060,
                      153.063 -
                      153.067
340-C.S.  - -         32.51
346-C.S.  - -         110.65
                      95.20 -
                      95.25,
347-C.S.  - -         95.35 -
                      95.40,
                      95.99
                      71.65,
348-C.S.  - -         71.66,
                      72.002
349-C.S.  - -         100.045 -
                      100.072
                      98.01 -
350-C.S.  - -         98.22,
                      98.99
351-C.S.  - -         153.999
354-C.S.  - -         100.106
355-C.S.  - -         150.011,
                      150.012
                      110.05,
                      110.09,
356-C.S.  - -         110.11,
                      110.60 -
                      110.69
357-C.S.  - -         153.059
                      153.281,
358-C.S.  - -         153.282,
                      153.284,
                      153.285
365-C.S.  - -         33.02,
                      33.31
368-C.S.  - -         153.380 -
                      153.383
369-C.S.  - -         72.074
375       - -         100.102
379-C.S.  - -         150.002
380-C.S.  - -         150.030,
                      150.031
381-C.S.  - -         150.020,
                      150.021
384-C.S.  - -         150.002
385-C.S.  - -         150.030,
                      150.031
386-C.S.  - -         150.020,
                      150.021
388-C.S.  - -         72.066
389-C.S.  - -         72.066
                      35.082 -
                      35.085,
                      35.088 -
                      35.090,
                      35.093,
390-C.S.  - -         35.095,
                      335.096,
                      35.098,
                      35.099,
                      35.102 -
                      35.104
393-C.S.  5-18-93     153.420 -
                      153.426
397-C.S.  - -         153.400 -
                      153.404
398-C.S.  - -         153.056
400-C.S.  - -         36.10,
                      36.99
401       - -         100.088
401-C.S.  - -         124.001,
                      124.002
403       - -         116.001
407-C.S.  - -         117.01 -
                      117.16
                      92.46,
                      92.48,
                      92.49 -
                      92.51,
                      110.68,
                      113.01 -
                      113.07,
408       - -         113.10,
                      119.02 -
                      119.09,
                      123.01 -
                      123.09,
                      123.20 -
                      123.25,
                      124.095
409-C.S.  - -         72.066,
                      72.074
                      51.01 -
                      51.16,
                      51.25 -
410       - -         51.28,
                      51.40,
                      51.41,
                      51.55
410-C.S.  - -         153.080,
                      153.100
411       - -         110.68
414-C.S.  11-16-93    150.200,
                      150.201
414-C.S.  - -         150.203,
                      150.204
                      33.01,
420-C.S.  4-5-94      33.02,
                      33.04
                      99.01 -
420-C.S.  - -         99.05,
                      99.15 -
                      99.17
422-C.S.  4-5-94      92.99
424-C.S.  5-3-94      38.01 -
                      38.03
425-C.S.  6-7-94      153.140 -
                      153.142
427-C.S.  6-7-94      153.055
428-C.S.  5-17-94     150.092
                      92.46,
429       - -         92.48,
                      92.50,
                      92.51
431-C.S.  9-6-94      71.09
                      121.01 -
                      121.17,
433-C.S.  9-6-94      121.30 -
                      121.37,
                      121.99
437-C.S.  9-20-94     116.064
444       - -         52.40
444-C.S.  1-3-95      150.002
445       - -         114.001 -
                      114.007
                      153.320 -
445-C.S.  5-16-95     153.333,
                      153.999
446-C.S.  4-18-95     72.078
447-C.S.  4-18-95     71.09,
                      71.10
                      34.01 -
                      34.12,
                      34.25 -
                      34.30 ,
448-C.S.  4-18-95     34.37,
                      34.39,
                      34.41 -
                      34.45,
                      34.47
                      33.31,
                      33.41,
449-C.S.  6-6-95      153.350 -
                      153.357,
                      153.365,
                      153.366
                      10.99,
453-C.S.  8-1-95      130.50,
                      130.53
454       9-19-95     116.065
                      153.003,
                      153.150 -
                      153.165,
                      153.170 -
455-C.S.  11-21-95    153.174,
                      153.220 -
                      153.227,
                      153.240,
                      153.381
457-C.S.  11-21-95    150.001,
                      150.002
                      150.010,
458-C.S.  11-21-95    150.011,
                      150.012
459       - -         92.01,
                      92.02
459-C.S.  11-21-95    150.020,
                      150.021
460-C.S.  11-21-95    150.030,
                      150.031
                      96.01 -
                      96.04,
                      96.20 -
461-C.S.  12-5-95     96.23,
                      96.40 -
                      96.44,
                      96.99
462-C.S.  11-7-95     130.05
464-C.S.  5-21-96     97.01
                      153.030 -
466-C.S.  11-5-96     153.047,
                      153.049 -
                      153.051
468-C.S.  8-20-96     153.325
                      92.45,
                      92.46,
471       - -         92.48,
                      92.50 -
                      92.57,
                      92.61
471-C.S.  8-20-96     30.01
473-C.S.  11-5-96     Adopting Ordinance
475       - -         150.110 -
                      150.115
476-C.S.  12-17-96    119.02,
                      119.11
478-C.S.  3-18-97     153.151
479-C.S.  4-15-97     153.003,
                      153.151
475       - -         150.110 -
                      150.115
480-C.S.  6-3-97      153.500 -
                      153.506
481-C.S.  9-2-97      71.03
                      130.50,
483-C.S.  9-16-97     130.52,
                      130.53
                      98.23 -
482-C.S.  2-17-98     98.27,
                      153.327,
                      153.334
485-C.S.  2-3-98      Ch. 73, Sch. I
486-C.S.  2-3-98      153.51
488-C.S.  -2-3-98     30.02
489-C.S   10-20-98    97.17
                      153.015 -
491-C.S.  10-6-98     153.016,
                      153.310 -
                      153.318
492       - -         97.10 -
                      97.16
                      92.80 -
493-C.S.  9-15-98     92.96,
                      92.99
                      112.003,
                      112.004,
                      112.023,
494-C.S.  1-19-99     112.044,
                      112.084,
                      112.115,
                      112.121
495-C.S.  2-16-99     153.64
498-C.S.  6-16-99     153.151
499-C.S.  4-6-99      130.53
                      150.001,
                      150.002,
                      150.004,
                      150.010,
500-C.S.  6-3-99      150.011,
                      150.020,
                      150.021,
                      150.030,
                      150.031
501-C.S.  6-3-99      150.210 -
                      150.223
502-C.S.  6-3-99      96.03,
                      96.99
504       - -         37.30 -
                      37.35
505-C.S.  7-18-00     30.02
506-C.S.  9-19-00     92.52
507-C.S.  9-19-00     130.17
                      50.01 -
                      50.015,
508-C.S.  11-7-00     50.999,
                      153.166,
                      92.99
509-C.S.  11-7-00     92.99
510-C.S.  12-5-00     153.27
                      153.350,
                      153.351,
512-C.S.  3-20-01     153.353-
                      153.355,
                      153.366
                      33.31,
513-C.S.  4-17-01     38.02,
                      153.351
514       - -         150.048
                      35.003 -
516-C.S.  8-21-01     35.006,
                      35.066,
                      35.096
518-C.S.  1-15-02     153.351
                      153.003,
520-C.S.  11-4-03     153.151,
                      153.162
524       - -         150.060 -
                      150.063
                      95.08,
                      95.24,
                      95.39,
                      153.003,
                      153.004,
                      153.030,
                      153.031,
                      153.079,
                      153.099,
                      153.158,
                      153.220,
                      153.241,
526-C.S.  7-16-02     153.246,
                      153.247,
                      153.261 -
                      153.263,
                      153.267,
                      153.268,
                      153.286,
                      153.323,
                      153.325,
                      153.327,
                      153.332,
                      153.354,
                      153.440 -
                      153.447
528-C.S.  2-18-03     91.05
530-C.S.  8-20-02     53.00 -
                      53.19
                      96.02,
531-C.S.  10-15-02    96.03,
                      96.99
532       - -         116.040 -
                      116.042
                      150.001,
                      150.002,
                      150.004,
                      150.010,
532-C.S.  10-15-02    150.011,
                      150.013,
                      150.020 -
                      150.022,
                      150.030 -
                      150.032
533-C.S.  11-16-04    154.001 -
                      154.006
                      153.031,
                      153.032,
                      153.041,
                      153.042,
                      153.047,
                      153.055,
                      153.062,
534-C.S.  6-17-03     153.063,
                      153.080,
                      153.082,
                      153.086,
                      153.087,
                      153.100,
                      153.102,
                      153.106,
                      153.107
                      100.016,
535       - -         100.018,
                      100.019
                      150.012,
                      152.31,
                      153.003,
                      153.005,
                      153.038,
                      153.040,
                      153.042 -
                      153.044,
                      153.046,
                      153.089,
535-C.S.  1-20-04     153.090,
                      153.108,
                      153.110,
                      153.115,
                      153.159,
                      153.161 -
                      153.164,
                      153.323,
                      153.328,
                      153.365 -
                      153.367,
                      153.440
536       - -         150.045
537-C.S.  10-7-03     30.02
541-C.S.  1-20-04     153.003,
                      153.126
544-C.S.  8-17-04     153.047,
                      153.354
546-C.S.  8-17-04     153.300
                      151.01,
547       - -         151.02,
                      151.03
                      114.045,
547-C.S.  4-20-04     114.047,
                      114.048,
                      114.048.5
                      153.280,
                      153.284,
                      153.285,
548-C.S.  8-15-06     153.450 -
                      153.462,
                      153.470 -
                      153.475
                      35.082 -
                      35.085,
Measure A - -         35.087 -
                      35.091,
                      35.093 -
                      35.105
549       - -         151.02
549-C.S.  12-7-04     33.32
551       - -         150.046
                      100.017,
                      100.030,
552-C.S.  11-22-06    153.003,
                      153.352 -
                      153.355
555       - -         130.15
                      153.001 -
                      153.003,
                      153.015 -
                      153.020,
                      153.055,
                      153.057,
                      153.058,
                      153.061,
                      153.062,
                      153.080 -
                      153.086,
                      153.100 -
556       - -         153.108,
                      153.125 -
                      153.130,
                      153.240,
                      153.241,
                      153.243 -
                      153.246,
                      153.248,
                      153.260 -
                      153.269,
                      153.470 -
                      153.474,
                      153.480 -
                      153.483
556-C.S.  9-6-05      72.025,
                      72.071 
                      33.01,
557       - -         33.02,
                      33.04
                      54.01 -
557-C.S.  12-6-05     54.13,
                      54.99
558-C.S.  9-20-05     30.02
561-C.S.  5-9-06      153.042
562-C.S.  12-19-06    153.290 
565       - -         130.16
569-C.S.  7-17-07     11.01 -
                      11.21
570-C.S.  6-3-08      34.75 -
                      34.78
572       - -         124.090 -
                      124.100
573-C.S.  7-17-07     30.02
                      96.01 -
                      96.04,
                      96.20 -
                      96.23,
                      96.40-
                      96.44,
                      96.99,
                      150.001-
                      150.002.1,
                      150.004,
                      150.010,
                      150.011,
575-C.S.  11-20-07    150.013,
                      150.020 -
                      150.022,
                      150.030 -
                      150.032,
                      150.111,
                      150.112,
                      150.146,
                      150.210,
                      150.215,
                      150.217-
                      150.219,
                      150.222
                      35.080 -
                      35.084,
                      35.086,
578       11-4-08     35.086.5,
                      35.092,
                      35.106,
                      35.107
580-C.S.  11-4-08     112.300 -
                      112.303
                      126.01 -
584-C.S.  6-1-10      126.05,
                      126.99
                      125.01 -
                      125.11,
585-C.S.  3-2-10      125.25 -
                      125.29,
                      125.98,
                      125.99
                      96.01 -
                      96.04,
                      96.20 -
                      96.23,
                      96.40 -
                      96.44,
                      96.99,
                      98.02,
587 C.S.  12-7-10     150.001,
                      150.002,
                      150.010,
                      150.011,
                      150.020,
                      150.021,
                      150.030,
                      150.031,
                      150.217,
                      150.218
588-C.S.  4-3-12      Ch. 73, Sch. I
                      153.049,
                      153.162,
                      153.220,
589 C.S.  2-1-11      153.221,
                      153.225,
                      153.228,
                      153.440
                      153.003,
                      153.100,
590-C.S.  3-1-11      153.151,
                      153.162,
                      153.484 
                      153.490
                      122.01 -
                      122.04,
                      122.15,
                      122.30 -
591-C.S.  9-20-11     122.35,
                      122.50 -
                      122.52,
                      122.99,
                      153.151,
                      153.165
593       - -         95.01 -
                      95.08
595       - -         114.005
597       - -         153.126
597-C.S.  1-15-13     153.290
599       - -         153.003
609       - -         153.019
612       - -         34.65 -
                      34.67
614       - -         150.049
615       - -         153.243,
                      153.264
620       - -         150.064 -
                      150.072
625       - -         51.40
628       - -         153.126
                      33.30,
631       - -         33.32,
                      33.34 -
                      33.40
634       - -         130.02 -
                      130.04
637       - -         92.20 -
                      92.22
644       - -         33.01,
                      33.04
                      113.01 -
649       - -         113.07,
                      113.10
652       - -         153.016,
                      153.100
653       - -         32.52
                      110.61,
657       - -         124.015,
                      124.016,
                      124.018
664       - -         34.65,
                      34.66
665       - -         150.111
667       - -         150.045
673       - -         38.15,
                      38.16
675       - -         130.04
680       - -         150.180,
                      150.181
681       - -         153.248,
                      153.269
684       - -         150.042
                      153.016,
                      153.055,
686       - -         153.057,
                      153.058,
                      153.061,
                      153.062
697       - -         100.016,
                      100.019
                      99.01 -
700       - -         99.03,
                      99.15 -
                      99.17
717       - -         35.035 -
                      35.041
720       - -         150.114
727       - -         34.65
                      32.20 -
728       - -         32.24,
                      34.66
                      153.248,
730       - -         153.268,
                      153.269
                      92.47,
                      92.48,
761       - -         92.50,
                      92.58,
                      92.59,
                      92.60
                      10.30,
774       - -         10.31,
                      10.32
785       - -         92.58
790       - -         153.474
797       - -         153.083,
                      153.129
798       - -         92.35,
                      92.36
800       - -         153.268
802       - -         130.09
                      110.01 -
                      110.20,
                      110.30 -
810       - -         110.47,
                      110.60 -
                      110.67,
                      113.02
813       - -         150.041
815       - -         31.30
821       - -         34.65
824       - -         100.019
831       - -         150.041
832       - -         32.51
835       - -         115.01 -
                      115.04
836       - -         37.15,
                      37.16
                      100.016 -
840       - -         100.019,
                      100.030 -
                      100.032
842       - -         92.49
843       - -         30.10 -
                      30.16
844       - -         150.112
859       - -         35.036 -
                      35.038
                      110.62,
860       - -         110.64,
                      113.02
862       - -         95.02
865       - -         114.024
866       - -         10.22
                      114.001,
                      114.005,
                      114.006,
                      114.025 -
871       - -         114.032,
                      114.045 -
                      114.059,
                      114.070 -
                      114.086
874       - -         34.50
883       - -         110.35
901       - -         52.40
902       - -         51.40
                      110.63,
905       - -         116.010 -
                      116.025,
                      116.027
909       - -         150.050
910       - -         153.268
911       - -         153.127
                      153.016,
912       - -         153.107,
                      153.108
925       - -         35.055 -
                      35.068
929       - -         94.01,
                      94.02
943       - -         30.01
955       - -         153.003
                      153.221,
956       - -         153.222,
                      153.223,
                      153.225
995       - -         153.003
599-C.S.  5-7-13      39.01 -
                      39.04
                      33.02,
602-C.S.  7-2-13      33.31,
                      38.02,
                      153.351
                      11.03,
605-C.S.  10-1-13     51.01,
                      51.60 -
                      51.68
606-C.S.  10-1-13     10.99
                      96.02 ,
                      96.03 ,
                      96.20  -
                      96.23 ,
                      98.02 ,
607-C.S.  11-19-13    150.001 ,
                      150.002 ,
                      150.010 ,
                      150.020 ,
                      150.021 ,
                      150.030 ,
                      150.031
                      122.31  -
609-C.S.  2-18-14     122.33 ,
                      122.50
                      153.037,
                      153.085,
                      153.089,
                      153.105,
                      153.115,
601-C.S.  3-4-14      153.133,
                      153.160,
                      153.164,
                      153.165,
                      153.530 -
                      153.539
                      92.02,
                      92.22,
                      150.162 -
                      150.164,
                      153.003,
                      153.031,
                      153.032,
                      153.042,
                      153.046,
                      153.047,
                      153.063,
                      153.117,
608-C.S.  5-10-14     153.126,
                      153.127,
                      153.132,
                      153.142,
                      153.150,
                      153.151,
                      153.162,
                      153.164,
                      153.167,
                      153.220,
                      153.224,
                      153.226,
                      153.227,
                      153.229
                      70.01,
                      71.80 -
                      71.83,
610-C.S.  4-1-14      72.047,
                      72.076,
                      72.087,
                      72.089
611-C.S.  3-18-14     99.03,
                      114.047
                      11.03,
                      122.01 -
                      122.05,
                      122.15,
612-C.S.  2-17-15     122.30 -
                      122.35,
                      122.50 -
                      122.52,
                      122.99
615-C.S.  1-6-15      153.290
                      111.01 -
616-C.S.  3-17-15     111.08,
                      124.060 -
                      124.064
                      153.003,
618-C.S.  1-20-15     153.151,
                      153.427
                      153.003,
                      153.151,
619-C.S.  4-21-15     153.242,
                      153.290,
                      153.427
                      150.160,
620-C.S.  9-1-15      150.161,
                      150.165 -
                      150.168
                      153.530,
                      153.531,
622-C.S.  11-17-15    153.534,
                      153.536,
                      153.537
624-C.S.  12-1-15     53.19
625-C.S.  2-18-16     153.151
626-C.S.  9-6-16      97.17
                      30.01,
                      32.05 -
                      32.07,
                      32.40,
                      32.60,
                      32.70,
                      33.01 -
                      33.04,
                      33.32,
627-C.S.  9-6-16      35.097,
                      35.098,
                      37.30 -
                      37.35,
                      93.02,
                      99.03,
                      99.05,
                      99.15 -
                      99.17,
                      116.018
                      30.01,
628-C.S.  9-6-16      32.05 -
                      32.07
629-C.S.  10-4-16     153.352 -
                      153.357
                      96.02,
                      96.03,
                      96.20 -
                      96.23,
                      98.02,
                      150.001,
630-C.S.  12-6-16     150.002,
                      150.010,
                      150.011,
                      150.020,
                      150.021,
                      150.030,
                      150.031
                      153.003,
631-C.S.  4-18-17     153.151,
                      153.162,
                      153.242
                      153.003,
632-C.S.  5-2-17      153.151,
                      153.162,
                      153.242
                      122.01 -
                      122.05,
                      122.15,
633-C.S   4-18-17     122.30 -
                      122.35,
                      122.50 -
                      122.52,
                      122.99
                      122.01 -
                      122.05,
                      122.15,
634-C.S.  5-2-17      122.30 -
                      122.35,
                      122.50 -
                      122.52,
                      122.99
                      153.042,
                      153.063,
636-C.S.  8-15-17     153.167,
                      153.455,
                      153.600 -
                      153.631
                      153.031,
                      153.035,
                      153.040,
                      153.043,
                      153.044,
638-C.S.  10-17-17    153.046,
                      153.353,
                      153.354,
                      153.358,
                      153.440,
                      153.533
                      153.031,
                      153.035,
                      153.040,
                      153.043,
                      153.044,
639-C.S.  10-3-17     153.046,
                      153.353,
                      153.354,
                      153.358,
                      153.440,
                      153.533
642-C.S.  12-19-17    153.515 -
                      153.522
                      30.01,
643-C.S.  4-3-18      33.03,
                      33.32,
                      153.351
                      153.003,
                      153.031,
                      153.041,
644-C.S.  6-19-18     153.047,
                      153.050,
                      153.055,
                      153.100
                      31.03,
647 C.S.  9-18-18     31.04,
                      32.10,
                      32.60
                      116.010,
648       10-2-18     116.039 -
                      116.043
649       2-5-19      112.301
650       2-5-19      153.351
                      153.003,
652       5-21-19     153.043,
                      153.044
                      153.031,
                      153.032,
                      153.047,
                      153.062,
                      153.080,
653       10-1-19     153.082,
                      153.086,
                      153.087,
                      153.102,
                      153.106,
                      153.107
                      110.33,
                      110.35,
654       10-1-19     110.61 -
                      110.63,
                      110.65
                      150.001,
                      150.002,
                      150.010,
655       11-19-19    150.011,
                      150.020,
                      150.021,
                      150.030,
                      150.031
                      34.31  -
656       9-17-19     34.37,
                      34.39 -
                      34.47
                      34.09,
                      34.25 -
657       11-5-19     34.47,
                      34.75 -
                      34.78
661       1-7-20      153.003,
                      153.047
662       1-21-20     153.003,
                      153.047
663       10-6-20     Ch. 73, Sch. I
664       6-16-20     70.40
667       3-3-20      35.115 -
                      35.127
                      91.01,
                      91.05,
673       7-6-21      91.09,
                      91.25,
                      91.27
674       9-7-21      92.100,
                      92.101
                      153.604,
679       10-19-21    153.606,
                      153.627
680       11-2-21     50.025 -
                      50.039
681       11-2-21     34.80
683       2-1-22      153.003,
                      153.048
684       9-6-22      32.53
                      96.02,
                      96.03,
                      98.02,
686       11-15-22    150.001,
                      150.002,
                      150.010,
                      150.020,
                      150.030
687       3-7-23      153.421,
                      153.422
688       5-2-23      130.18 -
                      130.22
690       7-18-23     153.450 -
                      153.461
691       9-5-23      40.01
693       12-5-23     153.003,
                      153.134
695       12-5-23     153.164
                      153.151,
702       3-5-24      153.516 -
                      153.523
703       3-19-24     32.53
706       5-7-24      153.003,
                      153.047
708       6-18-24     150.300
709       7-2-24      153.162,
                      153.240
710       10-15-24    153.290
711       9-17-24     94.02
                      34.31 -
                      34.33,
                      34.35,
713       9-17-24     34.36,
                      34.38,
                      34.43,
                      34.45
716       5-6-25      153.127
717       2-4-25      153.003
                      72.012,
718       3-4-25      127.01 -
                      127.05,
                      127.99
719       6-17-25     96.05
720       6-17-25     97.01
721       9-16-25     35.057
                     
 
